Purity, Pederasty And a Fallen Heroine
On the morning of April 2, in the courthouse of the small northern California mining town of Jamestown, a preliminary hearing was under way on charges against Daniel Driver for allegedly molesting several young boys.
During the proceedings, the mother of one of the boys, Ellie Nesler, thought she detected Mr.
Driver smirking.
So she went and got a gun, walked back into court and stopped the smirks forever.
Now charged with murder, Ellie Nesler, cast by the law as a killer, has made herself available for the role of cultural heroine.
Ellie Nesler took us at our word.
Believing that Mr.
Driver was a pederast, she did what society wants done to pederasts: she plugged him five times, stopping perversion dead in its tracks.


All Jordan, All Even: Chicago Takes Game 4
It was spectacular, but from Michael Jordan, the spectacular is never unexpected.
Jordan was due for a performance like this, a brilliant 54-point barrage that lifted the Chicago Bulls, deflated the Knicks and dramatically changed the atmosphere of a series that New York no longer controls.
Carrying his team with a remarkable long-range shooting exhibition, Jordan led the Bulls to a series-tying 105-95 victory this afternoon at Chicago Stadium in Game 4 of the Eastern Conference finals.
The four-of-seven-game series is tied, 2-2, heading into a crucial Game 5 confrontation Wednesday night at Madison Square Garden.


Patterns
Spectacles for Charity
The audience at Thursday's fund-raising runway show for the Fashion Industry Friends of AIDS Project Los Angeles will be rocking to Tina Turner.
But the sound to be heard next year, when Isaac Mizrahi is honored, could be the signature squeal of Roseanne Arnold, Mr.
Mizrahi's sometime muse.
This year, Calvin Klein is the honoree in this evolving fashion spectacle, and he may become an entry in the Guinness Book of World Records with a presentation involving 300-plus models.
Last year's honoree, Thierry Mugler, trotted out Sharon Stone fresh from her "Basic Instinct" exposure.
Others honored in the past include Gianni Versace and Bob Mackie.
Mr.
Mizrahi is a spectacle-friendly designer.
At his runway show this season, the comedian Sandra Bernhard and Ms.
Arnold made like Menudo groupies in the front row, while backstage a Mizrahi documentary was being filmed.
With his partnership with Chanel's Wertheimer family, Mr.
Mizrahi is one of the few young talents who could support the costs involved in the event.
As a spokesman for AIDS Project Los Angeles noted, although the organization shares expenses for the event, all profits go to the charity.
The designers "make nothing," the spokesman said, adding: "They spend money, they don't make money. They earn a lot of publicity, but that's it." A Banker Moves On
The special relationship between Seventh Avenue companies and the bankers who oversee their finances was underlined by the reaction this month after Chemical Bank removed William J. Carone, a regional manager, from his garment industry beat.


Bronx School Struggles Despite Praise and Fame
Everywhere, the children make music.
They stroke the keys in the piano room and they caress violins in the auditorium.
They sing in the musty, peeling theater built in 1914 where, just outside the door, beleaguered men gather along Boston Road and dogs sleep on the sidewalk.
St.
Augustine School of the Arts, a nationally renowned Roman Catholic elementary school in the South Bronx, is experiencing the best and worst of times.
An award-winning documentary about the school opened in New York on Friday, and the school's principal was recently honored as one of the nation's outstanding educators.
But a fire last December that destroyed two-thirds of the main school building has left St.
Augustine struggling to maintain its financial footing.


Nicklaus's Travel Plans
JACK NICKLAUS says his performance in this week's Memorial Tournament will help determine whether he plays in the British Open.
Nicklaus has played in every British Open since turning pro in 1962, and he has won three.
But he missed the cut in the championship last year, and he finished 44th and 63d in the two previous years.
This year's British Open is July 15-18 at the Royal St.
George course in England.


Nuclear Peace for Pyongyang?
Will North Korea try to build nuclear weapons or not?
That will be the central issue when Pyongyang's First Vice Minister of Foreign Affairs meets with State Department officials in New York tomorrow..
North Korea raised fears about its intentions in March by denying international inspectors access to its nuclear sites and threatening to withdraw from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
It needs to allay those fears now -- by remaining a signatory of the treaty and granting access to all its nuclear sites.


Plan Limits Development In Lincoln Center Area
The New York City Planning Department will propose zoning changes today that would put new restrictions on commercial development and building heights in the area around Lincoln Center.
Besides restricting the height of new buildings, the new use and design requirements for the Lincoln Square special zoning district are intended to limit vehicular and pedestrian traffic in an area that has seen the addition of 18 new buildings since 1969.


Guatemalan Leader Is Pressed to Yield Power
The opposition to President Jorge Serrano Elias's seizure of almost dictatorial powers grew more defiant today as the Government's isolation increased.
One day after military leaders backed away from their support for the President, prominent citizens called for his resignation, small groups of protesters again challenged a ban on public assembly, and newspapers began to openly mock the standing censorship of the press.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  A ZONING PLAN FOR LINCOLN CENTER
The Planning Department will propose zoning changes that would put new restrictions on commercial development and building heights in the area around Lincoln Center.
The new use and design requirements for the Lincoln Square special zoning district are intended to limit vehicular and pedestrian traffic in an area that has seen the addition of 18 new buildings since 1969.
B3.
CYCLIST IS HIT TWICE AND DRAGGED BY CAR
A man was knocked off his bicycle by a drunken driver in Washington Heights, and as he limped to his feet he was struck again by the same car and dragged for eight blocks, the police and witnesses said.
The episode was the latest in a series of accidents involving drivers whose licenses had been suspended or revoked.
B2.


A Churchill Draws Fire With Remark on Race
For more than two decades, Winston Churchill has tiptoed in the footsteps of his grandfather, either as a journalist or a Tory backbencher in the House of Commons.
But over the weekend, the grandson of Britain's wartime Prime Minister suddenly made a splash of his own.
In the last two days, Mr.
Churchill, 52, has been condemned by editorial writers, minority politicians and even members of his own Tory party for a speech on Friday in which he called for a halt to a "relentless flow of immigrants" that, he said, was threatening to change forever Britain's way of life.


Despite Heat, Christopher Has 'the Time of My Life'
Secretary of State Warren Christopher says he's never been happier.
"Everyone who knows me well knows I'm having the time of my life," the 67-year-old lawyer said over lunch on Friday.
"They're struck by how happy I seem to be in the job."


Lights, Camera, Cup? Gretzky Is Ready
For the first four years of the Wayne Gretzky era, the Los Angeles Kings were the fool's gold of hockey, one of those California dreams.
Gretzky gave them glitter and helped sell tickets and jerseys, but they never really mined a mother lode.
With his sublime skills receding but still considerable, Gretzky was like a colonial missionary from hockey's old world.
To the uninitiated, in the heat and dust of the American Southwest, he preached the coming glory of his sport, spreading the message to an ambivalent entertainment capital.
To the converted of the old cities, he urged repentance and reform.
Abandon fighting, he said, and market the business beyond the devoted cult that has sustained it for so long.


For Veterans, a Time for Memories; A Hospital's Small Celebration Turns Into a Day for Sharing
In a veterans hospital, the wars sometimes never end, and memories are carried deep in lasting wounds and lost years.
"Memorial Day is different when you get in here," said Andy Giannone, who came back from the dark terror of the Vietnam jungle as a heroin addict 25 years ago and who spent his first sober Memorial Day in years at a small celebration here today.


Yanks and Perez Get A Picnic on the Grass
Melido Perez is not used to this feeling.
He knows what it's like to pitch with no runs in his favor.
He knows what it's like to pitch out of a hole.
But pitching with a lead -- a big lead -- is a new thing for him.
Perez did not expect the Yankees to provide him with eight runs yesterday afternoon at the Stadium.
Usually, he's lucky to get three.
And with Bernie Williams, Don Mattingly and Danny Tartabull on the disabled list, the Yankee offense should be suffering, not racking up the hits.


Today the Questions Are About the Knicks
They had created questions, serious questions, about the two-time defending champions.
They had occasionally made Michael Jordan appear ordinary.
The Knicks came here with the chance to make their Eastern Conference championship series with the Chicago Bulls a short one.
But when it was time for them to return to New York, escorted to the exit stairwell amid the delirious noise of Chicago Stadium, that chance had vanished and their hopes of advancing to the National Basketball Association finals were threatened.


Philip Dorf Dead at 72; Public-Relations Chief
Philip Dorf, a New York public-relations executive, died on Sunday while swimming at a resort in Westchester County.
He was 72 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


'Made for a Mile,' Ibero Sizzles in the Metropolitan
Ibero, the 6-year-old war horse from Argentina and California, outran one of New York's most glittering fields of thoroughbreds yesterday to win the 100th Metropolitan Handicap in a sizzling performance that could influence honors and, even, careers.
He won it after a dramatic duel down the homestretch that gave all nine horses in the race a shot.
And he won it by running down the Canadian star Alydeed and his fellow California traveler Bertrando in the final 200 yards.


Big Noise About Sound and Motion
THE annual Spring Comdex computer exposition in Atlanta last week was much noisier than ever before, a result of the (Boom! Flash!) explosion of multimedia hardware and software.
Multimedia is the term loosely applied to any computer product that can produce CD-quality stereo sound, voice reproduction, full-motion video or animation on screen and high-resolution color graphics.
Eventually all personal computers will have these abilities, but for the time being multimedia is considered special enough to warrant its own category.


American Airlines to Lay Off Nearly 4% of Pilots by Aug. 31
American Airlines will begin laying off 350 pilots by Aug. 31, the first wave of pilot layoffs resulting from the airline's decision to park 31 of its biggest jets, a company spokesman said yesterday.
The layoffs represent nearly 4 percent of the carrier's 9,000 pilots.
The pilots were informed in a taped message on Friday, said the spokesman, Martin P. Heires.
He said the layoffs would affect the pilots with the least seniority.
Fifty to 100 will be dismissed in early September, with the rest facing layoffs by February of next year, he said.
Sweeping Reshuffling
The announcement came as no surprise.
American, in the midst of a sweeping reshuffling of its business, said two months ago that it would eventually dismiss as many as 500 of its pilots.
It has already laid off about 400 mechanics, and in December it eliminated 600 managerial jobs, half through layoffs.


Drama in Review
Master and Margarita, or, The Devil Comes to Moscow  Theater for the New City 155 First Avenue, at 10th Street East Village Through June 13 By Mikhail Bulgakov; directed by David Willinger; intepreted for the theater by Jean-Claude van Itallie; set design, Mark Symczak; lighting design, Tommy Barker; costume design, Tanya Serdiuk; music, Arthur Abrams; masks and special props, Hjordis Linn.
Presented by the Theater for the New City, George Bartenieff, executive director; Crystal Field, executive artistic director, and Play Producers, Annette Moskowitz and Alexander Racolin.
WITH: Eran Bohem, Jonathan Teague Cook, Gary Kimble, Lisa Nicholas and Kolawole Ogundiran.


New Medical Technology Could Do You Harm; A Dream of an H.M.O.
To the Editor:
Re "Let Us Journey Into the Mind of Managed Care" (letters, May 16): Let me guide you on another journey, into a health maintenance organization, with my 17-year practice experience as the guide.


Marijuana Medication
Ashes from a fourth-century tomb near Jerusalem suggest that marijuana may have been used in the ancient Middle East to help in childbirth, a group of Israeli researchers says.
The tomb contained the skeletal remains of a teen-age girl with a full-term fetus within the pelvic area.
She apparently died while giving birth or while she was in the last stages of pregnancy.


No Closer Brothers Than the Jameses
To the Editor:
Your May 22 Chronicle item about the American Academy of Arts and Letters falsifies what was said at the recent annual meeting about William James's reason for declining membership.
He did not say "he would never join anything that included his younger brother, Henry."


New Haven's Task: Tying City to Region To Promote Growth
Three decades ago, when Lyndon B. Johnson came into office with an ambitious urban agenda, this small New England city was an exciting laboratory for change, a model of urban renewal and a testing ground for the war on poverty.
Today New Haven is a city of disappointments and diminished hopes.
The laboratory is long closed and cluttered with its failures: misshapen renewal projects that haunt downtown, and the unchecked spread of poverty through neighborhoods.


Foote, Cone Given Additional Accounts
Two offices of Foote, Cone &amp; Belding Communications have been awarded additional accounts from existing clients.
The Vlasic Foods division of the Campbell Soup Company named FCB/Leber Katz Partners in New York to handle its account, which had been at W. B. Doner &amp; Company, Baltimore and Southfield, Mich., for 29 years.
While billings in recent years have not exceeded $6 million, it was estimated that spending could grow to $8.5 million.


Hollywood's Take on the Industry's Excesses in a 1949 Movie Still Applies.
LOOKING for fresh, trenchant, penetrating insights into the foibles and follies of the advertising industry?
Look for a film made 44 years ago.
It is "A Letter to Three Wives," released by 20th Century Fox in 1949.
Previously unavailable on videotape, it has now been issued, at a suggested retail price of $19.98 -- less than cocktails at a Jerry Della Femina restaurant -- as part of Fox Video's "Studio Classics Collection."


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Construction Spending April Personal Income April  Wednesday  Leading Indicators April  New-Home Prices April New-Home Sales April  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Employment May Factory Orders April


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-9  REPRESSION EASING IN CHINA  Nearly four years after the brutal suppression of the Tiananmen Square demonstrations in Beijing, repression persists in China but seems to be easing.
A1  DOWNSIZING A STRONGMAN  Life President Hastings Kamuzu Banda of Malawi has long occupied his own quirky niche: part African, part Victorian, part Mussolini, part Monty Python.
Now his hold on the country is being challenged.
A1


Review/Television; Limits of Tame and Wild at the Zoo
Among the big scenes in "Zoo" are the stillbirth of a rhinoceros, the egg-laying of a crocodile, the tooth-cleaning of a gorilla and the hunt for a pit bull who killed some deer.
But Frederick Wiseman is not the sort of documentary maker who settles for big scenes.
In this, his 25th work, as in his other studies of American institutions, from a hospital to a race track to Central Park, he allows his subject to reveal itself, the mundane along with the sensational.
What that means for tomorrow night's two-hour visit to the Miami Metrozoo are many pictures of fauna on both sides of the bars.
The zoo workers are efficient and conscientious, the visiting children are cute and the elephants, chimpanzees, zebras and so forth are easy to look at, even if you think you recognize most of them from other public television programs.
But they do not make for steadily enthralling television.
The opening 10 minutes of disporting families and showoff animals tests even a Wiseman fan's endurance, and after the sixth or seventh time the zoo train goes by, you might find yourself hoping for a derailment.


Corrections
A report in the Benefits column of Styles of the Times on Sunday about a dinner being held this evening to benefit CASA, a drug education organization, misstated the location.
It is the Pierre Hotel, not the Plaza.
The report also rendered the organization's full name incorrectly.
It is the Center on Addiction and Drug Abuse.


Riter, One-on-One, Makes Orange No.1
The game and the national championship came down to a one-on-one battle right in front of the goal: Gary Lehrman, the North Carolina goalkeeper, versus Matt Riter, Syracuse's leading scorer.
Riter had had a quiet tournament, but he slammed the ball past the frozen Lehrman.
The remaining 8 seconds ticked away and Syracuse had won the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division I championship, 13-12, in a match in which the score was tied seven times.


Courts Plan Seeks to Add Appeals Unit
Concerned by critical backlogs in appeals court cases coming from most of New York City and its suburbs, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and legislative leaders are seeking to expand New York State's appellate court system.
Legislative aides say leaders of the Democratic-controlled Assembly and Republican-controlled State Senate will introduce, possibly this week, proposed amendments to the State Constitution that would authorize the first major change in the appellate courts in a century.
The change would add a fifth department to the four that now form the Appellate Division, the state's intermediate appeals court and the last stop for most cases.


Effective Publicity Examples On a Disk
A BUSINESS thrives on publicity -- good publicity -- but not every one knows how to get it.
The owner of a small business may serve as public relations person or may assign the duties to a subordinate who learns, or fails to learn, on the job.
A medium-size to large business may have its own person, or staff, to handle publicity or may hire an outside agency.
Publicity Builder, a book-software combination from Jian, formerly Tools for Sales, of Los Altos, Calif., amounts to a course in how to win editors and influence reporters.
Every public relations person could benefit from the wisdom of admonitions like these:


CHRONICLE
JEWELL JACKSON McCABE, the founder and chairwoman of the National Coalition of 100 Black Women, has been elected to the board of trustees of Bard College in Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Ms.
McCabe, a leader in numerous civil rights and women's rights causes, is also on the board of overseers for the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania.


Hohenau Journal; Sure, Mengele Was at Home Here, but Bormann?
Using the early morning light to help her fading vision, Michline Reynaers sat recently in a sunny corner of the Hotel Tirol here, knitting socks for a grandchild.
"Everyone in town talked about how well he played the piano," the 72-year-old hotel keeper recalled, speaking in German of the courteous, mustachioed visitor who patronized her restaurant in 1959.
"I was introduced to him as Mr. Mengele."


Germany Arrests Young Suspect In Bombing That Killed 5 Turks
The German police had a young man in custody on murder and arson charges today in connection with a firebombing that killed five Turks in Solingen on Saturday.
The arrest did not stem the violence that has shaken Solingen over the last three days.
Thousands of people marched peacefully through the streets to show their sorrow, but small groups protesting the killings smashed store windows, looted and clashed with the police.
One group temporarily blocked roads leading to the Cologne-Bonn airport, forcing the cancellation of several flights.


In an Overture to an Enemy, Libyan Pilgrims Visit Israel
Nearly 200 Libyans arrived in Jerusalem today for a three-day visit to Muslim holy sites on the first group pilgrimage by citizens of an Arab country that is officially at war with Israel.
The visit followed a recent series of overtures to the United States and Israel from the Libyan leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi.
Israeli officials welcomed the pilgrims but disagreed about the political significance of the visit from a country long considered one of Israel's most implacable foes.


Robbery Suspect Is Killed
A robbery suspect was shot and killed by the police early yesterday when he drew a gun during a foot chase through backyards in Cambria Heights, Queens, the police said.
They said a second suspect escaped.
The dead man was identified by the police as Ian Johnson, 21, of 138-75 Francis Lewis Boulevard, said Lieut.
Raymond O'Donnell, a police spokesman.
Lieutenant O'Donnell said Sgt.
Donald Burton and Officer Riccardo Osuna of the 105th Precinct were chasing two men suspected of robbing a woman of $60 at 6 A.M. on Linden Boulevard.
The officers fired at Mr.
Johnson after he pulled his gun, Lieutenant O'Donnell said.


On My Mind; The Constant Hearts
The decision to pick a public relations man for three Republican Presidencies as the spokesman for the new Democratic Administration is an important step meaning one or more of the following things:
1.
The public and press are just as stupid as President Clinton obviously thinks they are and have never seen a cynical political gimmick they would not buy.


Mayor Race Focuses on Word
A dispute over the use of the word "pogrom" has once again focused the New York City mayoral race on the 1991 disturbances in Crown Heights.
The dispute began on Sunday in a television interview when Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate, called the three days in which unruly mobs of black youths assaulted Jews a "pogrom." The word, which dictionaries say means an "organized massacre," is variously defined as often officially "condoned," "prompted" or "encouraged."


A Retirement Spurs Race for District Attorney
As the Westchester County District Attorney's race heats up, five months before Election Day, one thing is already certain: for the first time in a quarter-century, the winner will not be Carl A. Vergari.
Mr.
Vergari, a Republican who is 71 years old, is retiring from the post he has held since 1968.
His departure has touched off a most feverishly contested race for District Attorney, with the main contenders proposing fundamental changes in the way the law is enforced in this suburban county.


Derrick Thomas Recalls His Father at Memorial
DERRICK THOMAS, the Kansas City Chiefs' All-Pro linebacker, said yesterday that he just wanted to live up to the courage of the father he never knew, a co-pilot who was killed during the Vietnam War.
"It's very ironic that my father's last mission was named Linebacker 2," said Thomas, who was among the speakers who joined PRESIDENT CLINTON at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington.
"It's very ironic that in college I had 52 sacks and my father flew a B-52."


The Knicks Just Needed to Reach for It
A window opened in the fourth quarter for the Knicks yesterday, and when they looked inside, there was Michael Jordan tied to a chair, ready to have his house burgled for just about all that was in it.
The prize the Knicks had come to get -- one victory to take back to Madison Square Garden for a series-clinching bash tomorrow night -- was on a mantel in Jordan's living room, ready to be had.
As it turned out, the Knicks had 3 minutes 4 seconds to steal Game 4 of the Eastern Conference finals.
They could not.
They wilted badly in the heat of going for the big score and were beaten by the Bulls, 105-95.
They went home to face the trial of their lives, knowing if they should happen to lose Game 5, the window at Jordan's house may not open again.


Observer; Tonsorialitis
No, I'm not sore about the President taking his business to another tonsorial artist.
If he thinks Cristophe of Beverly Hills can give him a better trim than Lary of Little Rock, O.K., he's the President, it's his hair, more power to him.
That's Lary with only one "r," please.
It used to have two, but my bride said "Larry" looked overstuffed with alphabet.
I said to her what did she mean "overstuffed with alphabet," and she said it just looked too old-fashioned.


By Design; Summer Evening Dress
For the last couple of summers, the "it" evening look was the littlest slip of a dress that clung to every curve.
This season a slip is still it, but now it's supposed to be as sheer as a night mist and waft around the ankles.
For fashion fanatics, it's not a new idea to wear sheer clothes.
What is new is their widespread availability -- and acceptance.
These diaphanous drifts of dresses are all over town.
Bloomingdale's is filled with versions from well-priced labels like DKNY and Nicole Miller.


Corrections
An article in the Westchester Weekly section on Sunday about a directory of Jewish organizations mistated the date of a concert marking the 50th anniversary of the Hebrew Congregation of Somers.
It will take place on Sunday, June 6, at 7:30 P.M. at the temple, on Mervyn Drive in Shenorock.


Drama in Review
Homo Alone Lost in Colorado  St.
Marks Studio Theater 94 St.
Marks Place, at First Avenue East Village Written and performed by Walter Barnett, Kelley Brower, Nora Burns, Chrisanne Eastwood, Terrence Michael and Eric Rockwell.
Directed by Ms.
Eastwood; lighting by Deborah Malkin; original music by Eric Rockwell; choreography by Mr.
Rockwell; produced by Michael Hyman and Planet Q; associate producer, Ethan Ciment.


Scanner Pinpoints Sites of Thought as People See or Speak
USING souped up versions of conventional brain imaging machines, scientists can now peer into the workings of the human brain, making movies of changes that occur as the mind thinks, talks, listens, dreams and imagines.
At the handful of centers where the technique is being developed, researchers are borrowing the machines at night and on weekends when patients do not need them and, like children in a toy store, are exploring one another's brains with unbridled glee.
In recent months they have made movies of the brain's circuitry as it performs.


Week's Treasury Auctions Will Be Confined to Bills
The Treasury's schedule of financings this holiday-shortened week includes today's regular weekly auction of new 3-month and 6-month maturities and tomorrow's auction of 13-day cash management bills.
Traders said that by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.05 percent and the rate on a six-month bill 3.20 percent.


CLINTON CONSIDERS TAX ON HOSPITALS
President Clinton is seriously considering a new tax on hospitals to help finance medical care for people who currently have no health insurance, Administration officials said today.
The officials said the proposal would be high on the agenda when Mr.
Clinton meets this week with his advisers to review the design of his plan to guarantee health care for all Americans.


Ammirati Resigns Schweppes Account
Ammirati &amp; Puris in New York has resigned the Schweppes U.S.A. account after nine years, citing a decline in advertising spending and changes in management at the United States parent, Cadbury Beverages.
Ammirati's decision to resign the account, which includes Schweppes ginger ales and mixers and Hires root beer, immediately set off speculation that the agency was hoping to land the account of the Royal Crown Cola Company, headed by John C. Carson, the former president of Cadbury Beverages.


Accounts
*
Seiko Corp. of America, Mahwah, N.J., to the Martin Agency, Richmond, to handle its Pulsar and Jaz Paris brands, previously at AC&amp; R Advertising, New York.
Martin was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $5 million, after a review that also included Cliff Freeman &amp; Partners, New York; Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor, New York, and Mullen Advertising, Wenham, Mass. *
Remy Amerique, New York, to Dweck &amp; Campbell, New York, to handle a special project for its Mount Gay Rum brand.
Billings were estimated to exceed $1 million.
Mount Gay was among several Remy brands previously at Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss, New York, which resigned the account in March.


Insects Castes
Insects may have developed a social class system at least 95 million years earlier than had been thought, say scientists who stumbled on some fossilized termite nests in Arizona.
The three nests, indications of social behavior and cooperative building, were found in a rock formation that is 220 million years old, said Stephen Hasiotis, a doctoral candidate in paleontology at the University of Colorado in Boulder.


How New York City Confronts the Problem of TB in Its Jails
To the Editor:
"Where Tuberculosis Breeds" (editorial, May 11) identifies the reasons tuberculosis is a serious public health problem in the New York City criminal justice system.
Unfortunately, you gloss over the Dinkins administration's response.


Remembering the Reason for the Holiday


Wildlife Park in India Is Stalled as Herders Fight to Stay in Homes
A CONFRONTATION between wildlife officials and thousands of water buffalo herders in the jungles here, which are home to the largest number of wild Asian elephants in northern India, has developed into one of India's sharpest conflicts between conservationists and advocates of the rights of indigenous people.
"We have been here from a time that there was no government, no forest department, no park officials, and they want us to just pack up and go to a place without forests or open air," said Ghulam Mustafa, a leader of Muslim herders known as the Gujjars, who have lived here for more than 200 years.


The Federal Reserve Prepares for a Rate War
Governors of the Federal Reserve say they intend to do what it takes to bring inflation below the 4 percent rate of the last few months -- a commitment that could put them on a collision course with the White House, which is eager for faster growth.
The worried mood at the Fed is far different from that earlier this year, when Alan Greenspan, the Fed's chairman, began his honeymoon with President Clinton.
At that time, with inflation dipping toward 2 percent, it seemed that Mr.
Greenspan could relax and go fishing for all of 1993.


Drama in Review
Low-Level Panic  One Dream Theater 232 West Broadway Lower Manhattan Through Sunday  By Clare McIntyre; directed by Leonard Foglia; set design, Michael McGarty; costume design, Nina Canter; lighting design, Russell Champa; sound design, One Dream; dialect coach, Lilene Mansell; stage manager, Jude Domski; assistant director, Rich Gershberg.
Presented by the Barrow Group and One Dream.
WITH: Marcia DeBonis, Christina Denzinger and Wendee Pratt.


New Medical Technology Could Do You Harm; Health Savings Account
To the Editor:
"Health Care's Fever: Not So High to Some" (The Week in Review, May 16) mentions a 1970's Rand Corporation study showing that families randomly assigned to a plan requiring them to absorb the first $1,000 a year of medical costs spent 40 percent less on their care, with "negligible" effects on health.
You used this to prove that overuse is a major problem in the cost of medical care.
This plan is also an easy, sensible way to solve our health care cost problem.


String-of-Pearls Comet Headed Toward a Crash
TWO months ago astronomers were treated to a spectacular rarity when a comet ventured too close to Jupiter and was ripped apart into about 20 brightly shining pieces, which scientists called "pearls on a string." The latest observations of this unlucky comet show that most of it is probably doomed to crash into Jupiter next year.
The comet was discovered in March, just after it broke up, by Dr.
Eugene Shoemaker of the United States Geological Survey, his wife, Carolyn, and David H. Levy, an amateur comet hunter in Tucson, Ariz.
It was named Comet Shoemaker-Levy 1993e.
Dr.
Brian G. Marsden of the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory in Cambridge, Mass., said the comet's doom was sealed on July 8 and 9 last year, when it entered the inescapable deathtrap of Jupiter's powerful gravitation.


Limits Seen On Human Existence
IS it possible, using statistics alone, to predict how long space exploration, the Catholic Church, the Miss America contest, the human race or the universe as a whole will continue to exist?
A Princeton University astrophysicist has concluded that these and many other predictions are not only possible, but can be made with 95 percent reliability.
As he described his hypothesis in the current issue of the British journal Nature, the scientist, Dr.
J.
Richard Gott 3d, proposed that the longevity of things can be estimated remarkably well from their histories.
All that is needed to calculate roughly how long something is likely to last is to assume that there is nothing special about it -- nothing to particularly distinguish it from all the other objects or systems or creatures or intervals of time in its class.
Theorists call this assumption the "Copernican principle," referring to the Polish astronomer Copernicus, who concluded that the Earth was not at the center of the solar system (or universe), and therefore did not occupy any "special" place.


Never-to-Be Wedding Brings Tears at Funeral
Dressed as bride and groom, Hema Sakhrani and Shaleen Wadhwani were mourned yesterday as they lay a few feet from each other in a funeral parlor in Queens.
She wore a red sari with gold trim that her uncle had brought from Bombay.
He wore a bejeweled turban and a black suit.
An orange sash, a symbol of the bond between man and woman in Hindu marriage rites, joined the two coffins.
Their parents held two services for the young couple, whose lives had seemed so promising until a man who the police said was obsessed with Miss Sakhrani gunned down Mr.
Wadhwani last Wednesday.
She was so overcome by grief that she killed herself two days later.


Books of The Times; The Way Universities Profit by War Research
The Cold War and American Science  The Military-Industrial-Academic Complex at M.I.T. and Stanford  By Stuart W. Leslie  Illustrated. 332 pages.
Columbia University Press. $42.
In "The Cold War and American Science," Stuart W. Leslie, a professor in the department of the history of science at Johns Hopkins University, takes off from the theme of President Dwight D. Eisenhower's only memorable phrase: his warning against the unwarranted influence of "the military-industrial complex." Mr.
Eisenhower used the words in his farewell address on Jan. 17, 1961, just before leaving the White House, but its significance echoes to the present time of big-power peace.


To the Spider Woman, Broadway Is Home
Chita Rivera (Dolores Conchita Figueroa del Rivero, to be more precise) is impatient with questions about the Tony Awards on Sunday.
She actually rolls her eyes and sighs when asked about whether she thinks she'll win the honors for best actress in a musical, for her title role in "Kiss of the Spider Woman."
"You delude yourself," she said on a recent afternoon at the Broadhurst Theater, in a cozy dressing room overstocked with long-stemmed red roses.
"You keep telling yourself it doesn't matter, that whoever wins, that'll be just fine. Then you get there. And? It's war! If you lose, that walk out of the theater is the longest you'll ever take."


Review/Dance; From Italy to Balanchine, via Petipa
The New York City Ballet's performance on Saturday afternoon of George Balanchine's "Harlequinade," one of the major revivals of the Balanchine Celebration, may well prove to be one of the happiest and best-danced performances in the festival.
There will never be another Balanchine, nor another Edward Villella and Patricia McBride, the original Harlequin and Columbine in the production.
Nor should there be.
But both the revival and the cast that danced it, nine years after its last performance at City Ballet, managed not only to stir potent memories among the balletomanes in the audience but also to make the ballet a fresh experience.


Perot's Organization Shows Fissures and Sagging Morale
Ross Perot's grass-roots political organization is in turmoil, riven by disputes that are beginning to cost it some of its most-committed volunteers.
Mr.
Perot's personal popularity has never been higher, but morale in his organization, United We Stand America, is beginning to sag.


Marian Anderson Tribute
"Remembering Marian Anderson," a tribute to the contralto, will take place at Carnegie Hall next Monday at 11 A.M.
Isaac Stern and James DePreist, the music director of the Oregon Symphony Orchestra and Miss Anderson's nephew, will offer reminiscences, and recordings by Miss Anderson will be played.
Admission is free.
Tickets are available at the Carnegie Hall box office, 154 West 57th Street.
Miss Anderson died on April 8 at age 96.


Markets Closed
All financial and commodity markets in the United States were closed yesterday for the Memorial Day holiday.
Government offices, banks and many businesses were also closed.
Many European markets were also closed yesterday for bank holidays, but Asian markets were open.


Beene Takes A Playful Look Beyond Clothes
Now, Geoffrey Beene joins the group of world-class fashion designers who have progressed beyond dressing their customers' bodies to affecting their surroundings.
Giorgio Armani in Milan, Jean-Paul Gaultier in Paris, Rei Kawakubo in Tokyo and, most successfully, Ralph Lauren in New York have all looked for fields to conquer beyond fashion.
"It's a natural progression," Mr.
Beene said.
"You deal with the same basic elements of design, and you want to see how they can be applied to another area, like furniture. It is, of course, a major challenge."


Longtime African Dictator's Grip Loosening
In the pantheon of Africa's Big Men, Life President Hastings Kamuzu Banda of Malawi has long occupied his own quirky niche: part African, part Victorian, part Mussolini, part Monty Python.
To casual travelers in Africa, Dr.
Banda is the homburg-hatted disciplinarian who to this day forbids bell-bottom pants and over-the-collar hair for men as signs of moral decadence.
His Government banned the Simon and Garfunkel song "Cecilia" as offensive to the woman the unmarried President's official hostess, Cecilia Tamanda Kadzamira.


Market Place; If Construction Revives, So Might USG as a Growth Stock.
UNITED STATES GYPSUM is back.
Of course, its products were never gone, but the industrial company that made big profits in the mid-80's fell out of favor with many investors after 1988.
That year, it borrowed $2.5 billion to pay the holder of each of its shares of stock a $42 dividend to ward off a takeover bid.
The debt, coupled with a steep drop in construction activity and lower demand for gypsum products, was too great a burden.
In January 1991, USG, the holding company for United States Gypsum and other divisions that was created in a 1985 reorganization, defaulted on bond payments.


INSIDE
Cambodian Vote Questioned
With returns showing the royalist opposition running neck and neck with the ruling party, the Government said there had been "irregularities" in last week's election.
Page A9.
Yugoslav Leader Is Ousted
President Dobrica Cosic of Yugoslavia was ousted in what was seen as a maneuver by nationalist forces who view him as too moderate.
Page A8.
New Life for Tribes
A century and a half after they were pushed off their land, Indian tribes along the Oregon Trail are trying to secure an economic future.
Page A12.
Watching the Brain Think
A new technique allows scientists to pinpoint the site at which human brain cells are energized for tasks like thinking.
Science Times, page C1.
Fraud Investigator Fasts
A Government investigator of scientific fraud is fasting to protest the sealing of his office.
Page C1.
Bulls Even Series As Jordan Scores 54
The Bulls beat the Knicks in Chicago, 105-95, to tie the N.B.A.
Eastern Conference finals at two games apiece.
Michael Jordan scored 54 points.
SportsTuesday, page B7.


Russia's Elite Schools
To the Editor:
"At Elite Russian School, O Is for Openness," your excellent May 24 front-page article, omits one vital point.
How did the few lucky children get into the school?
"About 170 children applied this year for the lowest grades," you state, "and only 70 were accepted." Was it on merit?
Yes, but not only.


Swarthmore Confers Degrees
Swarthmore College conferred 316 bachelor's degrees yesterday in its 121st commencement.
In ceremonies in Scott Outdoor Auditorium on the Swarthmore, Pa., campus, the college awarded honorary degrees to Dr.
Arlie Hochschild, an author and professor of sociology at the University of California at Berkeley; Senator Harris Wofford, Democrat of Pennsylvania; Bernice Johnson Reagon, a founder of the musical group Sweet Honey in the Rock; Dr.
Jonathan Fine, founder of Physicians for Human Rights, and the Rev.
Jon Sobrino, professor of philosophy and theology at Jose Simeon Canas University in El Salvador.


China Makes Population Control an Ism
To the Editor:
"China is a very big country with a very big problem: it has 7 percent of the earth's arable land -- and more than 20 percent of all its people. Today they number 1.17 billion. In several decades they will probably number 1.9 billion." Thus begins "China's Cruelty and Women's Rights" (editorial, May 21).


Seeking a Czech Version of the Chrysler Rebound
Six months ago, Gerald Greenwald, a former vice chairman of the Chrysler Corporation, got a phone call from a lawyer friend in Paris: could he help salvage Tatra, the Czech Republic's oldest truck company, which was saddled with debt and stalled production and caught in a scam involving 2,500 trucks and the Libyan Government?
After several trips to the plant, a lot of questions to management and negotiations with local banks, Mr.
Greenwald is now Tatra's turnaround expert.


Sports of The Times; Grim Reaper Cuts Down The Knicks
THIS is what comes from a "grimmer, darker" mood.
Michael Jordan comes out in a glowering rage and punishes the Knicks for all the indignities he has suffered.
Jordan administered this treatment yesterday, like the dean of boys in a hard-core high school back in the days of corporal punishment.
He flailed away at the Knicks, in heated dispassion, looking for every sore spot.


Q&amp;A
Keeping Your Balance
Q.  How can people stand erect if the stomach weighs more than the feet?
A.
People are indeed top-heavy, and balance, the ability to stand upright and move around without falling over, is not as simple as it feels.
It requires constant tiny adjustment of muscles as the weight shifts on the feet, much as a juggler maneuvers to balance a plate on a stick.


PATIENTS CITE BIAS IN AIDS COVERAGE BY HEALTH PLANS
Faced with the loss of medical benefits that keep them alive, an increasing number of people with AIDS are accusing their health insurance plans of discrimination forbidden under the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990.
Several dozen cases involving health insurance plans that have eliminated or limited coverage for AIDS patients have been filed with the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
The law's insurance provisions, which took effect last July, say that insurers may restrict their policies to avoid risk, but not as a subterfuge for discrimination.


Kukoc Passes Bulls' Physical
Toni Kukoc, the Croatian star who is considered to be the best basketball player in Europe, has completed physical examinations given by the Bulls, Jerry Krause, the team's director of operations, said today.
Krause said that Kukoc, who was in Chicago during the holiday weekend but did not attend either Bulls-Knicks game, must now make a final decision on getting out of his contract with Benetton Treviso of the Italian league within a couple of weeks.
That would enable the 6-foot-10-inch Kukoc to negotiate a deal with the Bulls beginning July 1.


Maryland Uses New Tack With Young Delinquents
At 9 o'clock on a Saturday night, in the Brooklyn neighborhood here, 16-year-old Ben Santos sat on his living room floor, fielding questions about the trouble he had gotten into the day before.
Sitting above him were his mother, Eden Santos, and Cynthia Florio, a 23-year-old who is part of a team of caseworkers assigned to help Ben and other delinquent 9- to 17-year-olds keep from getting into trouble.


Perkins Wakes Up and Smells a Title
Seattle is an espresso town, which may be why Sam Perkins has finally awakened.
Predictably nicknamed "Sleepy," because he always walks around as if it's 4 A.M., Perkins has turned into the SuperSonics' ambulance driver.
Whenever the team has needed a pick-me-up in the Western Conference finals, it has been Perkins dead-aiming a 3-point shot or Perkins backing in for an unobstructable hook.
Sonic fans, without his permission, have begun the following battle cry: "Sam, I Am."


U.N. GETS PROTEST ON CAMBODIA VOTE
With new vote totals showing a neck-and-neck race between Cambodia's ruling party and the royalist opposition founded by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the Government protested to the United Nations today what it said were "irregularities" in last week's elections.
Although the United Nations, several foreign governments and a variety of independent poll monitors have certified the voting as free and fair, diplomats in Phnom Penh warned that the Government was laying the groundwork for a claim that the election results should be annulled and that it might try to hold power even if it lost at the polls.


Mutual Banks Moving To Shareholder Owners
Depositors at Astoria Federal Savings and Loan in Queens and the Green Point Savings Bank in Brooklyn may soon have the opportunity to do more than just earn 3 percent interest on their money.
After more than a century of quietly collecting deposits and making loans without the bother of shareholders clamoring for dividends and higher profits, the two savings institutions separately announced plans last month to convert from mutual, or depositor-owned, organizations to shareholder ownership.


In Need of Public Support, Doctors Try Image Transplant
For Dr.
Michael Elia, a Westchester orthopedic surgeon, the national debate over health care has come to this: he has taken the M.D. license plates off his sports car.
"People see you driving around in a little convertible with M.D. plates and they get hostile," said Dr.
Elia, who practices at Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville.
"It's just a $14,000 Miata, but people see the plates and assume its a $60,000 Porsche. There's such resentment against doctors; why make it worse?"


Pressure on Bentsen Mounts as Senate Faces Budget
Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen vigorously thrust himself onto center stage of the budget battle last week, lining up a majority of House Democrats from Texas for President Clinton's economic plan, buttonholing and cajoling pivotal senators, tearing into opponents at a news conference and giving loads of advice to the White House.
Probably the best proof that he was in the thick of things was the photograph taken in the Oval Office last Thursday night: a beaming Mr.
Bentsen stood between President Clinton and Vice President Al Gore as they telephoned Speaker Thomas S. Foley after the House approved the plan by a margin of six votes.


Edouard Morot-Sir Is Dead at 83; Ex-French Diplomat Also Taught
Edouard Morot-Sir, a former French diplomat, cultural emissary, author and philosophy teacher, died on Thursday at Columbia-Presbyterian Hospital.
He was 83 and had lived in Manhattan since 1957.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Mr. Colon, Call Home
The allegation that City Councilman Rafael Castaneira Colon doesn't live in his own district is under investigation by the Council and the Bronx District Attorney.
Mr.
Colon may be exonerated.
But if authorities find that he has been thumbing his nose at his South Bronx constituents, the Council leadership will have an obligation to punish him harshly as a signal to Council members about their responsibility to constituents.
It is the Council's fundamental job, after all, to give communities a voice in City Hall.
According to a girlfriend who has accused Mr.
Colon of assault, he has falsely claimed her address as his for years.
A Council member can, for the term ending this year only, live anywhere in the city; because of redistricting in 1991, a court temporarily lifted the residency requirement.
But it's a criminal violation for elected officials to lie on official documents about their residences.
If Mr.
Colon is found to have violated a law, the Council would have several options, from reprimanding him to expelling him.
So far, Speaker Peter Vallone, who firmly controls the Council, has sent mixed signals.
Every elected official, he said, "has the moral and legal obligation to live and to serve in the district he or she represents." But Mr.
Vallone also said, "If any elected official is failing to adequately serve his or her constituency, there is no better place to remedy that concern than at the voting booth."


G.O.P. Showdown on Gay Rights
Shhhh.
The Republicans who control the New York State Senate prefer not to talk in public about the gay-rights legislation pending before their chamber.
With the Legislature scheduled to adjourn at the end of the month, there's a real danger that G.O.P. senators will kill the gay-rights bill without so much as one word of public debate.
If that happens, the Senate majority leader, Ralph Marino, will have to answer not only for defeat of a worthy civil rights initiative, but for the sad capitulation of his once-proud state party to intolerant extremists.


CHRONICLE
There are walks to raise money for breast cancer and walks to raise awareness of AIDS, walks for civil rights and walks for political causes.
On Saturday, there will be a "Walk for Water," intended to help protect New York City's and Westchester County's water supply.
Sponsored by Riverkeeper, a Westchester organization that monitors the watershed of the Hudson River, and the Open Space Institute, a land conservation organization, a group of celebrities led by ROBERT F. KENNEDY Jr.  will take an eight-mile hike around the Croton Reservoir.
It will end with a picnic and concert at Croton Gorge Park.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Victory for Langer
The Masters champion, Bernhard Langer, eagled the 12th hole for a second consecutive day and fired a six-under-par 68 as he breezed to a six-shot victory in the $1 million European PGA Championship in Virginia Water, England. (AP)
COLLEGE BASEBALL
Longhorns in Series
Mark Prather singled home the winning run as Texas rallied for two runs in the ninth inning and beat Southern Cal, 3-2, yesterday in Austin, Tex., to advance to the College World Series for the 27th time. (AP)


Fraud Sleuth On a Fast Over a Halt To Inquiries
Walter Stewart, a single-minded investigator of scientific misconduct who believes that his work was improperly halted by the National Institutes of Health, has gone on a hunger strike in protest.
Hunger strikes are rare in science, and few Government employees have embraced the risky tactic.
Today was the 21st day of his fast, in which he is taking only water, and Mr.
Stewart said in a telephone interview, "I'm getting weak."


Chess
Hypermodernism is old in the annals of military combat but a latecomer to chess.
While its strategy of provoking opponents to overreach themselves and then surround and destroy their frailly supported, advanced units did not become a self-conscious approach to the chess openings until the rise of players like Richard Reti, Gyula Breyer and Aron Nimzovich in the 1920's, this had been stock in trade to the Spartan infantry at least as early as the Persian Wars in the Fifth Century B.C.
Its lure in chess is the spirit of adventure that accompanies a bold plan.
What if the opponent's thrust becomes a juggernaut?
You are crushed.
But what satisfaction there is in undermining the enemy outposts and pouring through the gaps to victory.
This was the reward that the Armenian grandmaster Rafael Vaganian earned for his game with the Dutch grandmaster John Van der Wiel from Round 1 of the Sixth Klooster Tournament in Ter Apel, the Netherlands, in early April.
Vaganian tie for first place with the Russian grandmaster Aleksandr Khalifman, each having scored 3 1/2-1 1/2.


The '93 Cliburn Competition: Pianissimo
Any news a page turner makes can only be bad, but it is also likely to be small.
As the Ninth Van Cliburn International Piano Competition enters its final week here, a page turner has been the biggest news in this year's calm and amicable proceedings.
By the standards of past competitions, Cliburn or otherwise, this has been a placid affair, seemingly free of contentiousness among the jurors and of charges of scandal from the contestants.
The lone tempest, such as it was, began on Friday morning, when Fabio Bidini, a 24-year-old Italian, opened the semifinal round of competition with a performance of Morton Gould's "Ghost Waltzes," an 11-minute work commissioned for the event.
Each of the 12 contestants who remain, from 35 who competed in the prelimary round, must perform the Gould work as part of a 75-minute recital that makes up half of the semifinal requirement.
Since the competitors received the score less than six weeks before coming to Fort Worth, they were not expected to know it from memory.
Of the first six semifinalists to perform, only two played without the score.


Animals That Are Peerless Athletes
TO the recreational joggers of the world, champion runners like Carl Lewis and Olga Markova are the anointed children of Zeus, cardiovascular demigods who seem to ignite the air molecules around them as they race.
Yet even the most elite human athlete is thoroughly pathetic compared with nature's other aerobic masters.
Take the pronghorn antelope of Wyoming, for example, a goat-sized ungulate that may rank as the greatest athlete alive.
Its maximum speed of 60 miles per hour is second only to the cheetah's top pace of 70 m.p.h.
But while the cheetah can sprint for just a few seconds before practically collapsing, the pronghorn can maintain its freeway stride for an hour.


No Headline
"I ask you, at this monument, can any American be out of place? And can any Commander in Chief be in any other place but here on this day?" -- PRESIDENT CLINTON, at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.  [ A14:4. ]


Evidence for Planet X Evaporates in Spotlight of New Research
ASTRONOMERS can quit looking for the elusive "Planet X" because it is not there, a new study of solar system measurements has concluded.
For a half century stargazers have hunted for Planet X, the solar system's hypothetical 10th planet.
Its existence was inferred from what appeared to be irregularities in the orbital motions of several known planets.
But a new study of the outer planets indicates that the long chase, based on presumed wobbles in the orbits of Uranus and Neptune caused by a planet, was based on erroneous observations and calculations.


Forsaken Frontier: Revisiting the Oregon Trail -- Last of three articles.; 150 Years Later, Indians Bitterly Cope With Results of Whites' Arrival
The map of the American West in the first big year of the Oregon Trail showed a sea of open space, and carried warnings about the people who were living on much of it.
The Pawnee, Cheyenne, Arapaho, Sioux, Shoshone, Crow, Nez Perce, Ute, Spokane, Cayuse, Chinook, Umpqua -- these tribes were as prominent as any landmark on the migrants' guide of 1843.
Moving west along the old Oregon Trail today, a traveler who wanders off the interstate can still find the American Indian bands that both sustained and threatened the wagon trains.
The people live inside straight lines on the map, nations within a nation.
They are mostly off the road and out of sight.


New Medical Technology Could Do You Harm
To the Editor:
"Health Care's Fever: Not So High to Some" (The Week in Review, May 16) notes that many economists relate much of health care's cost to spectacular advances in medical technology.
These economists believe most Americans will not tolerate cost containment at the expense of further technological development.
But spectacular technological developments do not necessarily mean better outcomes and frequently are associated with worse outcomes than if the technology had not been used.


Japan Buying More U.S. Parts
Japanese automobile companies increased their purchases of American auto parts by nearly 30 percent in the fiscal year that ended on March 31, the Japan Automobile Manufacturers Association said today.
An association spokesman said 11 auto makers bought more than $13.5 billion in American parts, compared with $10.5 billion in the previous fiscal year.
The parts were for use in Japanese auto plants in Japan and Japanese-owned factories in the United States.


Image of Old Hoboken Recorded by an Invader
NORA JACOBSON began shooting Hoboken about the time landlords here started throwing tenants out.
It was 1984. The old port city was going condo.


Corrections
A front-page news analysis article yesterday about President Clinton's appointment of a new communications director rendered the name of a top adviser to President John F. Kennedy incorrectly in some editions.
He is Theodore C. Sorensen.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings this week:: TUESDAY
Phillips-Van Heusen Corp WEDNESDAY
Browning-Ferris Inds
Discount Corp New York
General Dynamics Corp
Helmerich &amp; Payne Inc
LG&amp; E Energy Corp
Stanley Works
Starrett L S Co THURSDAY
General Pub Utils Corp
Santa Fe Energy Res Inc
Times Mirror Co
TIS Mtg Invt Co
Wal-Mart Stores Inc
Zurn Inds Incc FRIDAY
Allegheny Pwr Sys Inc
Fed Home Ln Mtg Corp


A Gentler China: A special report.; 4 Years After Tiananmen, The Hard Line Is Cracking
Nearly four years have passed since the Communist hard-liners sent tanks to Tiananmen Square, filling the morgues with the broken bodies of young fighters for democracy and casting a repressive nightfall across the country.
Now a dawn of sorts has gradually broken across China.


Clinton, Saluting Vietnam Dead, Finds Old Wound Is Slow to Heal
President Clinton, who avoided the Vietnam War, confronted his own past and thousands of veterans today at a ceremony at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.
Framed by the 58,044 names of the Vietnam War dead etched in black granite on the wall behind him, Mr.
Clinton asked that differences over the war "not divide us as a people any longer."
The raucous, divided reception that was accorded Mr.
Clinton as he addressed the crowd and knelt before the memorial wall to make a rubbed impression of the name of James Herbert Jeffries, a boyhood friend killed in the war, seemed to underscore the realization that despite his appeal for reconciliation, Vietnam remained a national wound that would not heal.  [ Transcript of Mr.
Clinton's speech, page A14. ]


Courier Cracks Mirror Image at French
Coping with Thomas Muster center-stage on the French Open clay is a little like going one on one in the weight room with Arnold Schwarzenegger.
But today Jim Courier, the two-time defending champion, handled his fourth-round assignment, held over from Sunday because of stormy weather, without a quaver.
After all, at the French Open, Courier has been transformed into a muscle man who has yet to meet his match, and he upped his Paris winning streak to 18 matches in a row by out-blustering Muster, 6-3, 2-6, 6-4, 6-2.


Equity Issues
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Allstate Corp., Northbrook, Ill., an initial public offering of 78.5 million common shares, 68 million in the United States.
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.


Brooks Takes a Walk As Devils Jog in Place
In a disagreement with New Jersey's management over the direction the team ought to take, Herb Brooks resigned as coach yesterday after fulfilling one season of the three-year contract he was given last June 5 to "take the Devils to the next level."
Brooks, whose team (40-37-7) tied the Islanders for third place in the Patrick Division but was eliminated in five games by Pittsburgh in the first round of the playoffs, wanted the Devils to, in effect, take a step backward before going forward.
The 55-year-old coach viewed youth and speed as the main ingredients for building success.
Management felt the players on the team were good enough to become Stanley Cup contenders.


Reviews/Organ; The Art of Improvisation
McNeil Robinson is one of increasingly few organists who maintain the art of improvisation.
Last Tuesday night at the Church of the Heavenly Rest, at a moment's notice, Mr.
Robinson conjured up a "symphony in four movements" based on themes submitted by Ned Rorem.
Each movement found an effective dramatic shape, expertly deploying Mr.
Rorem's fluid and engaging material.
Especially impressive was the second movement, an Andante, in which a lilting melody stretched out to fill a space of considerable breadth.
The remainder of the program was taken up by a broad selection of works from different eras: Marcel Dupre's "Sept Pieces," three anonymous 17th-century pieces and Beavarlet-Charpentier's Fugue in A Minor, Bach's Prelude and Fugue in D (B.W.V. 532) and Franck's Choral No. 2.
While Mr.
Robinson is not perhaps the most agile of players, he has a strong grasp of tension and release; the Dupre rang out with particular force and clarity.


Mets Hail The Victor On Return From Exile
The wind was up at Wrigley Field.
The score was 6-4, the game only in the sixth inning.
Men were on base.
The Mets' manager was on the mound.
Disaster was in the air for New York, and the baseball was put in Paul Gibson's left hand.
Boom.
Dwight Smith turned on Gibson's third pitch, and the ball landed in the ivy, inches below the screen that would have claimed it as a home run.
Now, the score was 6-5.
There were Cubs on second and third, and there was still one out.
The flashbacks were unnerving Gibson.


Uncertainty Is Around the Corner
The prospects for approval of President Clinton's economic program improved greatly over the weekend with the disclosure of a prospective compromise in the Senate.
But while that development should help calm some of the growing fears about the President's ability to cut the deficit, the bond market must still face, with its usual trepidation, the uncertainty surrounding both the May employment data scheduled for release on Friday and two important reports on inflation in the following two weeks.
Since the bond market rally reached its peak in early March, prices and yields have moved in a narrow range.
For the 30-year bond, the yield has been stuck between 6.72 percent and 7.05 percent.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Activated Jose Melendez, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Placed Jeff Richardson, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Ken Ryan, pitcher, to Pawtucket of the International League.
Recalled Jim Byrd, infielder, from Pawtucket.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Activated Angel Miranda, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Sent Josias Manzanillo, pitcher, to New Orleans of the American Association.


Review/Dance; Running the Full Gamut Of Balanchine's Ballet
"Liebeslieder Walzer," which the New York City Ballet will perform tonight at the New York State Theater, and "Raymonda Variations," which is scheduled for Friday, symbolize the two poles of the company's continuing "Balanchine Celebration."
"Raymonda Variations" (1961) is typical of George Balanchine's work -- a plotless suite of solos and ensembles in which he reiterates his allegiance to ballet's 350-year-old classical vocabulary, especially as it had been modernized, in his view, by the 19th-century choreographer Marius Petipa.
Balanchine's own brand of 20th-century neo-classicism is evident in his reworking of classical technique in this sparkling gem of a ballet.
But it is also a work in which he pays overt homage to Petipa by quoting directly from that choreographer's 1898 ballet, "Raymonda," set to Glazounov's music.


Janet Reno's Independent Stand
Among recent Attorneys General, Janet Reno stands alone in support of the Federal independent counsel law, calling for a court-appointed prosecutor for investigations of high executive branch officials.
The distinction does her credit.
The law, first enacted in 1978 with Watergate freshly in mind, lapsed last year but President Clinton is pledged to revive it.
It takes cases involving Cabinet secretaries and a few dozen other top officials away from the Attorney General and gives them to an outside prosecutor who can't be fired except for good cause.


Cyclist Hit Twice and Dragged By Drunken Driver, Police Say
A 29-year-old man was knocked off his bicycle by a drunken driver in upper Manhattan on Sunday night, and as he limped to his feet, he was struck a second time by the same car and dragged for eight blocks, the police and witnesses said.
The man, Christopher Donohue, a school custodian, was in critical but stable condition at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center last night.
He suffered internal injuries and third-degree friction burns to his face and body, and he lost his left ear, his doctor, M. Kamel Abouzahr, said last night.


A Recital and a Debut Merge, to a Degree
Christopher Creaghan, an organist from Canada studying at the Manhattan School, was faced with a degree-requirement recital and a New York debut wrapped into one on Wednesday night at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola.
He handled the experience with poise.
Mr.
Creaghan's program stretched as wide as it knew how over the repertory, often favoring excerpts from a variety of pieces rather than concentrated doses of one or two styles.
While some recitals serve particular musical needs, this one was clearly designed to show what one organist could do.
The first half was principally Baroque, offering, among pieces by Sweelinck and Grigny, Bach's C-major Trio Sonata: chaste and cheerful outer movements, an austere Largo in between.
The second half tended toward bigger, later works and ended with Messiaen's familiar "Nativite du Seigneur," in which Mr.
Creaghan nicely exploited the size of this church and the power of its organ.


Bridge
One of the most exciting finishes in the 65-year history of the Goldman Pairs took place Sunday night at the Sheraton New York Hotel in Manhattan.
With one two-board round remaining, the defending champions, Steve Becker of Cos Cob, Conn., and Richard de Martino of Riverside, Conn., seemed to have a good chance of repeating.
They were in second place, 8 match points behind Dale Beers of Springfield, Pa., and Jim Gingrich of Lansdale, Pa.
Three other pairs were in contention.
Sadly, Becker and de Martino were knocked out of the running by a 25-point technical penalty for a misduplication at the start of the session.
But there was still a Becker winner, though unrelated: R. Jay Becker and Ira Herman, both of Manhattan, surged from fifth to first to take the title.
In two boards they scored 44 points out of a possible 50, and ended two and a half points ahead of Beers and Gingrich.
Yesterday, Becker and Herman began their defense of the Reisinger Knockout Team Championship, hoping for a rare double.


A Few Players Missing
Because of pro league commitments, several top American players will be missing when the United States plays Brazil in the first match of the U.S.
Cup '93 on Sunday at New Haven.
The United States Soccer Federation said yesterday that it was unable to obtain the release of midfielder TAB RAMOS from Real Betis in the Spanish League, and defender THOMAS DOOLEY (FC Kaiserslautern) and forward ERIC WYNALDA (Saarbrucken) from the German Bundesliga.


Murder Suspect Is Returned
A sanitation inspector accused of killing a 4-year-old boy and stuffing his body into a trash compactor in Brooklyn was returned to New York City yesterday after he was arrested on a Texas highway on Saturday, the police said.
The suspect, Stephan David Poole, was taken to Brooklyn Central Booking to await arraignment on second-degree murder charges, probably this morning, a police spokesman said.
Mr.
Poole, 31, had evaded the police since May 20, when the body of the boy, Kayesean Blackledge, was found in the Linden Houses Housing project.
Mr.
Poole had skipped around various places in Florida, Mississippi and Texas before he was pulled over in Huntsville, Tex., Saturday afternoon.


Operators of Nuclear Plants Are Warned of a Safety Risk
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission has warned the operators of 34 nuclear reactors around the country that the instruments they use to measure the level of water in the reactors could give a false reading during routine shutdowns and fail to detect important leaks.
The warning was issued Friday.
The problem was first brought to light by an engineer at Northeast Utilities in Connecticut, who said later that he had been harassed for raising safety questions.
Earlier this month, the commission agreed with him and said it would fine the utility; Northeast is appealing the ruling.


Rabin Shuffles His Cabinet But Critics Aren't Appeased
With a Cabinet shuffle over the weekend, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin managed to put the most serious political crisis of his year-old Government behind him.
But today he still had to contend with criticism of his leadership and the possible implications of his leadership style for the Middle East peace talks.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
An increasing number of people with AIDS are accusing their health insurance plans of discrimination forbidden under the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990.
The patients are facing the loss of medical benefits that keep them alive.
Several dozen cases involving health insurance plans that have eliminated or limited coverage for AIDS patients have been filed with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.  [ Page A1. ]
President Clinton is seriously considering a hospital tax to help finance medical care for people who currently have no health insurance, Administration officials said.  [ A1. ]  In the midst of the national health-care debate, doctors are reacting to shifting public perceptions of them in ways large and small.  [ B1. ]


Master of the Fastest Course
Roger Penske used an allusion to a 3-iron to illustrate a point about a driver today.
The golf club alluded to belongs to Bernhard Langer.
The driver is Emerson Fittipaldi, who on Sunday called upon more than two decades of racing experience to give Penske's team its ninth Indianapolis 500 victory in the last 25 years.


Ban Keeps Day From Belmont
In an unusual move by a jockey, Pat Day decided yesterday not to appeal a five-day suspension for careless riding but to accept the penalty and thereby forego his ride on the highly regarded Cherokee Run in next Saturday's $500,000 Belmont Stakes.
"I feel very strongly about the suspension process," the 39-year-old rider said from Churchill Downs in Louisville, Ky.
"And the decision had to be something I could live with."


Miles From Anywhere, Flocks of Tourists Descend
The tour buses are already crawling past the Elvis-A-Rama, the funnel cake parlors, hillbilly moccasin emporiums and glitzy new music theaters here in America's fastest-growing vacation center.
Once a sleepy Ozarks town, but now a billion-dollar phenomenon, Branson has become more than a refuge for a bewildering array of aging pop stars and pre-Garth Brooks country musicians who thrill the faithful at more than 30 theaters here.


School Hallways as Gantlets of Sexual Taunts
The hallways of America's high schools and junior high schools -- the highways and byways between classrooms, locker rooms and the outside world -- are daunting, sexually charged terrain where most girls and many boys can routinely expect to be grabbed, poked, pinched or put down in explicitly sexual ways.
This picture emerges from a new survey by the poll taker Louis Harris &amp; Associates for the American Association of University Women Educational Foundation.
It is the first study that tries to quantify both what teen-agers do to one another and how they react when it happens.


BCT International Inc. (NSC) reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


G.M. Delays Remote-Door Mini-Van
Remote-controlled sliding doors, a technological innovation that the General Motors Corporation hoped would breathe some life into the listless sales of its mini-vans, have been delayed until the fall because of defects discovered during testing.
The new feature, announced in February with fanfare at the Chicago Auto Show, was supposed to be available in April.
But G.M. said today that it now planned to offer it sometime in September, on 1994 models.


For Now, It's a Return to Plodding
The moderate economic expansion, which showed signs of flagging in earlier this year, might be back on a slow but steady track, according to reports issued yesterday.
Manufacturing grew modestly in May after weakening in the previous three months, a closely watched survey of corporate purchasing managers showed.
And the Commerce Department said yesterday that consumers returned to shopping malls and car dealers' lots in April after staying home most of March.


Badillo Urges State to Study City Budget
Herman Badillo, a candidate for city comptroller, called yesterday for the State Financial Control Board to step in immediately and assume control of New York City's finances because next year's budget is in disarray.
But a few hours later, he softened his position, saying he had meant only that the control board should convene a special meeting at once to criticize Mayor David N. Dinkins's budget before the City Council takes it up later this month for approval.


BTG Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Margaret Bush Clement; Bush's Aunt, 93
Margaret Bush Clement, an aunt of former President George Bush, died on Saturday at the Connecticut Hospice in Branford.
She was 93 and lived in Hamden, Conn.
She died of cancer, a spokesman for the Hawley Lincoln Funeral Home in Guilford, Conn., said.


Executive Telecard Ltd.  (NMS) reports earnings for Year to March 31


The Talk of Hollywood; Women Criticizing Women's Film Roles
There are more female executives and producers in the movies than ever before.
That's the good news.
The bad news is that there are more films that depict women as chattel ("Indecent Proposal" and "Honeymoon in Vegas") to be purchased by Robert Redford and James Caan, or airheads ("Sliver") who move into a weird New York apartment building owned by William Baldwin, or appendages ("A Few Good Men") who make Tom Cruise, as a Navy officer, look smart.
Why are there so many films made that portray women in embarrassing ways when women are becoming more powerful in Hollywood?
What are the responsibilities of female executives, producers and agents?


Shandling's Blend of Fact and Parody
One wall of Garry Shandling's office here is covered with newspaper clippings describing the latest twists and turns in the late-night television game: a little bit of Letterman, a little bit of Leno, some Arsenio Hall and Chevy Chase.
Mr.
Shandling could easily have included several recent headlines about another prospective late-night talk-show host: Garry Shandling.
Back in April, when NBC was pursuing Mr.
Shandling to take over Mr.
Letterman's "Late Night" show in the 12:35 A.M. slot, it was all over the newspapers.
There still are rumors that CBS will offer him a show to follow David Letterman on that network.


Raytheon Will Acquire Jet Business
In a bid to broaden its product offerings in the business jet market, the Raytheonn Company said yesterday that it had agreed to acquire British Aerospace's Corporate Jets division for $390 million.
Like many large corporations that have been seeking to spin off noncore operations and focus more intensely on what they think they do best, British Aerospace has been trying to sell the division for some time as part of a six-year-old restructuring effort.


Corrections
The Our Towns column yesterday about a filmmaker in Hoboken, N.J., referred incorrectly to a tenant rights lawyer who is now running for mayor there.
He is Ira Karasick.


Clinton Admits Big Changes In Budget Plan Are Needed
President Clinton conceded today that he would have to reduce his tax proposals and cut spending more deeply to get his economic program through the Senate, but he held out the hope that his plans to put more money into education and job training would not be gutted in the process.
In a speech here, Mr.
Clinton acknowledged that large changes in his budget plan were inevitable and set out five areas that he did not want touched.
He asked negotiators to leave intact his goal of reducing the deficit by $500 billion over four years, to approve only those new taxes that affect the rich more than the poor, to keep measures for small business and for the working poor and to retain spending cuts.


Duty Free International reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


3 Youths Go on Trial in Shooting Death of Brooklyn Principal
Nearly six months after a popular school principal was shot and killed while walking through a Brooklyn housing project, three teen-agers went on trial for murder yesterday, accused of taking part in a running gun battle in which the victim was caught.
In a case that drew national attention to the lethally random perils in neighborhoods riddled with guns and drugs, jury selection began in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn for the defendants -- one of whose bullets the authorities say tore into the chest of Patrick Daly, the 48-year-old longtime principal of Public School 15.


Panthers Expected to Name Neilson Coach
The Florida Panthers scheduled a news conference for today amid speculation they will name the former Rangers coach ROGER NEILSON as their first head coach.
GREG BOURIS, a Panthers spokesman, said that "with all the speculation recently, I'm sure it won't be a major surprise."


Cambodia: A Vote Worth Defending
It's offensive for the present Government of Cambodia to protest "irregularities" in last week's U.N.-run elections.
By most impartial accounts, the voting was conducted fairly.
And those doing the protesting have dirty hands; during the campaign preceding the vote their side engaged in assassinations and other forms of political intimidation.
Just 10 days ago it looked as if the 1991 Cambodia peace accords might unravel in a violently disrupted or boycotted election.
But in a surprising democratic triumph, more than 90 percent of eligible Cambodians braved death threats to cast their votes in an election that monitors certify as free and fair.


Lawyer Takes Plea Deal In Real-Estate Schemes
As angry clients waited to tell their stories, a disbarred lawyer surprised Federal prosecutors at a bail hearing today and pleaded guilty to defrauding investors of more than $3 million with bogus real-estate projects.
The defendant, Alan David Harris of Roslyn Harbor and Brentwood, Calif., pleaded guilty to 25 counts of mail and wire fraud and faces up to 125 years in prison and fines of up to $6.25 million.
He was also ordered to make restitution and a full accounting of how he spent the stolen money.


Matador in Manhattan


Injustice in Texas
Texas leads the nation in lethal injections and the number of people on death row, in part because of the legal rules that have exposed Gary Graham to execution early tomorrow.
One state law denies him a hearing on new evidence and substantial claims of innocence.
Another state law, since repealed, made his youth irrelevant to his sentence and arguments for mercy unavailable.
Gov.
Ann Richards agreed that the case raised significant questions of innocence, and in late April granted a one-month delay.
Mr.
Graham's execution will mean that the state's Board of Pardons and Paroles chose to ignore her.
It will also be another grim trophy for the current U.S.
Supreme Court majority, which seems determined to make the death penalty easier to enforce even if it has to legislate new rules to smooth the way.


COMPANY NEWS
CRI INC.,Rockville, Md., has acquired a $116 million pool of performing commercial real estate loans as part of the voluntary self-liquidation of First Home Federal Savings and Loan Association of the Carolinas in Greensboro, N.C.
FOURTH FINANCIAL CORP., Wichita, Kan., has agreed to buy Ponca Bancshares Inc. and its subsidiary, Security Bank and Trust Co. of Ponca City, Okla.
Terms were not disclosed.


CHRONICLE
It has not been a good few days for celebrity feet.
TOMMY TUNE was going down the stairs at the Chateau Marmont, a hotel on Sunset Boulevard in Los Angeles, on Thursday when a moderate earthquake struck, causing him to miss a step and break a bone in his left foot.


Bonds Rise On Loss By Gold
A sharp drop in gold prices and an improved outlook for President Clinton's deficit reduction plan helped send prices of Treasury securities sharply higher yesterday.
More sluggish economic data also helped the market.
The rally in the bond market and a $9 drop in the price of gold to $371.30 an ounce helped send stocks higher.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 24.91 points, to 3,552.34.  [ Pages D8 and D17. ]


College Overstepped In Removing Jeffries
To the Editor:
A Federal jury's ruling in favor of Prof.
Leonard Jeffries of City College in New York (front page, May 12) has provoked much misguided criticism.


Genetically Altered Foods Need Regulating
To the Editor:
The "cool look at genetically altered foods" in Jane Brody's May 19 Personal Health column is in our view a naive look.


K. S. Dannenhauer, Baptist Minister, 73
The Rev.
Kenneth S. Dannenhauer, a retired Baptist minister, died suddenly on Friday in Manhattan.
He was 73 and lived in Manhattan.
His family said he died of arteriosclerotic cardiovascular disease while out for a walk.


Volunteer at White House Said to Have Received Fee
A volunteer brought in to the White House travel office to help with charters when career employees were dismissed two weeks ago received a $1,400 commission for the first flight she arranged, then returned the fee when questions were asked about it, The Washington Post reported in Wednesday's issue.
The White House did not have a response late tonight when asked about The Post's account.
The Post said George Stephanopolous, a senior adviser at the White House, had replied when asked about the commission: "It was a mistake. She did not realize the funds were going to her firm."


After Jordan Does Damage, Riley Finds Another Target
Disturbed that Michael Jordan has attempted 17 more free throws than Patrick Ewing during their last two games, Pat Riley cried foul today.
Riley's complaints about the officiating provided more intrigue leading up to Game 5 of the Eastern Conference championship, the most critical game of the Knicks' season.
The four-of-seven-game series is tied at two games apiece and the scene shifts Wednesday night to Madison Square Garden, where New York has won 27 consecutive games.


Wieden &amp; Kennedy Co-Founder Resigns
David Kennedy, who co-founded Wieden &amp; Kennedy 11 years ago and helped turn the iconoclastic agency into one of America's largest and most honored, will retire at the end of the year, the Portland, Ore., agency said yesterday.
In a statement that confirmed a report this week in the trade publication Adweek, the agency said that Mr.
Kennedy, 54, whose talents as an art director infused campaigns for clients like Nike Inc. with a quirky edginess, would not be directly replaced.


5 Cubans In Search of a Club
Last year, Rene Arocha became the first national-team defector in three decades of Cuban baseball, and now he is a starting pitcher for the St.
Louis Cardinals.
This year, five more Cuban defectors have arrived in the United States to chase the same intoxicating dream -- and they have the advantage of knowing it's possible.
Call it the Arocha Connection.


Catherines Stores Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
I went into Manhattan from Port Chester the other day.
At the Guggenheim Museum, I just couldn't resist those beautifully balanced Calder mobiles.
In what I thought was a surreptitious manner, I blew on one of them, watching it stir into life.
An irate guard rushed over and admonished me loudly, "We don't blow on them!" As I attempted to slink away, a sympathetic art lover attempted to cheer me with a few whispered words.
"Calder would let you," he said. -- PEG FISK
. . .
Dear Diary:
The scene was one of the larger post offices in Brooklyn, where a long line of customers was not-so-patiently waiting.
There was one window open.
The wait seemed interminable.
All at once, five postal workers appeared carrying a ladder, balloons and a banner that read, CUSTOMER APPRECIATION WEEK.
Slowly, the workers proceeded to hang the banner.
The customer line, meanwhile, barely moved.
A man on line pointed out to the manager that, while five workers were hanging a "customer appreciation" banner, people had been waiting for more than half an hour because there was only one person working at a window.
Didn't the manager see any inconsistency?
"Oh that!" she replied. "That doesn't start until next week." -- DOROTHY KLEIN
. . .
Dear Diary:
Invited to a birthday luncheon for Sally Lefkowitz, a friend.
I, a rabbi, ask what I may bring.
How about the specialty of my Brooklyn neighborhood, kasha knishes?
"But," Mrs.
Lefkowitz reminds me, "our hostesses, Contessa Rosa and her daughter Joanna Green, are Italian."
So I hie myself to a liquor store in an Italian neighborhood where I ask the clerk for a bottle of his finest Italian wine.
"Why Italian?" he asks.
I explain that it's for two Italian women.
"Then you want French wine" he said.
"Italian ladies love French wine." He reaches for an inexpensive brand unknown to me.
"Price is no object," I say (always having wanted to have said that).
"Let me have a Rothschild."
"This one is much better," he assures me. "Take my word."
As he's gift-wrapping the bottle, I ask him how long he has been in America.
When did he come from Italy?
"Two years," he replies, adding that he didn't come from Italy, but from Baku, Azerbaijan.
"Baku?" I say, my heart sinking.
"Isn't that a former Soviet republic, a Muslim country?"
He nods.
"And doesn't the Koran forbid the drinking of alcohol?"
He nods again.
Here I am taking the advice of someone who had never tasted liquor -- at least not legally.
"Suppose you give me what I originally requested," I say.
"A bottle of fine Italian wine."
"Trust me," the clerk says, and he adds in Yiddish, "I am Jewish."
Inspired by New York's "gorgeous mosaic," I heed the advice of this Russian Jew from Muslim Baku working in an Italian neighborhood, and take French wine to the Contessa.
And what does Contessa Rosa, at her elegant dairy lunch at her estate on Long Island Sound, serve for hors d'oeuvres?
Lox on matzohs!
No matter that matzoh is out of season in post-Passover May.
I am touched by this sort of Gift of the Magi, Part Deux. -- HERBERT TARR
. . .
Dear Diary:
Since moving to New York three years ago, I've noticed that all Duane Reade stores have cats.
Well, almost all.
At the branch at Lexington and 46th, after cruising up and down the aisles, I saw no sign of a cat.
On the way out I asked the cashier: "Does this store have a cat?" I was dumbfounded when she answered, "No."
But as she handed me my change she added, 'We used to have a cat, but he got transferred."
What I want to know is, Was it a promotion or a lateral move?
I suppose I'll never know. -- SARA MCCLURE
. . .
Our friend who resides at 12 Perry Street in Greenwich Village related the Introduction of the Week, which he overheard uptown at the Social Event of the Season.
That would be last Wednesday's impeccable white-tie Victorian Ball where 1,000 grandly attired guests celebrated the 150th anniversary of the New York Philharmonic.
The quote was uttered by the female half of the last couple to reach their assigned table.
As their fellow diners were about to dig into the roast beef, the new arrivals bounced by breathlessly.
"Hello," the woman said by way of introduction. "We're 1185 Park. Who are you?"
12 Perry says he just sat there in awe.


Market Test Of New Video Technology
Hoping to stake out claims in the interactive television land rush, A.T.&amp; T. and Viacom International will announce a market test of new technology today that is intended to deliver movies on demand, as well as games and shopping services over cable-television networks.
The technology, developed at A.T.&amp; T.'s Bell Laboratories, is emblematic of a kind of broad architecture that will feature advanced switches for routing information and large computers for storing and retrieving movies and other programs.


Mitchell Energy &amp; Development reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


The In-Basket Is a Posh Sofa, The Secretary A Bellhop
LAURA PEARSON of Sag Harbor, L.I., conducts her Manhattan business in rent-free splendor -- a beautifully decorated room with impeccable service in one of the city's most desirable locations.
She uses it a few times a month, often spending most of the day there meeting with associates and clients and basking in its price-is-right luxury.
Still, Ms.
Pearson does feel a certain sense of financial obligation.
In her sojourns, depending on the time of day, she dispenses a modest amount of money on breakfasts and teas, snacks and drinks.
She is the first to say that her unusual office arrangement is better than anything she had when she lived in the city.


New Therapies Are Helping Men to Overcome Impotence
MORE than a million American men are currently being treated for sexual impotence.
Of those, a million are using a technique that involves self-injection with a drug that produces erections, urologists have reported; 30,000 a year are using a vacuum device that has the same effect, while 20,000 a year are choosing penile implants.
"The number of men coming for treatment of erectile dysfunction has increased fivefold in the last few years," said Dr.
James Barada, a prominent urologist in Albany.
"People realize that you should, if you want it, have a satisfactory sexual relationship into your 90's." Ignorance About Dynamics of Sex
The vast increase in the numbers of men seeking treatment, by no means all of them old, has taken place behind a wall of silence.


ATTACK ON YELTSIN STEPPED UP BY FOE
Vice President Aleksandr V. Rutskoi stepped up his attacks on President Boris N. Yeltsin today and called on the Russian Parliament to disband his Government "completely and immediately."
Mr.
Rutskoi's new offensive came as Russia's warring political factions head into a major battle over a new constitution, which Mr.
Yeltsin will put on the table this weekend at a specially summoned conference.
The conference, which opens on Saturday, was expanded today, as Mr.
Yeltsin ordered each of the Russian Federation's 88 regions and territories to double their representation.


Wayne's Whirl As the Kings Win Game 1
It seems that Wayne Gretzky can do it all and then some.
In addition to scoring once and assisting on the three other Los Angeles goals tonight, he accidentally put one puck into his own net, on behalf of the Montreal Canadiens.
Perhaps, for his next act, Gretzky can drive the Zamboni or sing two national anthems in two languages.
The show by Gretzky, and two goals by teammate Luc Robitaille, were the highlights of a tedious 4-1 Kings' victory in Game 1 of the Stanley Cup finals at the Forum.
Game 2 of the four-of-seven-game series is here on Thursday night.


Pogorelovka Journal; The Russians Follow Their Hearts, Back to Russia
Three years ago, at the first inkling of a collapse of the Soviet empire, Leonid N. Podolyan and two friends, all Russians living in the remote Central Asian republic of Kyrgyzstan, piled into a car and drove several thousand miles along the bumpy roads of Russia's heartland, looking for a new place to call home.
They found it here in a ramshackle village by the banks of the River Pronya, about 40 miles south of Ryazan, on the territory of a state chicken farm named 60th Anniversary of October, which offered them as good a deal they were likely to get.


Macy to Start Cable TV Channel, Taking Stores Into Living Rooms
Insomniacs and shopaholics take heart.
In a little over a year, Macy's will be open day and night, 365 days a year, via cable television.
Turning a month's worth of rampant speculation about its plans into fact, R. H. Macy &amp; Company announced yesterday that it would start a cable television channel in the fall of 1994 devoted to selling some of the merchandise carried in its Macy's and Bullock's department stores.


GERMANY PRESSED TO CURB VIOLENCE
After the second fatal firebombing of a house occupied by Turks in six months, the German Government is under renewed pressure to crack down on far-rightist and neo-Nazi activity.
Five girls and women of Turkish origin, ranging in age from 4 to 27, died on Saturday in a firebombing in the western town of Solingen.
Three Turks died in a similar attack in Molln on Nov. 23.


Reflections on a Quarter-Century Behind Bars; Can the Restricted Life on the Inside Offer Lessons for the Free Life on the Outside?
The city street was a slash of bright sunshine and teeming noise as William Wooden emerged from prison after 25 years inside, squinting at the outside.
This murderer-robber, and duly punished ex-convict, 55 years old and determined to salvage something from time, re-entered the slipstream of free humanity from an old warehouse building in Queens, now a holding center where inmates shed their prison greens and muster back out in mufti.


Corrections
A report in the Benefits column of Styles of The Times on Sunday and a about a benefit last evening at the Pierre Hotel for CASA, a drug education organization, misstated the group's full name.
It is the Center on Addiction and Substance Abuse.


Death Row, U.S.A.
At 12:01 A.M. tomorrow, Texas, which makes a habit of capital punishment, plans to execute Gary Graham, a black, for a murder committed a dozen years ago, when he was 17 years old.
Elsewhere in the West, he would not be put to death.
President Clinton supports the death penalty.
But his record in his first two-year term as Governor of Arkansas, in which he reduced the life sentences of 38 murderers, suggests he may have held a different view.


Public &amp; Private; A Fragile Truce
Those veterans of Vietnam who jeered and booed the President this Memorial Day did a disservice to themselves and to the conflict in which they served.
More than that, it was they, not the man they reviled as a draft-dodger and a coward, who did a disservice to those nearly 60,000 others whose names are etched in stone on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.


Spanish TV News Service Is Discussed
Telemundo Group Inc. said yesterday that it was talking with Reuters Holdings P.L.C. and the British Broadcasting Corporation about forming a 24-hour Spanish-language news service for cable television systems in the United States, Spain and Latin America.
Joaquin F. Blaya, the president of Telemundo, said he expected the negotiations with Reuters and the BBC to be completed within two weeks.
He said plans for the news services were announced yesterday because there was a conference of Spanish-language broadcasters in Los Angeles.


U.S. Encourages Reporting Of Adverse Medical Reactions
The Food and Drug Administration today announced a program to encourage nurses, doctors, dentists and pharmacists to report dangerous side effects from drugs and medical devices.
Until now, manufacturers have been chiefly responsible for reporting dangerous and unexpected effects of drugs and devices they sell.
But agency officials say that in large part because medical professionals have not been encouraged to report adverse reactions only 1 in 10 or perhaps even 1 in 100 of those caused by drugs became known.
And for medical devices like breast implants, they say, the rate of reporting has been even lower.


Stony Brook President Plans to Step Down
Dr.
John H. Marburger, president of the State University of New York at Stony Brook, announced today that he would step down and return to teaching, ending a 13-year tenure marked by strains to maintain academic standards as state aid steadily declined.
In announcing his resignation, Dr.
Marburger said he would leave his $146,000 position as soon as a successor is found, which he estimated would take up to a year.
He pointed out that when he was appointed to the post in 1980 he said he planned to stay for only 10 years.


Houston Signs Contract With Jets
Jets linebacker BOBBY HOUSTON agreed to a new contract with the team yesterday.
The terms of the deal were not disclosed.


METROPOLITAN GOLF REPORT
Nynex Commemorative
Bob Charles of New Zealand, the leading career money winner on the Senior PGA Tour and arguably the best left-handed golfer, was the honoree in last night's dinner at Sleepy Hollow Country Club in Scarborough, N.Y., where the 14th edition of the tournament will be staged this week.
Charles captured the Commemorative in 1988 and 1989.
This is the 30th anniversary of his victory in the 1963 British Open, where he beat Phil Rodgers in a playoff at Royal Lytham.
Charles won the Canadian Open 25 years ago; 20 years ago, he captured the New Zealand Open, the Scandinavian Open and the South African Open.


Headache for Japanese Investors
They came, they saw, they bought -- and now they're stuck.
During the real estate boom of the 1980's, Japanese investors purchased or financed tens of billions of dollars of American property, including prestigious properties like Rockefeller Center, the Tiffany building and the Exxon building in Manhattan alone.


FOOD NOTES
Exotic Oysters
For the first time, a number of varieties of oysters from the Southern Hemisphere, where winter is just starting, are coming on the market here.
Several kinds of oysters from Chile, like the small, sweet Chiloe and the new meaty Rilan Bays, are being served in some restaurants.
Also newly available are oysters from Tasmania, like the intriguingly dark, assertive Barillo Bays, and from New Zealand, the tender, mild and sweet Marbrough Bays.
All of these oysters are sold by the piece, to eat in or take out, Monday through Friday at the Oyster Bar and Restaurant in Grand Central Station.
Some are available at Citarella Fish Market, 2135 Broadway (75th Street), and Balducci's, 424 Avenue of the Americas (9th Street).
Dean &amp; DeLuca, 560 Broadway (Prince Street), and Jake's, 2425 Broadway (89th Street), have them from time to time.
Most are around $2 each.
California Olive Oil
The vineyard at the B. R. Cohn Winery in Glen Ellen, Calif., is named Olive Hill, after the trees planted there by the Spanish.
Now, in addition to bottling wine, the owner, Bruce Cohn, is pressing and bottling the oil of his picholine olives.
He's putting the oil in tall, slender 500-milliliter wine bottles made of glass that is nearly black, protecting the oil from light.


Holopak Technologies Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


As 4-Year-Old Is Buried, Accused Killer Is Arraigned
He was a little boy who liked seesaws and swings, rice and beans, slang words like "chill." He went to Sunday school.
He was fond of Diana Ross.
He would tag along after the woman he called his mommy as she moved from room to room.
Kayesean Blackledge was rehearsing for his first graduation at Salem Baptist Nursery School in Jersey City before his songs and his laughter were cut short on May 20.


60-Minute Gourmet
WHEN it comes to economical cooking, it's hard to beat chicken livers.
The liver is one of the most versatile parts of a chicken and can be used in pates and terrines, in rice dishes and in scores of main courses.
The French, among the most frugal of cooks, would never dream of tossing out the little livers in chickens.
One of the most common ways to prepare chicken livers is to dip them in seasoned flour, then cook them in oil until crisp and browned.
They are then served in a sauce that usually consists of dry red wine, chopped vegetables and seasonings.


Six Fasting to Press for a Chicano Studies Department at U.C.L.A.
Adopting the tactics of their hero Cesar Chavez, six protesters have gone on a hunger strike to demand that the University of California at Los Angeles establish a department of Chicana and Chicano studies.
Six Mexican-Americans -- five undergraduates and an anatomy professor -- began their second week without food today in a tent city erected in the center of the campus, as a group of parents tried to meet with the University's Chancellor, Charles E. Young.


Bob Evans Farms (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Bridge
This is the season when two major New York team events collide.
The Reisinger Teams, which began on Monday with an entry of 29 teams, will end on Saturday.
The Grand National Teams, which, in normal circumstances, would also end this week, has had to be delayed since many players are involved in both events.
The Grand National final will be played on June 27 between teams captained by John Rengstorff and John Roberts, each hoping to earn a trip to Washington next month to compete in national playoffs.
The Roberts team, which includes George Tornay, John Solodar, Tom Smith, August Boehm and Alan Miller, won its New York semifinal 10 days ago.
Playing at Honors Club, 42 East 74th Street, they defeated a group headed by Alex Pollenz of Wantagh, L.I., by 20 imps.


Safecard Services reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


A New Era Challenges Juilliard


Merger Windfall
For months, the Railroadmen's Federal Savings and Loan Association has traded below $25 a share.
Then came the announcement yesterday that the Indianapolis institution would merge into the Huntington National Bank of Indiana for $41 a share worth of Huntington stock.
Railroadmen's closed at a record high on the news.


Jan Bell Marketing reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Eating Well
OLD prejudices die hard.
English food is bad, the conventional thinking goes.
Pub food is worse: fish and chips, steak-and-kidney pie, sausage pasties, and vegetables -- all frozen -- with a gray-green pallor that comes from sitting in the cooking water since morning.
For the traveler who wants to eat well, even on vacation, English restaurants are mine fields.
Aren't they?
The British are the first to admit their former culinary shortcomings.
"Over the past 10 years in this country, the whole picture of eating out has changed miraculously," said Simon Edwards, who cooks with his twin brother, Jonathan, at St.
Cuthbert's Inn, a small pub in Scorton, North Yorkshire.
"People are demanding higher standards."


Rada Electronic Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


SENATE DEMOCRATS URGE WITHDRAWAL OF RIGHTS NOMINEE
Senior White House officials and Democratic senators said today that President Clinton's nomination of Lani Guinier to be the Justice Department's civil rights chief would have to be withdrawn because of mounting opposition in the Senate and the Administration's attempt to sprint to the political center.
The nomination has been intensely criticized for articles Ms.
Guinier wrote on the Voting Rights Act that her critics say make her a proponent of extreme race-based proposals.


PCA International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Riding Salsa's Coast-to-Coast Wave of Popularity
WHEN he was President of France, Charles de Gaulle once wondered how it was possible to govern a country that made 400 cheeses (or was it 246 or 300?).
How about a country with more than 300 salsas (or is it 246 or 400)?
The flood of salsas into supermarkets all over the United States has yet to crest.
Salsa, -- simply "sauce" in Spanish (and in Italian, too, for that matter) -- has come to be defined in the American market as any fresh-tasting, chunky mixture, usually made with tomatoes, chilies, onions and other seasonings.


CLINTON IDEA USED TO LIMIT WELFARE
States have begun appropriating an idea that President Clinton popularized in the fall campaign, beating him to the punch by issuing their own plans to place two-year limits on welfare benefits.
The actions create a potential dilemma for the Clinton Administration, which must decide whether to approve them on an experimental basis.


CHRONICLE
Britain and the United States may have resolved their political differences long ago, but when it comes to music, traces of national chauvinism endure.
Take the squabble now being conducted in the letters column of The Times of London by DENNIS MARKS, general director-designate of the English National Opera, on one side, and two respected members of the British music establishment, Dame JANET BAKER, the mezzo-soprano, and RICHARD FISHER, general administrator of the Royal Philharmonic Society, on the other.


Maybe the Lakers: Magic Wants a Team to Coach and Own
Magic Johnson is more likely to someday coach the Los Angeles Lakers than the Los Angeles Clippers.
Johnson, the former Lakers All-Star, said he will not accept any coaching job unless he can buy a small percentage of the team, and the Lakers' owner is more willing to sell to him than the Clippers' owner.


Books of The Times; The Disabled Come Out Fighting
No Pity  People With Disabilities Forging a New Civil Rights Movement  By Joseph P. Shapiro  372 pages.
Times Books. $25.
It took a President with polio (Franklin D. Roosevelt, who couldn't walk on his own) and the severely injured veterans of World War II, Korea and Vietnam to make Americans aware that being disabled wasn't something to hide and be ashamed of.
Then it took demonstrations and lobbying to force the Federal Government to recognize that people with disabilities ought to be included under the big umbrella of civil rights.


Clinton's Order on M.I.A. Data a Small Shift
President Clinton's announcement on Monday that he had ordered the declassification of all but a tiny fraction of military documents on Americans who did not return from the war in Southeast Asia represents only a small change from Bush Administration policy.
In July, President Bush ordered the declassification of 200,000 pages of State Department papers and 2,600 pages of Central Intelligence Agency materials related to the 2,260 American servicemen listed as unaccounted for in the Vietnam War, Administration officials said today.
The officials added that in 1991 Congress ordered that the military declassify 1.5 million pages of Defense Department documents.


CHRONICLE
NOLAN RYAN, the Texas Rangers pitcher, gashed his left foot in a boating accident on the Guadalupe River in Texas on Monday and has been ordered not to run or throw for two weeks.
The 46-year-old record-breaking player, who is retiring after this season, needed seven stitches, the team's publicity office said.
Mr.
Ryan spent the holiday weekend at his ranch in Gonzales, Tex.
He was climbing from a motorboat onto a dock after taking his children water-skiing when he stepped on a water-ski fin, said Michelle Salisbury, an administrative assistant with the team's public relations office in Arlington, Tex.


Judge Finds Against Apple in Its Copyright Suit
Federal District Judge Vaughn Walker said today that he would grant summary judgment in favor of the Microsoft Corporation and the Hewlett-Packard Company on the last significant issue remaining in the five-year-long copyright infringement suit brought against the two companies by Apple Computer Inc.
Judge Walker's formal ruling will be filed within several days.
Apple, which had said last week that it would not contest the ruling, said today that it would appeal the case on grounds others than those decided in the summary judgment.
Wall Street Approves
Although the case could drag on through the appellate level for years, Wall Street greeted its close at the district level as a positive.
Microsoft shares rose $3.625, to $96.25, in Nasdaq trading; Hewlett-Packard closed up $2.25, to $85.625, on the New York Stock Exchange, and Apple gained 37.5 cents, to $57, on the Nasdaq.


Guatemalan Who Grabbed Power Is Out
The Guatemalan military forced President Jorge Serrano Elias from office today with the backing of political parties, business executives and some civic groups.
Eight days ago, Mr.
Serrano seized nearly dictatorial powers with the Army's support.
As Mr.
Serrano sat under guard and hundreds of demonstrators chanted at the gates of the National Palace for a civilian government, military commanders worked out a settlement with political leaders and jurists late this afternoon to restore democracy.


Trainer Disappointed By Day's Reasoning
Frank Alexander should have been happier yesterday.
It wasn't the horse who was there but the jockey who wasn't there who upset the trainer.
Cherokee Run, the Alexander-trained colt who finished second by half a length to Prairie Bayou in the Preakness, had a sterling tuneup in his final blowout for Saturday's Belmont Stakes, working a half-mile in 492/5 seconds.
But Alexander was still dispirited because of the decision by Pat Day, Cherokee Run's regular jockey, not to appeal a suspension over the weekend at Churchill Downs.
An appeal would have permitted Day to ride in the Belmont.


Perot Plans To Address Rally in Wall On Saturday
Ross Perot will return to New Jersey this weekend, only days before the New Jersey primary election, and it's not quite clear why.
Three days before voters select nominees for governor and all 120 seats in the Legislature, Mr.
Perot will attend a long-scheduled get-out-the-vote rally in Wall Township on Saturday to talk, as he has done in speeches around the country, about the national debt, free trade and what he thinks is wrong with the Clinton Administration.


Graduates and Voters
To the Editor:
I was very pleased that Congress has approved the motor voter bill (front page, May 12), which will make voter registration procedures more convenient.
I have another suggestion -- require high schools across the country that receive any Federal funds to provide students with voter registration forms on graduation day.


Abraham Nowick, C.P.A., 68, Is Dead; Adviser to Dinkins
Abraham Nowick, a certified public accountant who became one of the closest friends and confidants of Mayor David N. Dinkins, died suddenly on Sunday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 68 and had homes in Manhattan and East Hampton, L.I.
The cause was cardiopulmonary arrest, his family reported.


Wilkens Chosen to Coach Hawks
LENNY WILKENS, who spent the past seven seasons with the Cleveland Cavaliers and is closing in on RED AUERBACH's record for most National Basketball Association victories, was named coach of the Atlanta Hawks yesterday.
In becoming the seventh coach in Atlanta Hawks history, Wilkens inherits a team that has not gotten past the first round of the playoffs the past four years.


Coney Island Wonder Wheel Won't Rest on Golden Arches
Worried that the Cyclone and the Parachute Jump would be joined by the "McWheel" in a new Coney Island trinity, the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission has rejected a plan to install 17-foot-wide, neon golden arches on the Wonder Wheel.
Under the plan, the owners of the Wonder Wheel had offered free advertising space to McDonald's, which has two restaurants nearby.
But the landmarks panel feared the company's well-known logo would eclipse the 150-foot-high, 200-ton structure.


Congress's Twists and Turns Reshape Bill on Energy Tax
Five months ago, seeking to raise billions for President Clinton's economic programs and at the same time promote conservation, the White House proposed a broad tax on most forms of energy.
Then armies of lobbyists beseeched the White House to make the tax fairer, squadrons of Congressmen amended it to make it less onerous, and Mr.
Clinton horse-traded some clauses to gain support for his budget.


Devils Renew an Unwanted and Unwelcome Ritual
Looking for a coach is becoming an annual ritual for Lou Lamoriello, the president and general manager of the Devils.
He was working toward that end again yesterday, seeking a replacement for Herb Brooks, who resigned on Monday.
"I'm looking at all the people available and I'm trying to narrow down the list," Lamoriello said by telephone from his office in the New Jersey Meadowlands.
"I am not ruling out the possibility of hiring someone from within."


Yankee Pitching Staff Picked Apart by Tribe
It started with Mike Witt, who had poor location and no control.
It ended with Rich Monteleone, who made a healthy contribution to what is now a 5.56 earned run average by the Yankee bullpen.
There was nothing but ugliness in between.


Phillips-Van Heusen Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


PEN Fights Censoring Of Gay Writers
PEN American Center, the American division of the international writers' association, has formed a committee to combat what it described as censorship of gay and lesbian writing and to work to insure that readers have access to such writing.
The organization said the committee "will expose and oppose" threats to the First Amendment from actions like the banning of gay books by school libraries.
The committee's formation is to be formally announced this morning.


Man Admits to Robberies Using a Syringe
A homeless man yesterday admitted that he robbed several Upper East Side antique stores, armed with an unusual weapon: a syringe that he said was filled with blood tainted with H.I.V.
In State Supreme Court in Manhattan, Ross Gottfried, 40 years old, pleaded guilty to five felony counts of robbery.
He acknowledged that from April 22 to May 3, he robbed stores at 230 East 80th Street, 1135 Madison Avenue, 957 Madison Avenue, 980 Lexington Avenue and 219 East 60th Street.


Rieslings That Recall A Region's Past Glory
WEINGUT JOHANNISHOF, a standard-bearing estate in the Rhine village of Johannisberg, wears its heart on its flag -- on two flags, actually.
One carries the legend "Rheingau Riesling." The other says "Charta." Informed passers-by get the message.
When they step into the tasting room and order a Charta (pronounced CAR-ta) wine, they get a 100 percent riesling of guaranteed high quality that tastes medium dry or dry and is intended to go with meals.
The 44-winery Association of Charta Estates has re-created the classical style of late-19th-century dry riesling that made whites from the Rheingau region, on the north bank of the Rhine, an hour's drive west of Frankfurt, as celebrated then as Burgundy is today.


The Perfect Foil
LIKE strawberries and cream or bagels and lox, salsa and chips are a symbiosis of taste and texture.
The crunchy, curved, triangular chip is not only a perfect foil for a spicy dab of salsa, but also an excellent vehicle for transporting salsa mouthward in endless mini-servings.
The classic chip off the old tor tilla is unsalted and made from yellow corn.
In Mexico and the Southwestern United States, chips are traditionally produced by cutting tortillas into wedges and frying them.


Court Counts the Ways Guns Can Be Used
There was a war of words at the Supreme Court today, but it wasn't over any technical, obscure, polysyllabic legal term.
It was over the word "use."
A Federal law subjects anyone who uses a firearm in connection with a drug offense to a mandatory prison sentence of up to 30 years, depending on the type of gun.
But suppose the gun is used not as an instrument of violence, not to injure or threaten, but as an object to barter: in this case, one machine gun for two ounces of cocaine.
Is that the kind of use that qualifies for the mandatory sentence?


Newbridge Networks (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


National Home Centers Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Cuomo to Get Racing Report
The final report of an advisory panel looking for ways to revive the state's beleaguered horse racing industry is expected to be delivered to Gov.
Mario Cuomo today.
According to a person familiar with the Governor's Advisory Commission on Racing in the 21st Century, the report recommends immediate reductions in the state's takeout from wagers and in the state's share of breakage, or the way bets are rounded off for bookkeeping purposes.
Lower withholding taxes are also recommended for certain winning bets.


AEP Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Custom Chrome (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Fernandez Turns Rout Into Rousing Comeback
She was on the run, on the defensive, and, after two sets on the French Open's red clay against Steffi Graf, Jennifer Capriati was on her way home to Florida.
Not so with another underdog, fifth-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez, who resurrected herself from the brink of elimination against third-seeded Gabriela Sabatini in a bizarre quarterfinal encounter that produced five match points for each player, started under picnic conditions in bright sunshine and ended with the court swathed in evening shadows.


Game 5 Looks a Lot Like Game 7 for Knicks
All the plans, the work, the investments are at stake tonight.
More than one series.
More than one basketball season.
Reputations are on the line.
Futures.
Dreams.
In two decades, the Knicks have not played a game as important as the one they will play tonight against Chicago at Madison Square Garden.
It is no overreaction to say they must win Game 5 of the Eastern Conference finals.
It is no attempt to overstate the night merely to heighten the pressure on the Knicks.
Pat Riley knows his team has no room for missteps.
His players know it.
Stan Jaffe and Dave Checketts and Ernie Grunfeld of the front office know it, too.


MORTAR FIRE KILLS 12 AT SOCCER GAME IN BOSNIAN CAPITAL
Mortar shells exploded today amid a neighborhood soccer tournament, killing at least a dozen people and wounding 80 in the worst single incident in a year in the bombardment of the city by Bosnian Serb forces.
Shrapnel-peppered cars, drying pools of blood, a few shreds of blood-soaked clothing and a worn-out soccer ball were all that remained afterward in the parking lot where about 100 players and spectators had gathered for the game.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Business Technology
Macy plans a cable television channel to sell Macy's and Bullock's merchandise.
Macy will hold a controlling stake in the network, whose other partners include Cablevision and Don Hewitt, the executive producer of "60 Minutes."  [ Page A1. ]
A.T.&amp; T. and Viacom will announce a market test of new technology to deliver on-demand movies, games and shopping services over cable television networks.  [ D1. ]


The Music (and Traffic) Go Round With a Beat
JOSE (CHEO) DIAZ is a J.D., M.C. and D.J.
Yes, an explanation is in order.
By day, Mr.
Diaz is a traffic court judge in Queens, presiding over a parade of speeders and red-light runners who try to fast-talk their way out of fines and license suspensions.
But at night, Cheo changes venue and does his own smooth-talking as a master of ceremonies at nightclubs and a radio disk jockey of a salsa show on WKCR-FM.


Out of the Woods and Into the Risotto
I AM partial to risotto.
Not just because it is a comfort food for me but because, contrary to what you may have heard, it is so easy and so quick to prepare.
It does not have to be stirred every minute for 20 minutes, though it must be watched carefully and stirred often.
Rice, like pasta, is a tabula rasa, taking on the flavors of what is added.
Because it is spring and asparagus spears are at their peak, crisp, uniform and reasonably priced, they are the choice for this risotto recipe.
Dried mushrooms are also included, for their intensity of flavor.
Porcini are perfect with asparagus, but just about any other dried mushroom will give the nice woodsy flavor.


Cubans Tired of Castro, Si. Fear Him? No.
To the Editor:
If one were to believe the rhetoric of those Cubans in exile represented by "Cubans in Exile Want Embargo to Go On" by Vicente Echerri (letter, May 21), one would expect to find Cuba some sort of vast prison camp.
Having recently returned from Cuba, I must object.


O'Connor Reflects on Role In Eye of Moral Tempests
Reflecting on nearly 10 turbulent years at the helm of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, John Cardinal O'Connor said yesterday that he might have gone too far at times in thrusting himself and his church into secular politics -- from his implicit criticism of Geraldine A. Ferraro in 1984 to his loose alliance with Pat Robertson last month.
"Time after time I have to ask myself if the Church would be better off -- certainly, I would be better off -- if when I came here I had just become a silent servant of the people," the Cardinal said.


Hostos Commencement
Cesar A. Perales, deputy mayor of New York City for Health and Human Services, addressed the 455 graduates at the 22d commencement exercises of Eugenio Maria de Hostos Community College of the City University of New York.
In a ceremony presided over by the college's president, Isaura Santiago, the students marched up the aisles of the concert hall at Lehman Center for the Performing Arts.
Hostos Community College is the first of the City University of New York colleges to be deliberately placed in an economically depressed community, the South Bronx.
It is devoted to bilingual education and serves more than 5,000 students, 75 percent of whom come from Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic and Central and South America.


LIBYANS CUT SHORT A VISIT TO ISRAEL
Muslim pilgrims from Libya suddenly cut short their visit here today after calling for the overthrow of the "Zionist leadership," the "liberation" of Jerusalem and the establishment of a "democratic" Palestinian state of Arabs and Jews.
Israeli officials, some of whom had hailed the visit as a portent of peace, were surprised and outraged by the remarks, made at a news conference.
The strange collapse of an already strange pilgrimage quickly dampened speculation that the trip might promote ties with Libya after years of unbending hostility.


Wreaking Havoc -- and Selling Sneaks
Pro basketball is one part aerial ballet and one part controlled brutality.
Charles Barkley, the bruising, blunt-talking forward for the Phoenix Suns and the league's most valuable player, is less an aerialist than a skilled practitioner of force.
He has chased referees from the stadium and verbally accosted fans, while intimidating opposing players.
Mr.
Barkley, or at least the image he tries to project, stands at great odds with the notion that athletes ought to be paragons of virtue and temperateness to inspire the nation's youth.
Thus it's an ingenious irony that Nike sporting goods is starring Sir Charles in a television commercial about role models.
Staring into the camera, Mr.
Barkley says: "I am not a role model. I am not paid to be a role model. I am paid to wreak havoc on the basketball court." Mr.
Barkley points out that "parents should be role models" and notes that his ability to dunk a basketball does not make him fit to raise America's children.


Whittaker Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Helping Mentally Ill Find a Niche, to the Admiration of Japanese
Once, it seems like a lifetime ago, Christine Stahlman planned to be a schoolteacher.
She imagined herself explaining the mysteries of words and numbers to classrooms of children.
Her eyebrows furrow in recalling such dusty dreams from another era, before depression shrank hope.
The illness turned Ms.
Stahlman from would-be teacher to student -- of struggles and false starts, of psychiatric hospitals and unsuccessful work programs.
But recently, leaning close to the high-tech camera she now uses to put court documents on microfilm, she explained how a steady job, with some measure of dignity, restored stability to her life.


Club Med Narrows Its Agency Review
Club Med said yesterday that it was in the final stages of a review on its estimated $7 million American account, which has been at TBWA Advertising Inc. in New York since 1991 when it moved there from Ammirati &amp; Puris.
A spokesman for Club Med confirmed a report about the review this week in Adweek, but added that the finalists included other agencies besides those named in Adweek: Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG in New York and the New York office of Publicis, which handles the account in Europe.


Slaney Is Off and Convalescing
MARY SLANEY has undergone surgery on her left heel, ending her track season before it started.
Slaney, who hopes to run some road races by the end of the summer, will miss the USA Mobil Outdoor Track and Field Championships, which will be held June 15-19 in Eugene, Ore. (AP)


Diagnostic/Retrieval Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Movies Discover Black Cowboys and Cavalry; Burial Grounds
To the Editor:
It is encouraging to see interest among New Yorkers in African-American cemeteries (front page, May 23).
I was the primary researcher for the African-American Historic Sites Survey of Allegheny County (Pittsburgh) for the Pittsburgh History and Landmarks Foundation, which uncovered more than 300 sites related to black history before 1960.


Traditional Arabs Now Seek Advice From the Left
Lotfi Al khouli of Egypt, one of the Arab world's best known leftist-Marxist writers, was dumbfounded in April when he got an invitation to Saudi Arabia, where his name had figured prominently on the blacklist for decades.
More astonishing, Mr.
Alkhouli received a red-carpet reception, including an audience with Crown Prince Abdullah Ibn Abdelaziz and an invitation from members of the royal family and prominent Saudis to speak at several gatherings.


McElroy Signs With Chiefs
REGGIE McELROY, the starting right tackle for the Los Angeles Raiders last season, has signed a three-year contract with the Kansas City Chiefs.


Foes of Execution Contest a Texas Case
If the State of Texas has its way, Gary Graham will be executed before dawn on Thursday for the killing of Bobby Lambert in a robbery 12 years ago.
But no physical evidence links Mr.
Graham to the crime, and opponents of the death penalty have seized on his case as emblematic of serious flaws in the system of capital punishment here.
Mr.
Graham, 29, was convicted in 1981 on the strength of testimony from a single witness, who was in her car roughly 40 feet from where Mr.
Lambert was shot and briefly saw his killer.
Since the trial, six other witnesses and five alibi witnesses have sworn that Mr.
Graham was not the assailant, but Texas law prohibits the presentation of new evidence after 30 days after conviction.


A Campaign Breathes Life into Carol Wright, Fictional Coupon Queen.
A COMPANY that has helped build brand-name products for America's largest marketers is finally doing some brand-building of its own.
For the first time, Donnelley Marketing Inc. is advertising to consumers its Carol Wright promotional program, by which it distributes billions of cents-off coupons through the mail 10 to 11 times annually to households nationwide.


Too Many Musicians? An Overhaul at Juilliard -- A special report.; A New Juilliard for a More Challenging Era
The sun was beating strongly on the plaza in front of the Juilliard School on a recent weekday, but the real heat was coming from another source.
Before an audience of students sprawled on the white stone or crowded around a buffet table set up for the school's year-end picnic, Eugene Park was going through an ear-splitting, high-voltage rendition of a Hungarian czardas by Vittorio Monti.
This was a crowd that knew its Monti and liked what it was hearing.
Mr.
Park, a first-year student whose face was obscured by long hair, rocked back and forth on his heels in the slower sections, building anticipation, then let it rip in the fast passages, bow hairs snapping as he punished the strings of his electric violin.
It was Paganini with a few dashes of Pete Townshend thrown in for extra attitude.
The students clapped and whistled, grateful perhaps for diversion from the week's main focus: solo performances before a faculty jury to determine their final grades.
The Advent of Change
It was a scene at odds with the traditional picture of Juilliard, the most prestigious conservatory in the United States, and perhaps in the world, one whose graduates account for about 20 percent of the musicians in the Big Five American orchestras (and half of those in the New York Philharmonic).


Yale Plans to Build Environmental Center
Yale University plans to build a $20 million environmental research center in which dinosaur bones will share a roof with laboratories for creating computer-simulated ecosystems and cloning DNA.
The four-story building on Yale's campus in New Haven is to house both the Yale Institute for Biospheric Studies, a new research and teaching center, and much of the vast collection of the Peabody Museum of Natural History, a Yale institution.
The collection dates back to the 1780's and includes many rare fossils and artifacts now in basements and in danger of deteriorating.


Suns Win Behind Barkley, Majerle
Dan Majerle camped out 26-feet from the basket tonight.
His teammate Charles Barkley was quite willing to be a one-man team, but Majerle gave the Phoenix Suns a second option for once.
The release on Majerle's shot was so picturesque this evening, it should have been commissioned to a local artist.
His eight 3-point shots broke a National Basketball Association playoff record, and the only two he missed touched inside the rim before curling out.
In the process, Majerle proved that the Phoenix Suns are superior as a tag team, that he and Barkley could run a treadmill all day long and that his teeth do not chatter with his team on a ledge.


Wine Talk
WINE and travel are inextricably entwined.
Not a year goes by without the appearance of a dozen new books, nominally about wine but mostly about the countryside where the wine is made.
Take for example, two new books on New York State wines and wineries, published just in time for the summer traveling season: "The Wines and Wineries of the Hudson River Valley," by Alan R. Martell and Alton Long (Countryman Press, $14.95), and "The Wines of Long Island," by Philip Palmedo and Edward Beltrami (Waterline Books, $16.95).
Both are wine books, but they are travel books as well.


Bristol-Myers Squibb in Alliance to Develop Heart Drugs
Bristol-Myers Squibb announced a 50-50 deal yesterday to help develop and market two potentially important heart drugs from the research pipeline of Elf Sanofi, the French drug maker.
Elf Sanofi is a unit of Societe Nationale Elf Aquitaine, the giant oil company the French Government plans to sell to private investors.
The new alliance also includes Elf Sanofi's partner, Sterling Winthrop, a unit of the Eastman Kodak Company.
Sterling Winthrop and Bristol-Myers Squibb are based in New York.


No Headline
"Time after time I have to ask myself if the church would be better off -- certainly, I would be better off -- if when I came here I had just become a silent servant of the people." -- JOHN CARDINAL O'CONNOR, of New York.  [ A1:1. ]


Issue of Outsiders Kills Town's Housing Plan
A narrow strip of littered land just off Main Street, where the trickle that is the Mamaroneck River flows, is the center of the latest battle over affordable housing in generally affluent Westchester County.
Twenty-eight families were supposed to move into two-family houses to be built on the land later this year.
But elected officials who once championed the project have withdrawn their support after recent court decisions elsewhere suggested that they might not be able to give local residents the first chance at the units, effectively keeping out outsiders.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.38
3.02
3.89
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.08
3.05
3.72
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.22
3.20
3.85
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.67
5.78
6.97
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.88
6.98
7.86
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.82
7.92
8.70
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.88
5.89
6.65
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


3-Year-Old Bronx Girl Wounded by Bullet
When Jasmine Zapata felt a sting on her arm as she played in front of her Bronx home yesterday, she told her nanny, "A ball hit me."
It was not a ball, but a bullet, that struck the 3-year-old girl just after 2 P.M. on the sidewalk outside her family's home at 2757 Sedgwick Avenue in Kingsbridge.


Supreme Court Roundup; High Court Defines One Error by Judges It Will Not Tolerate
Overturning a murder conviction, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously today that regardless of the evidence, a criminal conviction is invalid if the judge did not instruct the jury properly on finding guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
In an opinion by Justice Antonin Scalia, the Court held that mistaken jury instructions on reasonable doubt could never be disregarded as "harmless error," even if it appeared that the guilty verdict was not the product of the mistake.


Ambition vs. Practicality in Cable-Phone Link
In theory, the recently announced Time Warner-U S West deal is the perfect marriage.
Time Warner's cable television system already has the potential to deliver hundreds of channels of programming.
U S West is an expert in building telephone networks that can instantly route millions of phone calls at the same time.
Want to order up a video how-to guide on repairing your car or building a deck?
Click the remote control.
Want to choose from a long list of movies, and specify when they will be shown?
Just click again, and put the bill on a credit card.
Want to make a plain old phone call?
The new networks planned by Time Warner and U S West would do that, too.


AT BREAKFAST WITH: T. Coraghessan Boyle; Biting the Hand That Once Fed Battle Creek
TWO elderly men in flannel shirts gaped up from their fried eggs and grits as the writer T. Coraghessan Boyle pushed through the knotty pine door of LaVerne's Family Restaurant in Battle Creek, birthplace of cornflakes, where at the turn of the century and under the stewardship of Dr.
John Harvey Kellogg dietary fanaticism was minted and made palatable for the mainstream.
Cheeks sucked in horror, the two men looked like Bartles and Jaymes viewing the apocalypse.
In the kitchen, LaVerne McCormick, the proprietor, stopped humming a country tune and did her best to appear impassive.


Time to Reform Law On Assisted Suicide
To the Editor:
Dr.
Jack Kevorkian has done great service by demonstrating in practical fashion that many terminally ill people want the help of a physician in committing suicide.
Most physicians quibble about his slender medical education, and the cursory connection he has with patients before they die, but he has made the point about the need for euthanasia.


Navajos Are Asked to Aid Effort to Contain an Illness
The leader of the country's largest Indian tribe went on tribal radio today to beseech his people in their own language to cooperate with the medical investigators searching for the cause of a mysterious illness that has killed 12 people since March.
Peterson Zah, president of the Navajo Nation, appealed to tribe members to visit one of the six Indian Health Service Hospitals on the vast Navajo Reservation to be checked if they felt any of the illness's symptoms, which include body aches and fever.


Anthony G. DeLorenzo; General Motors Spokesman, 78
Anthony G. DeLorenzo, a former vice president for public relations at the General Motors Corporation, died on May 15 at St.
Joseph Mercy Hospital in Pontiac, Mich.
He was 78.
He died of a heart attack, the company said.


Cray Computer in Effort To Raise Over $23 Million
Cray Computer said yesterday that it planned to raise between $23 million and $29 million from a private stock sale to institutional and private investors.
Funds from the sale will be used to manufacture and market the company's Cray-3 supercomputer, a machine that Seymour Cray, the company's founder, has been working on since 1985 and that he continued developing after leaving Cray Research to found Cray Computer, which is based in Colorado Springs, in 1989.
Mr.
Cray, who is 67, has been building the Cray-3 supercomputer with chips made with gallium arsenide, a material that allows great speed but is more difficult to work with than conventional silicon chips.


In Shift, White House Will Stress Aiding Foreign Concerns in U.S.
In a break from decades of Government policy, the Clinton Administration has reached a rough consensus to give higher priority to helping foreign-owned companies expand production in the United States than to assisting domestic companies with output from their factories overseas, three Administration officials said today.
The informal understanding was reached by five top Administration officials at a secret meeting last Wednesday.
The compromise addresses the questions of where America's interests lie in an era of heavy international investment and what kinds of companies the Federal Government should be helping.


Sports of The Times; Overrated? Overpaid? Not These 3
IT'S easy to pounce on those millionaires who aren't worth their money.
Bobby Bonilla has been hitting home runs for the Mets lately but not enough to justify his $6.2 million salary.
Jon Koncak of the Atlanta Hawks didn't do much this season for his $2.6 million.
Eric Lindros is still an investment in the Philadelphia Flyers' future at more than $3 million.
Overrated and overpaid.
It's enough to make some people think that no athlete can possibly be worth that much money.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  DOZEN DIE IN BOSNIA SOCCER RAID  After mortar shells exploded amid scores of soccer players and spectators at Sarajevo, the toll was at least a dozen dead and 80 wounded.
Shrapnel-peppered cars, shreds of blood-soaked clothing and a worn-out soccer ball were all that remained of a neighborhood tournament.
A1  GAINS FOR SERBIAN NATIONALISTS  Thousands of demonstrators clashed with riot police in front of the Parliament building in downtown Belgrade in the most serious anti-Government demonstration in two years.
A10


CAMBODIAN RULERS ASK FOR NEW VOTE
The Government threatened today to reject the results of last week's elections and warned of the possibility of "insurrections and riots" if the United Nations refused to hold new voting in four provinces.
The United Nations rejected the call for new polling, saying that the Government had failed to produce evidence of serious vote fraud in the four provinces: Phnom Penh, the capital; Battambang; Kompong Chhnang and Prey Veng.
Together they account for 35 of the 120 seats in the new national assembly, which will be responsible for drafting a constitution and forming a new government.


Belgrade Riots Follow President's Ouster
Thousands of demonstrators clashed with riot police in front of the Parliament building in downtown Belgrade Tuesday night in the most serious anti-Government demonstration here in two years.
A score of demonstrators were injured as the crowd stormed the Parliament, smashing windows and chanting "Justice!" and "Rise up, Belgrade!" They threw rocks at the police, who charged them with truncheons under a torrent of tear gas.
At least three members of the security forces were badly injured, Belgrade television said.
The police said 18 demonstrators were injured, according to the Associated Press.


Once-Limping Bulls Steeled to March East
Having reduced the worst of what Madison Square Garden can offer to the analytical intensity of a film session, and having replaced their angry rhetoric with consecutive victories, the Chicago Bulls prepared today to return to face the Knicks in Game 5 of the Eastern Conference final.
Chicago is in far better condition than the team that left New York last week.
The Bulls have had time to regroup and heal.
They have gained the success, and the perspective, to transform their responses to questions about officiating from confrontational to complimentary.


Leader's Edge in Debate Cheers Spain's Socialists
Convinced that another lackluster performance by Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez would doom its chances of victory in general elections on Sunday, the Spanish Socialist Party breathed a sigh of relief today when the final televised debate of the campaign ended.
Handily defeated in the first debate last week, Mr.
Gonzalez came out fighting from the first bell this time and, in the opinion of independent commentators and Spanish newspapers, scored a clear victory over his conservative challenger, Jose Maria Aznar.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Acquired Jeremy Hernandez, pitcher, from the San Diego Padres for Tracy Sanders, outfielder, and Fernando Hernandez, pitcher.
DETROIT TIGERS -- Activated Dan Gladden, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Placed Dave Johnson, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to May 23.


INSIDE
Sexual Climate in Schools
Junior high and high school students are routinely grabbed, pinched or put down in explicitly sexual ways at school, a survey says.
Page B7.
Bicyclist Slain in Park
A bicyclist riding through Prospect Park in Brooklyn was shot to death while trying to flee robbers who wanted his bike, the police said.
Page B1.
Secularism in the Arab World
In Saudi Arabia, Egypt, Jordan and Kuwait, influential Arab voices are saying secular values can be compatible with Islam.
Page A3.
Big Losses for the Japanese
Japanese investors are now facing the prospect of big losses on American buildings they bought in the real estate boom of the 1980's.
Page D1.
Student Loan Proposal Stalls
The President's student aid plan has been slowed by critics who question whether the Government can administer loans efficiently.
Page A14.


Critic's Notebook; Hunting for the Musical Thread
There was a bit of a challenge about the seventh annual Bang on a Can Festival, which came to an end at the Kitchen on Sunday night after 10 concerts, 82 compositions and about 22 hours of music.
The challenge was to find something coherent in the festival's deliberate eclecticism, some sense of a governing taste or theme, some characteristics of whatever style is now dominant in what was once called the downtown music scene.
As in other seasons, the directors of the festival -- David Lang, Michael Gordon and Julia Wolfe -- have done everything possible to minimize the sense of a governing voice or taste.
I found the selections weaker than they were last year but the variety no less fascinating.
The concerts included, for example, a remarkable Chinese shadow play by the Yueh Lung Shadow Theater in which a mythic tale of a prince battling dragons was told with delicate miniature images projected on a screen.
The ancient art form was accompanied by music by Bun-Ching Lam that had echoes of the traditional, in the timbres of the Chinese pipa, along with an almost edgy contemporary sensibility.


Review/Television; A TV Host as a TV Host. Familiar?
Starting new seasons tonight, two Home Box Office comedy series are being presented back to back.
Expanded beyond their normal 30 minutes, "The Larry Sanders Show" runs from 10 to 10:45 and "Dream On" from 10:45 to 11:45.
If you can catch only one, make it "Larry Sanders."
Like "Seinfeld," in which the real stand-up comic Jerry Seinfeld plays a fictional stand-up comic named Jerry Seinfeld, "Larry Sanders" hovers tantalizingly between reality and fiction.
Larry, the talk-show host, is played by Garry Shandling, once a frequent guest host for Johnny Carson and now, with the late-night scene churning furiously, being mentioned as a candidate for his own show, possibly after the new David Letterman package on CBS.


3,000 Subway Riders, Cards in Hand, Test New Fare System
With six months to go before computer-coded cards start replacing subway tokens, the Transit Authority began its first large-scale test of the automated fare-collection system yesterday, handing out 3,000 sample cards to regular subway riders.
The seven-week experiment will test the cards and the computerized turnstiles that use them, and will allow officials to focus more intently on how passengers take to the new method of entering the subway.
Results of the test, transit officials say, will help them prepare instructions on how to use the card when it is introduced later this year.


METRO DIGEST
CARDINAL O'CONNOR LOOKS BACK
Reflecting on nearly 10 turbulent years at the helm of New York's Roman Catholic Archdiocese, John Cardinal O'Connor said that he might have gone too far at times in leaps of faith that thrust him and his church into secular politics -- from his implicit criticism of Geraldine A. Ferraro in 1984 to his loose alliance with Pat Robertson last month.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  A LITTLE BOY IS MOURNED
A tape cassette recording of his classmates, their voices raised in song, was placed gently inside a small veiled white casket with Kayesean Blackledge, a 4-year-old whose lifeless body was found beaten and strangled at the base of a garbage chute at a Brooklyn housing project.
B3.


Don't Pin This Loss On Young
Anthony Young sat transfixed as the television screen inside the Mets' clubhouse flashed one terrible sequence after another.
There was a single to left field and then a single barely inside the bag at third.
There was a double-play grounder that became a single because a hit-and-run play was on.
There was a double to the ivy wall in left-center and a two-run single to right.
Young, cursing occasionally at no one in particular, kept staring at the screen.


Royal Bank of Canada reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASEBALL  Montclair State Wins Division III Title  Drew Yocum pitched his second complete-game victory in two tournament outings as Montclair State captured the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division III College World Series championship by defeating Wisconsin-Oshkosh, 3-1, yesterday.
Yocum, a junior left-hander from Verona, N.J., allowed just seven hits and walked no one at C. O. Brown Stadium in Battle Creek, Mich.
Yocum, who pitched a three-hitter in Friday's 5-1 victory over Carthage (Wis.), was named the most valuable player in the double-elimination tournament.
The loss for Wisconsin-Oshkosh (28-15) was the second to the Red Hawks (37-11), who also defeated the Titans in 1987 for the national title.
BOXING  Panel Makes Recommendation on H.I.V.
Any fighter seeking an International Boxing Federation title will have to present evidence that he is not infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, before his bout is sanctioned, the federation's executive committee recommended yesterday.
The committee voted, 11-0, to present to the convention of the I.B.F. and its parent body, the United States Boxing Association, a resolution that will require promoters to make sure that those seeking championships are free of the virus before the fight is sanctioned.
The motion will be presented to the entire body today. (AP) TENNIS  Navratilova Opens With a Rout  Top-seeded Martina Navratilova trounced Sherli-Ann Siddall of Britain, 6-1, 6-1, in a second-round match in Beckenham, England.
In the men's draw of the exhibition grass-court tournament, top-seeded Brad Gilbert lost, 6-4, 6-4, to Danny Sapsford of Britain.
Gilbert, never at home on grass, is ranked 28th in the world to Sapsford's No. 641.
Second-seeded David Wheaton defeated Mark Petchey, 6-4, 6-2. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  Powell Wins Long Jump in Slovakia  Mike Powell easily won the long jump yesterday at the Slovnaft '93 meet in Bratislava, Slovakia, the first major outdoor meet of the European season.
Powell leaped 27 feet 8 inches, off the meet record of 27-10 1/4 and the world record of 29-4 1/2 he set two years ago in Tokyo.
Merlene Ottey won the women's 100- and 200-meter races in times of 11.10 and 22.27 seconds.(AP)


Critic's Notebook; Connie Chung at the Anchor Desk
So as of last night it is "The CBS Evening News With Dan Rather and Connie Chung." Why the addition of the last three words?
One canard -- that CBS News executives decided a proven favorite would help the second-place program's ratings -- must be dismissed out of hand.
Such an explanation would be disrespectful to CBS News, unflattering to Mr.
Rather, patronizing to Ms.
Chung and sexist to boot.
Definitely impermissible.
Another possibility is that after all these years of solitary stardom, Mr.
Rather found the part of his job that consists of spending a few minutes five nights a week reciting headlines and doing 20-second leads into other people's stories onerous or tedious, and begged his employers for relief, or at least company.
Maybe with a helpmeet in place, he plans to get out the old bush jacket and visit more scenes of catastrophe.


Abrams Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Black Mediator Serves As a Bridge to Koreans
In her baseball cap and baby blue running suit, Karen Gunn is an unlikely diplomat, shuttling in her rusting Toyota from one haggard business strip to the next, checking out wig shops and shoe stores.
Ms.
Gunn, a black woman working for Koreans, roams the ghettos of Chicago, where Korean merchants and their black customers have formed a nervous truce after years of antipathy.


Dow Advances 24.91 in a Broad Rally
Emboldened by lower interest rates, falling gold prices and promising news on the economic outlook, investors pushed the stock market higher in all major indexes yesterday.
The performance was in sharp contrast with Friday's session, when all major indexes plunged.
No stocks or stock groups dominated trading yesterday.
But high-technology stocks like Microsoft and Intel and gambling-related stocks like Bally Manufacturing and Hollywood Casino saw their shares rise strongly in moderate trading.


Sabine Royalty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Harold Zintel, 80, Ex-Chief of Surgery Who Was Teacher
Dr.
Harold A. Zintel, a former director of surgery at St.
Luke's Hospital in Manhattan and of the American College of Surgery in Chicago, died on April 22 at a nursing home in Deerfield, Ill.
He was 80 and most recently lived in Winnetka, Ill.
He died of heart failure, said his daughter, Nancy Ribakove.


Review/Television; Sex and the Talk Shows: Con and Pro
Tonight's somewhat scattershot "48 Hours" tour of the talk-show universe settles down briefly for a report by Dan Rather on Phil Donahue's troubles with Richard Neill, a Fort Worth dentist.
Dr.
Neill is trying to extract shows like "Donahue" from afternoon television because they are infected with sexual display and bizarre confessionals.
Mr.
Donahue's main defense, which he has used more than once in his 25 years on television, is that he is competing with like-minded or mindless programs for big audiences.
He says, "You cannot televise the front page of The Wall Street Journal and survive." And he protests that his critics never give him credit for his programs about racism, Bosnia and other unsexy subjects.


Guatemalan Ousted
The Guatemalan military forced President Jorge Serrano Elias from office with the backing of political parties, business executives and some civic organizations.
The move came eight days after the President had seized nearly dictatorial powers with the support of the army.
Article, page A8.


Campus Journal; Georgetown of Clinton, Meet Georgetown Today
On June 5, members of Georgetown University's class of 1968 will celebrate their 25th reunion at the White House at the invitation of their classmate Bill Clinton.
For the rest of the homecoming weekend, the class members will have plenty of time to get reacquainted with one other and the university they left 25 years ago.
They will have changed, but probably not nearly so much as their alma mater.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal Home Loan Bank is offering $100 million of step-up notes due 1998 at a price of 100 through Dean Witter Reynolds.
The notes yield 4.35 percent and are callable in one year, with the coupon increasing to 5.96 percent if it is not called June 22, 1994. *
Loews Corp., the insurance and tobacco holding company based in New York City, is offering $300 million of 30-year 7 5/8 percent notes due in 2023 at a price of 98.549, to yield 7.75 percent, through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities.
The issue is callable in 10 years and rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service and AA- by Standard &amp; Poor's. *
San Bernardino County, Calif., is offering $254.5 million of tax-exempt short-term notes through BT Securities.
The tax and revenue anticipation notes due July 29, 1994, have an interest rate of 3 1/4 percent and are rated MIG-1 by Moody's and SP-1+ by S.&amp; P.


Tommy Hilfiger Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Chinese Restaurants Are Adding Herbs for Flavor and Health
IT is 6:30 on a Monday night, and the Chinese Herbal Restaurant is mobbed.
Li Lian Xing, the resident licensed herbalist, measures out herbs, carefully weighing each ingredient he has taken from the drawers of a handsome wooden medicine cabinet.
When the herbs are ready, he sends them to the chef, who uses them to prepare the meals.
This is no ordinary restaurant.
In addition to standard dishes like stir-fried spicy chicken with walnuts and flank steak with orange peel, the menu offers things like monkey-head mushroom with milk vetch root, which is supposed to improve the complexion and enhance the memory; steamed pear, with fritillary powder to nourish the lung, and walnut cream to preserve hair color and lower cholesterol.


Personal Health
OF all the diseases that have failed to yield to the war on cancer, one of the most frustrating to researchers, clinicians and patients is ovarian cancer.
Despite new treatments that prolong life, in the last three decades there has been little improvement in long-term survival.
Early, curable ovarian cancer produces no symptoms, and three-fourths of cases are not diagnosed until the cancer has spread beyond the ovarian capsule.
Once the disease has advanced beyond the ovary, fewer than 10 percent of women are cured.
But if it is detected and treated early, 90 percent survive, a fact that has prompted a frantic search for cost-effective ways to screen women for early signs.
The death on May 20, 1989, of the 42-year-old comedian Gilda Radner from ovarian cancer produced an outpouring of concern about the disease.


Health Management Systems Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Falcon Products (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Cyclist Shot to Death in Brooklyn's Prospect Park
A man riding his new mountain bike through Brooklyn's Prospect Park was shot three times in the back and killed yesterday afternoon when he attempted to flee from robbers who wanted to steal the bike, the police said.
The killing, on a sunlit afternoon that brought scores of people to the park, occurred on a winding dirt road, just yards away from joggers and ball fields, near one of the park's jewels, Swan Lake.


The Pop Life
Springsteen for Charity
Bruce Springsteen is coming home to New Jersey and next door to New York for his only two concerts in the United States this year.
The shows, both charity events, are to be on June 24 at Brendan Byrne Arena at the Meadowlands and on June 26 at Madison Square Garden.
The first concert is to benefit three hunger-related organizations: the Community Food Bank of New Jersey, World Hunger Year, and the Food and Hunger Hotline.
Proceeds from the June 26 performance are to go to the Kristen Ann Carr Fund, which was created earlier this year in memory of the daughter of Mr.
Springsteen's co-manager, Barbara Carr, and Dave Marsh, a writer.
The fund will be used to establish a research fellowship dedicated to the study and prevention of sarcoma, a form of cancer.


In Cairo, the Pied Piper Rides


Paige Retires From Dolphins
Fullback TONY PAIGE, who made a career out of creating holes, left a big one for the Miami Dolphins yesterday.
The reliable blocker and pass receiver unexpectedly told Coach DON SHULA that he's retiring. (AP)


Fittipaldi Didn't Know It Was a Milk Run
EMERSON FITTIPALDI, who saluted his Indianapolis 500 victory Sunday with an unconventional drink of orange juice, apologized yesterday for passing up a bottle of milk, a 60-year tradition in Victory Lane.
He said the posted prize of $5,500 from the American Dairy Association of Indiana would go instead to the Championship Auto Racing Auxiliary, a women's group that supports various charities.


Skeptics and Lobbyists Besiege Student Loan Plan
President Clinton's proposal to change the way college students get education loans has bogged down in the face of a banking industry lobbying blitz and criticism of the White House's assumption that the Government can administer loans more efficiently than private lenders.
The Administration maintains that it can save students and the Government billions of dollars a year in interest and other lending costs by replacing "middlemen" like the Student Loan Marketing Association, or Sallie Mae, and making the loans itself through the Department of Education.
The House appears ready to go along with the plan, but the Senate is sharply divided.


Movies Discover Black Cowboys and Cavalry
To the Editor:
Your screen review of "Posse" (May 14) can't seem to forgive its director, Mario Van Peebles, for trying to duel with "the flagrant distortions of the past."


Town &amp; Country reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


Accounts
*
Boise Cascade Corp., Boise, Idaho, to Bradford &amp; Maloney, Greenwich, Conn., to handle the introduction of Boise Cascade Expression, a coated paper for catalogues and magazines.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Paul Stuart Inc., New York, to Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond, New York, as expected, for its print and collateral account, after an informal review that also included Mad Dogs &amp; Englishmen, New York.
The account was previously handled by Henszey &amp; Co., New York.
A campaign is expected in the fall.
Billings were not disclosed.


Organ Shortage Leads to Nontraditional Transplants, and Ethical Concerns
Faced with a severe shortage of organs for transplant, some doctors are quietly turning to patients who would not ordinarily be considered suitable donors.
Traditionally, before a patient can qualify as a donor it must be declared that there is no brain function.
If such a patient is put on a ventilator, the organs can be kept healthy and perfused with blood until they are needed.


A History of Gergenism
Talk about being present at the creation.
David R. Gergen helped package the Reagan Administration policies that, according to Bill Clinton, almost wrecked America.
It is a measure of Democratic desperation and of Mr.
Gergen's popularity inside the Beltway that his appointment is being hailed as a gain for the shell-shocked White House.
Maybe Mr.
Gergen can help end the press-room follies that have cost Mr.
Clinton so dearly.
But this appointment has other meanings as well.
It points up a deterioration of political values and an erosion of journalistic standards in the capital.
And it suggests that the Arkansas crowd not only came to Washington without experience, but also without a clipping file or a historical memory.


Market Place; Enthusiasm Builds Strongly For Allstate Public Offering
Money managers and analysts were talking with rising enthusiasm yesterday about the imminent initial public offering of the Allstate Company.
The sale, expected to raise more than $2 billion, would be the largest initial public offering ever in the United States.
The company, the nation's second- largest insurer of homes and automobiles, is being spun off to the public by Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, which is shedding financial services assets to focus on its retail operations.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Plans to push for a higher minimum wage have been delayed by the Clinton Administration because of worries about undermining job growth and antagonizing conservatives and business executives while the President's budget hangs in the balance.  [ Page A1. ]
The index of leading indicators edged up a puny tenth of a percent in April, and new-home sales surged.
But analysts said the reports pointed to a continuation of a sluggish recovery.  [ D1. ]


Joan S. Harrison, 59, Sarah Lawrence Dean
Joan S. Harrison, associate dean of studies at Sarah Lawrence College, died on Monday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 59 and lived in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
The cause was complications of lymphoma, her family said.


Council Panel Weighs Case Against Ruiz
A City Council committee met privately yesterday to consider charges that Councilman Israel Ruiz Jr. registered and voted in 1991 using a fake address, moments after Mr.
Ruiz offered an impassioned denial on the Council floor.
The meeting by the Committee on Standards and Ethics -- the second time in a week in which it has taken up allegations that members have provided false information about their residences -- followed an impassioned denial of the charge by Mr.
Ruiz before the full Council.
Mr.
Ruiz, a Bronx Democrat, said he had been falsely accused in newspaper articles, and he demanded a public hearing into the charges.


Douglas C. Watson, Design Engineer, 73, In Military Aviation
Douglas C. Watson, an aeronautical engineer, died on Saturday at his home in Jamaica, Queens.
He was 73.
Mr.
Watson, who had suffered from emphysema for several years, died in his sleep, a family spokesman said.


Washington at Work; Untested Role for Moynihan in Budget Fight
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan has played many roles in many areas of public life, ranging happily from foreign to domestic policy, from ethnic conflict on the international scene to the problems of children and poverty at home.
But the New York Democrat is still a novice as chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, a job he began six months ago, and he faces the challenge of a chairman's lifetime.
President Clinton's economic plan has lurched through the House -- just barely -- and landed with a somewhat ominous thud in Mr.
Moynihan's lap.


At the Cliburn Contest, a Note of Discord Intrudes
In the nature of musical contests, it had to happen.
The Ninth Van Cliburn International Piano Competition, now a week and a half old, has finally produced widespread and spirited dissent if not yet a major furor.
Typically, in an affair that has proceeded like clockwork but for an odd page-turning mishap on Friday, the selection of six finalists early this morning required only one ballot and, with additional voting on other awards, took under an hour.
The finalists are Armen Babakhanyan, 25, of Armenia; Fabio Bidini, 24, of Italy; Valery Kuleshov, 30, of Russia; Simone Pedroni, 24, of Italy; Johan Schmidt, 28, of Belgium, and Christopher Taylor, 23, of the United States.


Senator Trails in Texas, and Slugs Alone
The bell is about to sound in the final round of the fight for a United States Senate seat from Texas, but this is no toe-to-toe slugfest.
It's more as if only one of the candidates -- the Democratic incumbent, Bob Krueger -- is storming around the ring.
He is off to every corner of Texas, invoking all manner of serious accusations against his Republican challenger, State Treasurer Kay Bailey Hutchison.


Xscribe Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mulroney Offering Troops to Help Blockade Haiti
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada told President Clinton today that his country was ready to send troops to enforce a blockade around Haiti, but Mr.
Clinton committed himself to no more than a thorough review of United States options.
Administration officials said later that Washington was not prepared to move beyond far less aggressive measures to isolate the Haitian leadership, like freezing assets.


Hot Words Preceded Barkley's Hot Hand
It is not certain who had a more productive Tuesday evening: Dan Majerle or Dan Majerle's pub.
Majerle, a fluid Phoenix Suns guard, nearly brought rain with his playoff record eight 3-point baskets at American West Arena and, later, found a winding line of people, 25-deep, outside his affluent sports bar a block away.
"I think I might shoot a couple from over there," said Majerle, mulling a 600-foot shot he saw Michael Jordan make in a commercial.


Texas Court Stays Execution for Slaying in 1981
The Texas Court of Criminal Appeals granted a stay of execution today to Gary Graham, who had been scheduled to die by lethal injection after midnight for the 1981 murder of a 53-year-old Arizona businessman, Bobby Lambert, in a supermarket parking lot here.
The court unanimously voted to stay Mr.
Graham's execution, pending a decision by the United States Supreme Court in another case, probably later this month.
But the court sidestepped what many considered the crucial issue in Mr.
Graham's case: the lack of a judicial forum to hear new evidence of his assertion that he is not guilty.
In a 5-to-4 decision, the court declined to consider the issue of new evidence.


AirTran Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Studying Classics With the Lights On
CLASSICAL architecture -- the Parthenon, the Acropolis -- is usually taught in art history courses, through slides flashed on screens in darkened rooms.
Seldom is it part of the curriculum at architectural schools.
"Deans think it is the stuff of history, not a language of design," says Donald Rattner, a Manhattan architect trying to fill the educational gap.
Two years ago, he founded the Institute for the Study of Classical Architecture, a division of the New York Academy of Art in Manhattan.
Last summer, the institute offered its first program, to a mix of 13 architecture students, practicing architects and others.
From Saturday to July 17, the institute will offer its second summer program, six weeks of full-time classes.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the installation of a sculpture of a bull at Madison Square in Manhattan misidentified the sponsor.
It is the New York City Department of Transportation, not Parks.


Oshap Technologies Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Pan Atlantic Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


COMPANY NEWS
HANGER ORTHOPEDIC GROUP INC., Bethesda, Md., said it had acquired privately held Winter Park Orthotics and Prosthetics Inc.
The price was not disclosed.


Republicans Fight Cuomo On Hospital-Funds Plan
Responding to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's proposal to take money from New York's hospitals to help pay for more basic health care, the Republican leaders of the State Senate countered today that hospitals should get more, not less.
They also said funds should be increased for preventive and family medicine, with some of the money coming from general state coffers.
In releasing its long-awaited proposal, the Senate effectively fired the starter's gun for a marathon of politically charged negotiations over how to reorganize the state's health-care system, widely criticized as both costly and inefficient.


Sports of The Times; 'We Seemed A Little Bit Tight'
IT'S the oldest story in basketball: missed free throws.
Under those peach baskets nailed to the Y.M.C.A. gym in Springfield, Mass., a century ago, Dr.
James Naismith, who invented the game, was probably the first to bemoan missed free throws.
"Practice your free throws," coaches have preached ever since.
"Practice your free throws."


AIDES SAY CLINTON WILL DROP NOMINEE FOR POST ON RIGHTS
President Clinton has decided to withdraw the nomination of Lani Guinier to head the Justice Department's civil rights division, White House officials said today, an acknowledgement that her chances of winning confirmation have evaporated under an assault by critics of her proposals to bolster the political power of minorities.
The decision came at the end of a day in which Mr.
Clinton publicly said he disagreed with some of her writings and offered only lukewarm support.


In Marshall Papers Case, Library Abuses Trust; A Balance of Rights
To the Editor:
Suppose an eminent journalist who wrote about issues of great importance until shortly before her death left her papers to the Library of Congress, giving the library discretion to make the papers available when it felt appropriate.
Suppose that the library released the papers within a few months of the journalist's death, and that among them were her notes of conversations with leading public figures of the day -- conversations engaged in on a clear understanding of confidentiality.
Would you hail the release of these notes, after so short an interval, as an appropriate vindication of the public's "right" to information?
Somehow I doubt it.
I suspect you would decry the breach of confidentiality necessary to protect news sources and the free flow of information.


Concorde Career Colleges Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mr. Bulb reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Guatemala: Democracy Recouped?
As a rule, military coups do not produce wholly positive results, and the Guatemalan Army's ouster of President Jorge Serrano on Tuesday is unlikely to prove the exception.
Yet for Guatemala, and its army, the removal of a would-be civilian dictator is a big step forward from the brutal military interventions of the recent past.
Outside pressure -- especially the Clinton Administration's threat to suspend lucrative trade and investment incentives -- helped undermine Mr.
Serrano's ambitions.
But it was the widespread hostility of Guatemalan civil society that assured his early downfall.


Pro Bono Accounts
*
Heartshare Human Services of New York, Brooklyn, to Friedman Benjamin Advertising, New York, as the first agency to handle its account.


Laser Photonics reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


G.E. Gives Midtown Tower To Columbia University
A century after moving its campus from mid-Manhattan, Columbia University returned yesterday to accept the 50-story General Electric Building at 570 Lexington Avenue as a gift from the General Electric Company.
The slender landmark Art Deco skyscraper at 51st Street -- ornamented by lightning bolts and electric rays -- is valued at $40 million.


Executive Changes
CHEVRON CORP., San Francisco, appointed Al Caccamo president of Chevron International Oil Co. effective Aug. 1.
He will succeed Bob Walsh, who will retire.
ICI AMERICAS INC., Wilmington, Del., a unit of Imperial Chemical Industries P.L.C., named John Danzelson chairman and J. Kent Riegel president.
SCRIPTEL CORP., Columbus, Ohio, a maker of electronic drawing boards for use with computers, appointed James Vance Holloway chief operations officer.


A Deal on the Economic Plan
Three Democrats on the Senate Finance Committee -- David Boren of Oklahoma, Kent Conrad of North Dakota and John Breaux of Louisiana -- are threatening to hold President Clinton's economic plan hostage.
Each insists that the Administration revise the plan's $70 billion energy tax that accounts for nearly a third of the total revenue increase but which threatens oil producers, farmers and manufacturers.
Unless each Democrat votes yes, the plan won't clear the committee.
The White House believes it knows how to win over Senators Conrad and Breaux: Shrink and restructure the B.T.U. tax, and offset that lost revenue with additional spending cuts.
But Mr.
Boren's threat -- that he'll vote no unless the B.T.U. tax is dropped entirely -- is more ominous.
Still, the White House holds powerful cards.
With Senators Conrad and Breaux on board, Mr.
Boren is unlikely to scuttle the plan and thereby single-handedly smash an already wobbly President.


Books of The Times; Lawyer Is Missing. Now the Bad News.
Pleading Guilty  By Scott Turow 386 pages. Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $24.
The intrigue swiftly introduced at the start of Scott Turow's latest legal thriller, "Pleading Guilty," seems sufficiently complex by itself to hold the reader's attention.
Certainly it absorbs the members of the law firm of Gage &amp; Griswell; the senior management of Trans-National Air, the firm's main client, and the financial-crimes division of the local police department in the nameless Midwestern American city where "Pleading Guilty" is set.


Calendar: A Festival Of Roses
Rose Revelry  New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, in the Bedford Park section of the Bronx; (718) 817-8700.
The garden is celebrating its rose collection, which is in peak bloom.
On Saturday and Sunday, and on June 12 and 13, events will include guided tours of the Peggy Rockefeller Rose Garden, which contains more than 2,700 plants; a farmer's market with cut flowers and fresh fruit and vegetables; Victorian crafts, and activities for children.
There will also be concerts on June 13.
Rose events will be held from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.


Home Video
Movies on a 5-Inch CD
At the Consumer Electronics Show in Chicago this week, the talk is of the 5-inch compact video disk called CD-ROM, which one day may hold movies the way CD's now hold music.
Virtually ignored is the movie disk already available, the 12-inch laser disk.
With about one million players in use and more than 8,000 titles available, the format occupies a niche among movie buffs who appreciate its quality of picture and sound.


U.S. Filter reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Through a Child's Eyes, History and Tragedy
IT'S just not another science exhibit telling children how gravity works or what they can do about recycling.
Or a historical display of medieval knights in shining armor.
It's all about telling children of the Holocaust, in which one and a half million children were murdered.
It's about showing how the lives of Jewish children changed dramatically when the Nazis came to power, how they were separated from their families, forced to move out of their homes and how the best thing that could happen to them was getting out of the whole experience alive.


Video Display Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Economic Scene; A Cold-war Trade Weapon Isn't Used on China and May Never Be.
TRAPPED between his own campaign rhetoric and the advice of both the business and foreign policy establishments, President Clinton punted.
China, he announced last week, would have one more year of open trade with America.
Thereafter, renewal of China's "most favored nation" trade status would depend on the Old Guard's willingness to slip gently into the democratic night.
Nancy Pelosi, a California Democrat who has led the Congressional push to punish China for Tiananmen and Tibet, pronounced herself satisfied with "President Clinton's commitment to human rights and democratic freedoms." But it is still difficult to imagine how the President will be able to wield the trade weapon with much effect when the deadline passes.
For as the tough old Communists who still rule the roost in China apparently understand, closing down trade would undermine a variety of American interests.


Cabot Medical Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


War, Crises, Politics . . . and 3 Quick Holes
At a time when his Presidency seems under siege from all sides, as crises are erupting in the White House and around the world, President Clinton took a break from it all this afternoon.
He played golf.
Not a full round, his aides were quick to note.
"He played the last three holes," said George Stephanopoulos, the President's spokesman.
"It was just a break."


F.D.A. Unit Bars Plan to Sell Syntex Drug Over Counter
An advisory panel of the Food and Drug Administration shot down a proposal yesterday for the first entirely new entry into the $2.75 billion market for nonprescription analgesics since an over-the-counter version of ibuprofen joined aspirin and Tylenol in 1984.
The panel voted 7 to 4 to withhold approval of a nonprescription version of Naprosyn, an anti-arthritis drug made by the Syntex Corporation, based in Palo Alto, Calif.


Wet Seal Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Market Place; Heart Technology's Alternative to Angioplasty Gets a Green Light.
A YEAR ago, shareholders in Heart Technology Inc. got the worst kind of surprise when the company voluntarily withdrew its only product from field trials because of a manufacturing defect.
But yesterday, the faithful could feel vindicated: the Food and Drug Administration granted Heart Technology approval to market its Rotablator system to remove plaque that blocks coronary arteries.
Shares of the company, which is based in Bellevue, Wash., jumped $2.25 yesterday, to $21.50 in Nasdaq trading.
That is below the high of $31 the stock reached during its initial public offering in March 1992 after having been offered at $18.
But last June, the stock fell as low as $7.75 after the manufacturing problem produced a batch of defective Rotablators, five of which failed during use.


Analysis &amp; Technology Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Marjorie Buell, 88, Pioneer Cartoonist Of 'Little Lulu' Strip
Marjorie Henderson Buell, the creator of Little Lulu, the mischievous cartoon character with corkscrew curls who regularly outwitted the neighborhood boys, died on Sunday in the Elyria (Ohio) United Methodist Home.
She was 88.
The cause was lymphoma, said John D. Harvith, the co-arranger in 1982 of the only comprehensive retrospective of Mrs.
Buell's work, in Oberlin, Ohio.


D'Amato Gets F.B.I. Protection Following Threats
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato said yesterday that he has been under extra protection for the last month and skipped the annual Salute to Israel parade after the F.B.I. alerted the police to death threats against him.
A law-enforcement official who spoke on condition of anonymity later said that Mr.
D'Amato was one of two lawmakers to be threatened by what is believed to be the same group of Islamic fundamentalists.


Many Antismoking Aids Are Being Banned by U.S.
No nonprescription smoking deterrent now available has been shown to be effective in helping people quit and new shipments of the products will be prohibited after Dec. 1, the Food and Drug Administration said today.
The agency said the action would affect more than two dozen smoking deterrents sold over the counter as pills, tablets, lozenges and chewing gum under names like Cigarrest, Bantron, Tabmint and Nikoban.


Bridge
The world's biggest bridge event, the Epson Worldwide Bridge Contest, will be played tomorrow night and Saturday afternoon, with 100,000 players in about 80 countries.
In the New York area, play will be at the following clubs:


Hevesi Urges Rivals to Limit Underwriters' Contributions
Alan G. Hevesi, the Assemblyman from Queens who is running for City Comptroller, yesterday challenged his two rivals to voluntarily limit campaign contributions from firms that underwrite city bonds.
Seeking to take advantage of the widespread perception that firms use campaign contributions to influence the selection of bond underwriters, Mr.
Hevesi, a senior member of the Assembly, also said he would introduce legislation that would force the city to put out to competitive bidding the bulk of its underwriting business.


Attack on Civil Rights Nominee Is Unfair
To the Editor:
The attempt to derail Lani Guinier's nomination as Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights because of disagreement with her academic writing ("A Civil Rights Struggle Ahead," editorial, May 23) is unfair and misguided.
It is wrong for Orrin G. Hatch of Utah and other conservative Republican senators to oppose a Presidential nomination for executive office for such disagreement.
Opponents of Professor Guinier argue that since senators used Robert Bork's academic writings against him during his unsuccessful effort to be confirmed as Associate Justice of the Supreme Court, Professor Guinier's academic writings are likewise a basis to refuse to confirm her as an Assistant Attorney General.
What that false analogy overlooks is that when Mr.
Bork was nominated for an executive office in the Department of Justice -- solicitor general -- his academic writings were not used against him.
Despite strong disagreement with his academic views, senators voted overwhelmingly to confirm him as solicitor general because they knew he was serving as part of the President's team, not as a free agent.


Creative Learning Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


A VISIT WITH: Julia Louis-Dreyfus; She Who Gives 'Seinfeld' Estrogen
STRANGERS stop her on the street, wanting to know how she does her hair.
They sidle up to her in restaurants or scurry over when she is filling her car with gasoline.
"Elaine!" they say. "Is that you, Elaine?"


Senate Passes a Civil-Rights Bill To Safeguard Access to Abortion
Seeking to safeguard access to clinics where abortions are performed, the Connecticut Senate today approved a broad civil-rights statute that would make it a crime to use force or physical obstruction to deny someone the equal protection of state or Federal laws.
The measure does not mention abortion specifically.
Its intent, however, is to deter the kind of demonstrations that have disrupted abortion clinics around the country, as well as the violence threatened against many clinics.
Last March, a Pensacola, Fla., physician who carried out abortions was shot to death.
Mirroring a Federal Law
The proposed law mirrors a Federal civil rights law from the Reconstruction era that helped protect access to clinics until the Supreme Court struck down that application earlier this year.


Smith Goes Up, but Only Knicks Drop
The play seemed to last forever, a lifetime of opportunity for Charles Smith to win the night for the Knicks.
Under the basket with the ball, his team down a point and the fourth-quarter seconds ticking away, Smith went up, up, up and up.
Every time, he came down with the ball.
Every time, it felt like a bell tolling for the Knicks.
The score was 95-94, the Bulls hanging on, the Knicks with the ball and 28.8 seconds left in what could very well be the last game of the season in New York.
Patrick Ewing had started a drive against Stacey King, lost his footing, and shoveled the ball to Smith to the left of the basket.


Schools Can't Segregate Handicapped Children
To the Editor:
As the parent of a handicapped child, I was gratified by "When Disabled Students Enter Regular Classrooms" (front page, May 19).
However, you omit a problem I have seen time and again in my local schools.
There still are quite a number of school principals who shun the presence of multiply handicapped children in their schools, a prejudice not easily set aside.
The children, though allowed into the school to satisfy the law's requirements, are treated as though they were living before the civil rights era: they are banished to a classroom that is isolated from the main part of the school and their peers.
Their classroom is usually the smallest, most cramped quarter in the building, more often than not a converted lounge without windows and without sufficient space to maneuver wheelchairs and walkers.


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  Milne Wins N.C.A.A.
Discus Throw  Brian Milne, a sophomore from Penn State who had to give up track and field three years ago when he was diagnosed with Hodgkins' disease, won the discus throw last night on the opening day of the National Collegiate Athletic Association championships in New Orleans.
Milne was in sixth place after four rounds, his throw of 191 feet 3 inches nearly 9 feet behind the leader, Ramon Jiminez-Gaona of the University of California.
But on the fifth round, Milne's throw sailed 200-5 for the victory, the first in the event by an Easterner since Victor Frank of Yale won in 1949.
The women's long jump was won by Daphnie Saunders, a Louisiana State junior from the Bahamas, who also won the N.C.A.A. indoor long jump less than three months ago.
Her winning jump was 22 feet 2 1/2 inches.
Shana Williams of Seton Hall, who also competed in the heptathlon, finished third in the long jump at 21-5 1/4.
Earlier in the day, the hammer throw was won by Balazs Kiss, a 21-year-old Hungarian Olympian who now attends Southern California.
His winning throw of 246-10 was the second longest in the meet's history.
Pat McGrath of Manhattan College finished sixth (223-6).
SOCCER  Norway Shocks England in Cup Qualifying  Norway put itself in position for its first World Cup berth since 1938, stunning England, 2-0, last night in Oslo.
The match was played following a brawl that led the police to detain 73 English fans, who were accused of smashing up a bar.
England hadn't lost to Norway since 1981.
Oyvind Leonhardsen scored with three minutes left in the first half and Lars Bohinen ended a slick three-man attack by scoring three minutes after the break for Norway (5-0-1), which leads Group 2 with 11 points.
England (3-1-3) is second with 9 points, followed by the Netherlands (3-1-2) and Poland (3-0-2) with 8 points each.
The top two teams in each European group qualify for the World Cup finals next year in the United States. (AP)


Corrections
A Critic's Notebook article yesterday about the Bang on a Can Festival referred incorrectly to the composer of "Itsofomo," a video-theater piece.
He is Ben Neill.


In Praise of Those Who Bent the Rules
DURING the 12th Dynasty (1971-1928 B.C.), the Egyptians bent wood to make their bows.
Thrones and stools made of bent wood were later found in the tomb of Tutankhamen.
But it took Michael Thonet, the German furniture innovator (1796-1871) to perfect the technique of using heat, steam and pressure to mold solid wood into fluid furniture shapes.
Starting Saturday, 74 bentwood designs -- including 41 by Thonet's company, Gebruder Thonet -- will be on exhibit in "Against the Grain: Bentwood Furniture from the Collection of Manfred and Fern Steinfeld" at the Chicago Art Institute.
Twenty-two pieces are by Jacob and Josef Kohn, Austrian competitors of Thonet, and 11 are by others.


Corrections
A chart on the Media Business page on May 24, with an article about a salary dispute at The Wall Street Journal and its parent, Dow Jones &amp; Company, misstated the minimum salary for beginning reporters at Reuters.
Reuters says it is $41,126.80.


Pall Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Guadalajara Journal; Where Blast Leveled the Streets, Fear Still Loiters
They call it "that black day," and most people here can recall precisely where they were the moment more than a year ago when miles of underground sewer lines exploded, tearing this city open and leaving a deep scar of dirt and destruction that still has not healed.
"I had just come back from buying a few chickens for my son's birthday party," said Maria de Socorro Partida de Gomez, who has lived in Guadalajara for 40 years and who said that April 22, 1992, was seared into her memory.


Wisconsin Southern Gas (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Big Nations Optimistic On Tariffs
The major industrial nations said today that they were optimistic about soon reaching a breakthrough in their long, start-and-stop efforts to lower barriers to world trade.
Finance and trade ministers from the United States and the other largest economic powers, meeting here, said that they expected by next month to reach broad agreement in amajor category of their negotiations -- eliminating or reducing tariffs on hundreds of products.


Changing Roles
To The Home Section:
It was a delight to read about the recent acceptance of males as nannies in "Breaking a Stereotype, More Men Are Being Hired as Nannies"  [ May 13 ] .
But the limited success of men in the field proves America's reluctance to accept a change of roles for men and women.


Italian Blast: 'Dark Force'?
The bomb that blew through the Uffizi Gallery last week has again forced Italians to acknowledge a central paradox of their artistic heritage, that its very size and wealth and ubiquity make it impossible to protect.
But they have also begun to revise their perception of Italy, from a place on the verge of change to a place where change is impossible because "occult forces" behind the public face of political power always conspire to make it so.


Xylogics Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


James A. Prevost, 58, Mental Health Leader
Dr.
James A. Prevost, a former New York State Commissioner of Mental Health, died on Monday at Grant Hospital in Chicago.
He was 58 and lived in Chicago.
The cause was prostate cancer, his family said.


Patrol of Park Is Intensified After Slaying
Police officers in helicopters, patrol cars and on scooters, horses and bicycles circled Prospect Park yesterday, an almost-military presence amid the park's jewel-like lakes and meadows, as detectives investigated the killing of a 42-year-old drama teacher shot four times in the back as he bicycled along a secluded path.
There were few leads by evening in the slaying of Allyn Winslow, who somehow managed to pedal his bicycle nearly 400 yards before he collapsed and died Tuesday afternoon in a bed of clover.


York Research (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


Guatemala's Counter-Coup: A Military About-Face
When President Jorge Serrano Elias startled Guatemalans last week with the announcement that he was dissolving the Congress and suspending the Constitution, his seizure of power seemed to have been accomplished at a stroke.
The military, which had led many coups in the past, backed his actions and not a protester appeared in public.
But on Monday, the military switched sides and ousted Mr.
Serrano.
Today he flew to El Salvador, and the State Department in Washington said he was expected to travel to Texas to visit his ailing mother.


Clinton Delays Push to Increase Minimum Wage
The Clinton Administration has delayed its push for a higher minimum wage because of worries about undermining job growth and antagonizing conservatives and business executives while the President's budget hangs in the balance, Administration officials said today.
They said the Administration would probably wait until next year, and then propose an increase in the minimum wage, now $4.25 an hour, that would be far smaller than the $1-an-hour rise contemplated when President Clinton took office.


Falcon Oil &amp; Gas Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  DISPUTE OVER SEARCH FOR NEW CHANCELLOR
The New York City Board of Education is wrangling over the pace of their search for a new schools chancellor, with some members urging a speedy decision while other members demurred.
B3.
A MIDTOWN SKYSCRAPER FOR COLUMBIA
Columbia University has accepted the 50-story General Electric Building at 570 Lexington Avenue as a gift from the General Electric Company.
B3.


Gish Biomedical Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


BioWhittaker Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Money Market Funds Rise In Yield in the Latest Period
Yields offered by tax-exempt and taxable money market funds rose in the latest week, according to the most recent survey by IBC's Money Fund Report.
Tax-exempt money fund yields were up for the period ended Tuesday, reflecting higher rates of money market instruments like Treasury securities, negotiable certificates of deposit and commercial paper over the last few weeks.
But with an expected heavy supply of new tax-exempt municipal issues this week, yields could increase again next week, analysts said.


13th Death in Southwest Is Attributed to Flu Epidemic


Pop and Jazz in Review
Roy Haynes  Drummer Village Vanguard 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street Greenwich Village Through Sunday
Roy Haynes's show on Tuesday night was all about ornament.
Jazz drumming changed radically during the be-bop era, moving from a time-keeping role, where the beats were made explicit, to a looser, more improvisatory and interactive role; Mr.
Haynes, who was one of be-bop's best drummers, absorbed the revolution.
His performance is an unending monologue, a stream of changing accents, ideas, suggestions and rhythmic angles.


Gun Licensees Scrutinized
The New York City Police Department and the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms intend to visit 993 gun collectors and dealers who hold Federal firearms licenses to make sure they are not using them to buy or ship guns across state lines, the two agencies announced yesterday.


Serbian Forces Said to Overrun Muslim Villages
The Sarajevo radio reported today that Serbian nationalists had overrun several Muslim villages in the Gorazde enclave in eastern Bosnia.
The radio reports said the Serbian tank and infantry assaults were coming from all directions, and they spoke of thousands of refugees fleeing their villages toward Gorazde town, which also came under heavy shelling today.


Trade Bait? Bonilla's Bat Sizzles
The home run crashed into the bleachers in left at Wrigley Field.
Bobby Bonilla crossed the plate.
The right fielder's statistics were pumped fuller, and his week of offensive terror made that much more imposing.
The two-run, fourth-inning home run, which made the afternoon's 11-3 demolition of the Cubs certain, if not complete, also had the effect of starting once more the debate about Bonilla's future with the Mets.


Finals to Start Wednesday
The National Basketball Association championship series will begin Wednesday night, June 9.
Starting with the opener, games will be played on Wednesdays, Fridays and Sundays until the four-of-seven-game series concludes.
Wednesday and Friday games will start at 9 P.M., Eastern time, and Sunday games will begin at 7 P.M.
All games will be televised nationally by NBC.


Born in Secret, Baby Is Found Dead in Trash
A 17-year-old Long Island girl delivered a full-term baby boy in the bathroom of her parents' home on Tuesday, stuffed him in a plastic bag and then left him in a neighbor's trash can where he was found dead, the Nassau County police said yesterday.
The case reflected the tragic consequences of teen-age pregnancy, with medical officials saying that the girl, Roxana Ramos of Manorhaven, should have received counseling and prenatal care, and, in fact, would have been eligible for it under Medicaid.


Bankruptcy Judge Backs Circle K Sale
A Federal bankruptcy judge in Phoenix gave interim approval yesterday to the Circle K Corporation's reorganization plan, which calls for the sale of the convenience-store chain for $399.5 million.
Judge George Neilsen Jr. rejected a rival proposal offered by holders of $515 million in Circle K debt and endorsed a plan proposed by the company for its sale to CK Acquisitions, a New York-based investment group led by Investcorp International Inc.


Majority on Board Seeks New Chancellor Quickly
The New York City Board of Education wrangled over the pace of its search for a new schools chancellor yesterday, with the four-member majority urging a speedy decision while members allied with Mayor David N. Dinkins warned against rushing the process.
With the board's self-imposed June 30 deadline approaching for the selection of a successor to Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez, the debate erupted as the board met with the committee selected in March to oversee the search.


Smooth Sailing Leaves Norman Out of Rough
Six weeks off usually leaves a thick coat of rust on the games of professional golfers, but in Greg Norman's case, a long break smoothed jagged edges.
As he prepares for Thursday's opening round of the Memorial Tournament, Norman is coming off a strong runner-up finish at the Southwestern Bell Colonial Invitational.
The Texas event last weekend was the first for Norman since his 31st place finish at the Masters in April, a performance so disappointing it left the 38-year-old Australian drained.


Events: Strolling Through History
Inside and Out  Friends of the Upper East Side Historic Districts; (212) 535 2526.
Barry Lewis, an architectural historian, will lead a walking tour in the Carnegie Hill neighborhood, including the interiors of the former Otto Kahn mansion built by C. P. H. Gilbert in 1913, on Saturday at 2 P.M.
Reservations are required.
Fee is $15.
Student Designs  New York School of Interior Design, 155 East 56th Street; (212) 753-5365.
The 46th annual student exhibition, featuring graphic designs and architectural plans, models and renderings, continues through June 24.
Open Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
No charge.
Clearly Different  Wheaton Village, 1501 Glasstown Road (off Wade Boulevard), Millville, N.J.; (609) 825-6800.
"Glass Weekend 1993" will be held June 12 and 13 at the village, which features the American Glass Museum and the T. C. Wheaton Glass Factory.
Events will include displays and sales of functional and sculptural glass artwork from 21 galleries and ongoing demonstrations by the glass artist William Morris.
Open 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission each day, including Wheaton Village, $6; those 62 and older, $5.50; students, $3.50; families, $12.
Proceeds will benefit the Creative Glass Center of America, the Art Alliance for Contemporary Glass and the Corning Museum of Glass.
Ceramics Plus  Jones Street between Bleecker and West Fourth streets; (212) 242-4106.
Greenwich House Pottery is holding a street fair on Saturday, from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., that will include crafts in ceramics, glass, fabric, wood, metal and paper.
Rain date is Sunday.
No charge.  18th-Century Farmhouse  King Manor Museum, Jamaica Avenue near 150th Street, Jamaica, Queens; (718) 291-0282.
On Saturday, from 2 to 4 P.M., there will be a guided tour of the renovation of the manor, a cottage built around 1800 and later expanded.
Fee is $2.
Reservations are requested.
Staten Island Antiques  Historic Richmond Town, 441 Clarke Avenue, off Arthur Kill Road, Staten Island; (718) 351-1611.
There will be an antiques and collectibles market on Sunday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission is $1; children under 16, 50 cents.
Weekend in Queens  Jackson Heights Beautification Group; (718) 898-7205.
On June 12 at 11 A.M. there will be an illustrated talk about Jackson Heights, a planned garden apartment community developed between 1909 and 1945, at the Jackson Heights Public Library, 35-51 81st Street (near 37th Avenue).
There will also be a show of photographs and memorabilia from 10 A.M. to 3 P.M.
No charge.
Nine private gardens will be open for a self-guided tour on June 12, from noon to 4 P.M.
On June 13, at 11 A.M. and 2 P.M., the beautification group is offering walking tours in the Jackson Heights historic district.
Fee is $5 for each tour.
Reservations are required.


1 Play. 4 Lost Chances. Knicks 1 Step From Exit.
For the Knicks, especially Charles Smith, it was utter frustration and despair.
For the Chicago Bulls, it was ecstacy, and a major step toward advancing to a third consecutive championship series.
Ending the Knicks' 27-game winning streak at Madison Square Garden, Chicago took a 3-2 lead in the four-of-seven-game Eastern Conference championship series with a dramatic 97-94 victory last night.
The Bulls can end the series, and the Knicks' season, by winning Game 6 on Friday night in Chicago.


Critic's Notebook; On TV, Truth Is More Instant Than Fiction
Television movies based on fact are not just still with us, despite an escalation in warnings over the last couple of decades about blurred lines between fact and fiction; there are, in fact, more of them than ever.
And the time lapse between factual event and television dramatization gets shorter and shorter.
In recent weeks, NBC broadcast three "instant docudramas" within four days: "Ambush in Waco," "Hurricane Andrew: Triumph Over Disaster" and "Without Warning: Terror in the Towers." Not surprisingly, this particular achievement turned out to be dubious.
Most productions of this sort are doomed to mediocrity.
Rushed into low-budget production, they are saddled with patched-together scripts and B-list actors obviously cruising at minimum-rehearsal speed.
Worse, too many of the movies are forced into phony uplift modes, squeezing tearful sleaze out of genuine disasters, natural or man-made, whose survivors may still be distraught.
That subtitle "Triumph Over Disaster" sums up prime-time television's determination to eliminate the negative, no matter what.


Scrubs Clean Up Again for Yankees
Mike Stanley printed the T-shirts last season.
They were for the Yankees' role players, the bench sitters, the guys who have spent their share of time in the minor leagues.
On his shirts, Stanley called them the "Gooners," and he and his low-profile teammates -- guys like Pat Kelly and Mike Gallego, Jim Leyritz and Randy Velarde -- got a great kick out of wearing them around.
Manager Buck Showalter thinks it might be time for a reprint.
These shirts, though, are destined for more hallowed lockers -- those belonging to the likes of Danny Tartabull and Don Mattingly and Bernie Williams.
After all, while the big-name, regular players have sat by with injuries, the "gooners" have managed to win game after game.


Engle Homes Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


A Phone Pickup
The Newbridge Networks Corporation makes and sells networking equipment for telephones.
Its stock price has surged recently from $15 last year.
On Tuesday, Newbridge posted its best quarterly earnings ever and yesterday said that it had sold $5 million worth of equipment to China.
Its stock jumped almost 9 percent to reach a new high.


Essay; Sad State of State
Bill Clinton has made two major forays into foreign affairs so far.
His first was a winner: the embrace of Boris Yeltsin at the Vancouver summit probably helped democratic reformers increase the size of their victory in the Russian referendum.
His second was a loser: he announced his intention to coerce the Bosnian Serbs to the peace table with air power, then dispatched his Secretary of State to Europe to bring the allies along; instead, Warren Christopher brought back the first public humiliation of an American President since World War II.


Editorial Notebook; Crown Heights Was Not Iasi
As someone who grew up hearing her father's recollections of violent anti-Semitism in Poland, may I suggest that New York City politicians give the word "pogrom" a rest.
It's legitimate to argue that the police did a bad job of protecting the Jewish population in Brooklyn's Crown Heights section during the riots in the summer of 1991.
The police did do a bad job.
But to call the riots a pogrom, as former Mayor Edward Koch, the mayoral candidate Rudolph Giuliani and others persist in doing, is not only wrong -- and inflammatory -- but an insult to those who lived through the real thing.
My late father didn't speak often about his childhood in Eastern Europe.
But when he did it was with a steely anger, a transforming bitterness that he carried with him all 89 years of his life.
Though he left Poland when he was only 6, he could vividly recall nights when Cossacks would sweep through his village on horseback, beating, maiming and murdering Jews for one reason -- because they were Jewish.
He remembered fleeing and hiding, and he remembered the confused fear of a child who could not make sense of what was, after all, incomprehensible.


State Comptroller McCall Honored at Hunter College
H.
Carl McCall, the New York State comptroller and former president of the New York City Board of Education, delivered the keynote address yesterday at Hunter College's 167th commencement exercises.
The Hunter College president, Dr.
Paul LeClerc, conferred the president's medal on Mr.
McCall.
Also receiving the President's medal was Frank Bonilla, a teacher, scholar and an advocate for Puerto Rican rights.


CHRONICLE
Dr.
JOSEPH DUFFEY, former president of American University in Washington, who was also chancellor and president of the University of Massachusetts, is being sworn in this morning as the 13th director of the United States Information Agency.
Then he will plunge immediately into the business at hand: explaining United States foreign policy by presiding over a panel discussion for U.S.I.A. employees, "A New Time: How Will America Present Itself to the World?"
The answer to that, Dr.
Duffey said, will have to evolve with the times and the circumstances.


2 Key Appointments Made By May Department Stores
The May Department Stores Company, the nation's largest department store operator, yesterday named Thomas A. Hays to the newly created position of deputy chairman and promoted Jerome T. Loeb to president of the company, effective June 14.
The promotion of Mr.
Loeb, currently the vice chairman and chief financial officer of May, appears to establish a clearer line of succession at the low-profile company, a matter of much speculation on Wall Street.


Astro-Med Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Episcopal Bishop Defends Suspension of Bronx Priest
The Episcopal Bishop of New York said yesterday that he suspended a priest in charge of a South Bronx church because a highly charged atmosphere in the parish prevented an intended discussion of the priest's "authoritarian leadership style."
In his first public comment on the May 19 suspension of the priest, the Rev.
Luis Barrios of St.
Ann's Church, in Mott Haven, Bishop Richard F. Grein said that the outcry over the priest's suspension was fueled by nonparishioners who exacerbated tensions, which culminated in a disruption of services last Sunday and a death threat against the priest who celebrated the Mass.


EX-OFFICIAL ADMITS FRAUD IN MISSOURI
William Webster, the former state attorney general who lent his name to a major Supreme Court abortion ruling, pleaded guilty today to Federal charges of conspiracy and misapplication of public funds.
But the plea from Missouri's former top law-enforcement officer came after a two-hour court session in which Mr.
Webster repeatedly told Judge D. Brook Barlett of District Court that he disagreed with parts of a six-page agreement he had signed earlier in the day admitting his guilt.


Richard Failla Memorial
A memorial service for Justice Richard C. Failla will be held at 4 P.M. today in Room 503 of Surrogate's Court at 31 Chambers Street in Manhattan.
Mr.
Failla, of State Supreme Court, died on April 11 at age 53.


Dredging Begins in Ports Newark and Elizabeth


Data Show An Economy In Low Gear
A fresh set of mixed economic data appeared today, as the Government's chief forecasting index rebounded feebly from a March plunge while sales of new homes soared to their highest levels in more than six years.
Taken together, private analysts said, the reports pointed to a continuation of the recovery that officially began two years ago -- but without much prospect of imminent acceleration.
Improved weather played a big part in the April results.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
DR.
RUTH A. LAWRENCE still clearly remembers feeling exhausted and inadequate after the birth of her first child in 1951.
"I was totally overwhelmed, even though I'd read all the books," said Dr.
Lawrence, a professor of pediatrics, obstetrics and gynecology at the University of Rochester.
All of her professional training and work as a physician had not prepared her for the intensity of her emotions and the physical drain on her body that came with caring for a newborn baby.
"I realized how much useless advice I'd given to new parents because I didn't know what it was really like," added Dr.
Lawrence, who went on to have eight more children.


In Rough World of American Politics, Asian-Americans Stand Out, as Rare
If he wins election next week as mayor of Los Angeles, Michael Woo, a third-generation Chinese-American, will become the first Asian-American mayor of a major American city.
But to get this far in politics, he has had to leave his Asian roots far behind.
Like most of the few other Asian-Americans who hold elective office in the United States, Mr.
Woo has been required by politics to go against his own inclinations, to wade into controversies, to seek headlines, to lobby aggressively for campaign money.


Marion Merrell Plans Deal With Sepracor
Seeking to halt the erosion in sales of its antihistamine terfenadine, known as Seldane, Marion Merrell Dow Inc. will announce today a licensing agreement and $10 million investment in Sepracor Inc., a biotechnology company in Marlborough, Mass., the companies said yesterday.
For $7.5 million, Sepracor will license to Marion Merrell exclusive rights to its patent application covering the use of terfenadine carboxylate, a new form of the best-selling Seldane, without the negative side effects that have hurt Seldane sales in the last year.


President Again Postpones Unveiling of a Health Plan
Preoccupied with efforts to win approval for his economic program, President Clinton has again postponed his proposal to remake the nation's medical system and has allowed his wife's task force on health care to expire.
As a result of the new delays by the Administration, Congress is highly unlikely to pass comprehensive health-care legislation this year.
In a speech on Feb. 17, Mr.
Clinton said Congress must pass such legislation "this year -- not next year, not five years from now, but this year."


Tobacco Ban in Minors
Major league baseball jumped on the anti-tobacco bandwagon yesterday -- with one foot.
It announced that all minor league players, coaches and umpires would be forbidden to smoke or chew tobacco anywhere in their ball parks or on team buses.
The ban, which takes effect June 15, applies to more than 6,000 uniformed baseball personnel on the 160 minor league teams, but not to fans, employees of the clubs or to any major league players, including those sent down to the minors for rehabilitation.
That's because major leaguers have rights under a collective bargaining agreement.


E'town Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Ballet Theater Revives, With Help From Friends
American Ballet Theater, which last September was close to financial collapse, announced yesterday that it had paid a $2 million bank debt and raised an additional $1 million toward a new production of "The Nutcracker" to be performed in California in early December.
The company also announced the formation of "The Partnership for A.B.T.," a special fund-raising task force headed by Peter Joseph, the new president of Ballet Theater's board, and Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis, Peter Duchin and Wilbur Ross, a senior partner at Rothschild Inc., who played a major role in saving the New-York Historical Society.
"It's not a question of survival any more," Mr.
Joseph, chairman and chief executive officer of Rosecliff, a merchant banking company, said yesterday.


Sierra On-Line Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


In Marshall Papers Case, Library Abuses Trust
To the Editor:
All who knew Associate Justice Thurgood Marshall well have no doubt that the Library of Congress has seriously and grievously abused the discretion that he bestowed on it by releasing his private papers so soon after his retirement from the Supreme Court and his death (front page, May 25).
His passionate wish to preserve the confidentiality of the Court conference room and his colleagues' debates was clear to all of us who were close to him.
James H. Billington, the Librarian of Congress, did not know Justice Marshall.
Thus, he may honestly believe he is acting in accordance with Justice Marshall's wishes.
But he is wrong.
And his assertion that confessing error will hurt the library suggests that even Mr.
Billington may now have some doubts.


TV Contract Spurs Soul-Searching
Major league baseball's television contract is in place -- a revolutionary deal, if you listen to some baseball owners, an alarming prophecy come true, if the reaction of some general managers is any gauge.
Sal Bando, the general manager of the Milwaukee Brewers, initially greeted news of the drastically reduced national television revenues with the view that the Brewers might have to seek a larger market to survive.


WHERE TO FIND IT
COMMUNING with nature on a trail or in the woods may be great for the soul, but it's hard on clothing and equipment.
Tents rip, zippers break, and after a few nights by a roaring campfire, a sleeping bag needs a good cleaning.
Most equipment manufacturers will repair their own tents, packs and sleeping bags, but that can take weeks.
A quicker alternative is to deal directly with a company that restores outdoor gear.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
AL -- Upheld the three-game suspension of Cleveland Indians outfielder Albert Belle and announced it will begin Friday.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Activated Mike Greenwell, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Jim Byrd, infielder, to Pawtucket of the International League.
National League


HOME IMPROVEMENT
DESPITE their generally sturdy construction, most wooden outdoor decks begin to look shabby after only a few years without care, as mold, mildew and rust set in.
Simply washing by hand can brighten a deck that is not too dirty.
Use a stiff-bristled scrub brush dipped in a solution of warm water and strong household detergent.
Follow the label's directions for heavy-duty cleaning, or use about half a cup of detergent for each gallon of water.


Pacers Are Talking to Brown
Sixteen years ago, LARRY BROWN talked DONNIE WALSH back into coaching.
Now the roles are reversed.
It's Walsh who's doing the talking, and the Indiana Pacers' president hopes his old friend will respond to his sales pitch.
Walsh, whose first National Basketball Association coaching job was as Brown's assistant in Denver, was in Los Angeles yesterday to meet with Brown and the team's owner, HERB SIMON.


Koor Industries Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Delta Computec reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Berks County, Pa., Municipal Authority is offering $32.7 million of tax-exempt hospital revenue bonds for the Reading Hospital and Medical Center project through underwriters led by Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
The issue was initially priced to yield a maximum 5.75 percent for a bond due in 2014 and 5.60 percent for a bond due in 2008.
Shorter-term serial bonds were priced to yield from 2.85 percent in 1994 to 5.25 percent in 2003.
Because all the bonds are insured by the Municipal Bond Investor's Assurance Corp., they are rated triple-A by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Davis County, Utah, Solid Waste Management and Energy Recovery Special Service District is offering $50.6 million of tax-exempt solid waste management revenue refunding bonds through Smith Barney, Harris Upham &amp; Co.
The bonds are initially priced to yield a maximum of 6.35 percent for an issue due in 2009, with shorter-maturity serials priced to yield from 3.25 percent in 1994 to 6 percent in 2003.
The issue is rated Baa by Moody's and BBB- by S.&amp; P


G.M. Dealers Offer Leases For Some Used Vehicles
The General Motors Acceptance Corporation said today that G.M. dealers were now offering leases for most used midsize and larger G.M. cars and trucks up to three years old.
Even though new-car leasing has grown dramatically in popularity as car prices have risen, auto makers have not been willing to lease used cars until recently.


What Makes Kentucky's Bluegrass Blue
To the Editor:
"Kentuckians Try to Reign in Suburbia" (news article, May 16), an otherwise excellent piece on urban encroachment in central Kentucky, has added misinformation to the blurred truth about common bluegrass, or poa pratensis, the luxuriant natural carpet that adorns half the lawns in suburban America.
Bluegrass is not named for its leaves, which are always green without a hint of azure, anil or topaz, whether they grow on limestone, granite, sandstone or igneous substrata.
The grass is named for the seed heads, which appear during the spring and summer when allowed to grow unshorn and unmolested to a natural height of two to three feet.


Jordan's Second Half Speaks Volumes
By this point, with the Chicago Bulls one game from another championship series and an opportunity to win a third consecutive National Basketball Association title, maybe it is best that Michael Jordan remains temporarily silent.
After his 29-point, 14-assist, 10-rebound effort led the Bulls to a 97-94 victory over the Knicks last night in Game 5 of the Eastern Conference finals, any words would not be nearly as eloquent.


CUC International reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


INSIDE
Tunnel for Drugs Is Found Under U.S.-Mexico Border
While searching for the killers of a Mexican cardinal, the police found an elaborate tunnel for smuggling cocaine into the United States, the largest such channel ever found.
Page A5.
Tables Turn in Guatemala
When Guatemala's President seized power last week, his position seemed secure.
But that was before the military switched sides.
Page A3.
Progress on Tariffs Seen
Major industrial nations said they had made progress toward a breakthrough in the long effort to lower tariff barriers.
Page D1.
Newborn Is Found Dead
A 17-year-old Long Island girl gave birth in her parents' bathroom and left the boy in the trash, where he was found dead, officials said.
Page B1.


CHRONICLE
MOTHER TERESA was named a freeman of Dublin yesterday , the first nun to receive the honor, The Associated Press reported.
Spectators reached out to touch the frail 82-year-old Nobel Peace Prize winner as she climbed the platform to accept the freedom of Dublin, an honor similar to the key to a city.
Mother Teresa began religious life at a convent in Dublin 65 years ago.


Seagram Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Strawberry Is a Hit in Rehab
Nine-year-old ANDY SERRANTO surveyed his position in the growing line at the Albuquerque (N.M.) Sports Stadium and concluded his chances for an autograph were bleak at best.
"There's no way he's gonna sign my card," said Serranto, one of the estimated 1,500 fans who stayed long after a Pacific Coast League game Monday in hopes of getting a DARRYL STRAWBERRY signature.


MC Shipping Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Comtech Telecommunications Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Score Board Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


2 Auto Makers Set Big Campaigns
Two leading Japanese car manufacturers are mounting multimillion-dollar campaigns.
Mitsubishi Motors is introducing a theme to replace its long-running slogan "The word is getting around." The new theme, which calls the company's products "The new thinking in automobiles," is being phased in with a series of five television commercials for the 1994 models of its Galant mid-sized sedan.


In a Shift, Stein Will Abide by Spending Limits
After months of refusing to abide by New York City's voluntary campaign-spending and contribution limits while he was running for mayor, Andrew J. Stein said yesterday that he would comply with the limits now that he is campaigning for public advocate.
Mr.
Stein, who dropped out of the race for mayor last week to run for re-election to the newly renamed public advocate post, said he had needed large contributions when he was challenging Mayor David N. Dinkins, but not for the race for public advocate, where he is the incumbent.
He said he would not accept the public matching funds that are part of the law, though that is a moot point because the deadline for entering the program was earlier this year.


South Africa Court Suspends Winnie Mandela's Jail Term
South Africa's highest appeals court today upheld Winnie Mandela's conviction for the kidnapping of four black youths, but said she would not go to prison for her role in a crime that opened deep wounds in the anti-apartheid movement.
The appeals panel rejected the five-year jail term imposed by a lower court judge in favor of a fine, a payment to the victims, and a suspended sentence, saying the more lenient sentence would "achieve a measure of social justice and fit the crime."


On Display: A Life In Aluminum
JIM BAUER, a self-taught artist from Alameda, Calif., is an aluminum enthusiast: he's been an auto mechanic, a researcher at the Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Corporation and a dealer of aluminum kettles and teapots at flea markets.
And last year, he started making fanciful robotlike figures from kitchen detritus (Jell-O molds, measuring spoons).
Twenty-two of them are on exhibit through June 26 at American Primitive, a gallery in SoHo.
They have a futuristic look, but a nostalgic quality.
"It's like they walked out of an animated cartoon," said Aarne Anton, the gallery owner.


On the Surface, No Upset for Bruguera
His gait was eriatric, his shoulders stooped, his head bowed, and his mouth twitched with self-righteous indignation.
Pete Sampras, ranked No. 1 in the world, didn't paint a pretty picture of life atop the tennis mountain at the French Open today, and it was little wonder that Sergi Bruguera of Spain scored a successful knockdown in their quarterfinal at Roland Garros.
Sampras had his version of a bad day at the office on the stadium court as Bruguera, who has gathered all seven of his career titles on clay and is considered a 22-year-old maestro on the surface, eliminated him with competence and confidence, 6-3, 4-6, 6-1, 6-4.


Ex-Chairman Of G.O.P. Is Indicted
The former chairman of the Connecticut Republican Party, Richard Foley Jr., was indicted today on charges that he solicited a $25,000 bribe to influence interstate banking legislation while he was a state legislator in 1989 and 1990.
The charges say that Mr.
Foley took $2,500 a month over 10 months from two real-estate developers who were later convicted of corruption charges in connection with a municipal bribery scandal in Waterbury.
The two men are now cooperating with investigators.


Flow International Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Hrudey Can't Fail Between the Pipes for Kings
In the middle of the season, Kelly Hrudey's job was in jeopardy and he felt as secure as a loose rebound in the goal crease.
He worried that he would become a backup goalie.
He feared that he was about to be traded by the Los Angeles Kings, even though "I was probably playing so poorly that nobody wanted me."
Now, Hrudey is the first-string goalie again and his team has a 1-0 lead over the Montreal Canadiens in the Stanley Cup finals.
The four-of-seven-game championship series resumes here Thursday night.
Hrudey stopped 31 shots in Game 1, a 4-1 Los Angeles victory Tuesday night.
For one game, at least, Hrudey was better than Montreal's Patrick Roy.
An Inner Anger
Hrudey says he has never had so much fun in his life, but he says it without a smile and in a way that suggests an inner anger.
When he said today that "I don't want hockey to distract me from what's important in life," someone asked him what is important in his life.


Panthers Name Neilson Coach
Five months after being dismissed by the Rangers, Roger Neilson was today named head coach of the expansion Florida Panthers, the sixth team he will coach in the National Hockey League.
Neilson, 58 years old, signed a three-year contract with a one-year option.
No other terms were disclosed.
Under Neilson, who has a career won-lost-tied mark of 328-270-109, the Rangers were 19-17-4 last January and only 2 points out of second place in the Patrick Division when he was dismissed.
Neilson noted today how in recent seasons Chicago and Pittsburgh had also been around the .500 mark at midseason and their coaches had remained as their teams went to the finals.


Time Running Out for Whitman's Republican Rivals
With the Republican primary for Governor just six days away, both opponents of the Republican front-runner, Christine Todd Whitman, insisted today that their own soundings showed not only that they were in the race, but that they would win.
But the consensus among political professionals, poll takers and others following the campaign is that Mrs.
Whitman has a lead that probably cannot be overcome by June 8, although the race is tightening.


Sihanouk Seeking Settlement By Government and Royalists
As election returns showed the Government apparently headed for a defeat, Prince Norodom Sihanouk tried to broker a settlement between the Government and the royalist opposition party that would prevent the Government from using force to hold onto power, United Nations officials said today.
So far, the two sides have not agreed to meet.


A Lift for Tax-Exempt Municipals
The improved outlook for President Clinton's deficit reduction plan appears to be giving a lift to the tax-exempt municipal bond market.
Analysts said yesterday that the increase in income tax rates under the plan would make tax-exempt bonds more attractive.
"Frankly, were having a busy day," said said Terry Tracy, the national sales and marketing manager for municipal bonds at Lehman Brothers.
"It certainly helps," he added, referring to the talk of compromise on both the President's proposed spending cuts and his energy tax, which could lead to approval in the Senate, where the economic plan had been expected to face difficult sledding.


Frederick Glass, 79, Transportation Official, Dies
Frederick M. Glass, a former transportation industry executive, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 79.
He died of cancer, said a family friend, Margie Gewirtz.


Television Infomercial Products are Beginning to Show Up on Some Well-Known Store Shelves.
SO you thought you could avoid "miracle" products like car waxes and Cher's cosmetics peddled via infomercials by turning off -- or tossing out -- your television set.
Well, the same products being hawked on those program-length commercials are now showing up on store shelves.
When infomercials were spawned in the 1980's, they were envisioned as a new form of selling to appeal to people who could not, or would not, shop at stores -- a kind of combination 21st-century Sears, Roebuck catalogue and cure for mall fatigue.


Yaakov Friedman, 95, Rabbi Emeritus, Dies
Rabbi Yaakov Yosef Friedman, the founder and former spiritual leader of the Garment Center Synagogue in Manhattan, died on May 25 at the Aishel Avraham nursing home in Williamsburg, Brooklyn.
He was 95.
Rabbi Friedman lived for 50 years in Washington Heights in Manhattan.


No Headline
"It's like the stock market. The difference is you get your results immediately. And you can't get emotionally involved in securities. I mean, it is fun. Buy 100 shares of G.M. and there's no opening night party." -- ROGER BERLIND, a Broadway producer and investor.  [ C16:2. ]


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.07
3.33
3.82
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.08
3.69
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.18
3.22
3.83
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.64
5.67
6.97
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.87
6.88
7.86
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.80
7.82
8.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.87
5.88
6.64
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Allstate's Share Price Is Set at $27
In the first stage of the biggest American initial public stock offering ever, the Allstate Corporation yesterday raised more than $2.1 billion with the sale of 78.5 million shares.
Wall Street underwriters who bought the shares said that the price in the public sale today would be $27 a share.
The offering of nearly 20 percent of the Allstate Insurance Company by Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, Allstate's parent, is part of a plan by Sears to leave the financial services business, concentrate on retailing, and cut its debt by $3 billion.


U.S. and South Africa In Different Leagues
To the Editor:
In "Blurred Vision on Health Reform" (editorial, May 17), you repeat the canard that the United States is "the only industrialized country, other than South Africa, that does not provide medical insurance as a right of citizenship."
It is wrong to compare the two countries.
South Africa is a developing country with a per capita income closer to those of Brazil and Mexico, two countries whose social welfare systems are never compared with ours.
South Africa's first-world cities, like those of Brazil, are surrounded by shantytowns.
I believe the mistaken classification of South Africa had roots in past efforts by apartheid rulers to proclaim their country an anti-Communist bulwark and defender of Western values.


Speed and Intrigue Mark Final Workouts for Belmont
One and a half miles.
Once around Belmont Park, the longest race track in North America.
It is a distance farther than any 3-year-old horse has raced, and yet 14 or 15 of them will race that far on Saturday in the 125th running of the Belmont Stakes, the third and most demanding event in the Triple Crown series.
In the swirl of traffic on the main track early yesterday, a track crammed with famous horses booked into the Belmont or the half-dozen other stakes that will festoon this weekend's racing in New York, the chief topic was distance.


URS Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


McGwire's Foot Placed in a Cast
MARK McGWIRE, bothered by persistent soreness from a bruise in his left heel, had the foot placed in a cast yesterday in hopes of speeding recovery.
The Oakland Athletics slugger suffered the injury May 3 while sliding into third base during a game against the New York Yankees.
He was placed on the disabled list two weeks later. (AP)


Knogo Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Stocks Edge Up as Dow Nears a Record
The stock market rose modestly yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average coming tantalizingly close to another record.
The Dow ended at 3,553.45, up 1.11 points.
That is only 1.38 points away from breaking last Thursday's all-time high.
Most other major market indexes were also slightly higher in heavy trading.


Restructuring Report Getting to the Wire Late
The long-awaited report on restructuring horse racing in New York State will be delayed a few days because some members of the study commission apparently disagree with the proposals being submitted to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
The report was supposed to have been sent to the Governor yesterday and released to the public today, two days before the 125th running of the Belmont Stakes, the landmark event during what is annually New York's biggest week of racing.
But Steve Villano, vice president of the Governor's Commission on Racing in the 21st Century, said yesterday that "Some members want more time to review it and discuss it."


Whose Dream House?
To The Home Section:
Your May 13 article entitled "Architect to Client: 'Let's Work Together' " by Barbara Flanagan resounds with the spirit of joyous teamwork.
You lead the reader to believe that by eliminating the costs of change orders, ponderous specifications "down to the nails," etc., that a dream house can be built on a relative shoestring.


Mostly Stunts and Games in Chicago
The 48th Consumer Electronics Show does not officially open here until Thursday, but things got off to a ragged start today with a spontaneous display of consumer greed.
Nintendo, the Japanese king of home video games, staged a publicity stunt that degenerated into a scramble for what onlookers thought were free copies of the popular Super Mario game.


Review/Pop; Show-Business Ritual Celebrated by 2 Stars
Although one is American and the other French, Liza Minnelli and Charles Aznavour are deeply simpatico.
Both are experienced troupers in an old-time music-hall tradition in which the solo performer is a pure, all-around entertainer.
Emotions are larger than life, sentiment runs rampant and behavior that can seem like shameless self-congratulation can also be seen as a show-business ritual in which the star becomes a symbolic lightning rod for a collective celebration of life.
In "Minnelli/Aznavour," which opened a six-performance engagement at Carnegie Hall on Tuesday evening, the two performers share a 17-piece orchestra.
During the first half of the show, they appear together for one number, after which Ms.
Minnelli takes over the stage.
The first two-thirds of the second act belong to Mr.
Aznavour.
For the finale, they reunite for an extended medley of mostly American popular standards.


Terex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Empire Blue Cross Has to Begin Healing Itself
To the Editor:
Re "Rehabilitating Empire Blue Cross" (editorial May 24): I would like to point out that New York State's health insurance playing field was recently leveled.
Last year the Legislature recognized the dire situation at Empire Blue Cross and passed community rating legislation that became effective April 1.
Now every health insurance company in New York State that sells individual and small group policies is required to set its premiums by geographic regions and not discriminate by basing rates on the health of the policyholder or small group.
This change should help stabilize all health insurance premiums in this market.
However, realistically it will be at least a year before we can accurately analyze its effect.


Graphic Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


In Yugoslavia, a Backlash Is Stinging Serbia's Leader
The politics of Yugoslavia sharpened today when the rule of President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia was attacked as totalitarian by political opponents high and low.
At the same time, after a night of violent anti-Government demonstrations in which a police officer was killed and 32 people were injured, riot police maintained a conspicuous presence on the streets of the capital.
With the country's foremost opposition leader still in custody after being beaten by police truncheons, the police were wary about more trouble.
An Unusual Challenge
The level of public criticism directed at Mr.
Milosevic was exceptional; his control of the instruments of power is usually unchallenged.
For six months, as the country fell under punishing sanctions and pursued a foreign policy that alienated most of the world, his opponents lay low as he used his position of President of the Serbian republic to dominate Yugoslavia.
Of the original six republics, Serbia and Montenegro are the last ones left in the Yugoslav federation.


Johnny Mize, Home Run Slugger And Hall of Famer, Is Dead at 80
Johnny Mize, the hulking Hall of Fame first baseman who moved with feline grace and carried a very big stick during 15 major league seasons in St.
Louis and New York in the 1930's, 40's and 50's, died in his sleep yesterday at his home in Demorest, Ga.
He was 80.
The cause of death was cardiac arrest, according to the McGahee-Griffen Funeral Home in Demorest.


Westwood Corp. (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.N. Official Warns of Tensions More Threatening Than Bosnia's
The deputy head of United Nations forces in the Balkans said today that ethnic strife in the Kosovo region of southern Serbia and in Croatia were potentially more dangerous than the current fighting in Bosnia.
The official, Cedric Thornberry, the top civilian executive in charge of 25,210 United Nations personnel stationed throughout countries that used to be republics of Yugoslavia, said the conflict in Bosnia and Herzegovina was "a confusing image of general mayhem with the danger of descent into anarchy in many areas."


STUDY QUESTIONS BREAST REMOVAL
Women with a common type of very early breast cancer, called intraductal carcinoma, or ductal carcinoma in-situ, are often treated with full mastectomy even as surgeons are moving to less extensive surgery for more advanced tumors.
It is a paradox that has perturbed surgeons and breast cancer patients alike.
Now the first large scientific study of these tiny, noninvasive tumors has found they can often be cured with surgical removal of the lump and radiation therapy.
"We wanted to see if we could eliminate the need for mastectomy in such patients," said Dr.
Bernard Fisher, a professor of surgery at the University of Pittsburgh, and the lead author of the study, which is published in today's issue of The New England Journal of Medicine.
"And the bottom line based on these results is that lumpectomy plus radiation for women with ductal carcinoma in situ is an acceptable strategy." Of 319 women with this type of cancer treated with lumpectomy and radiation as part of this study, only 10 percent had a recurrence within four years, and only 3 percent had a serious cancer.


Walter E. Mac Donald, A Mobil Executive, 67
Walter E. Mac Donald, a former vice president and director of the Mobil Corporation, died on Saturday at his home in New Canaan, Conn.
He was 67.
The cause was cardiac arrest, his family said.


B&amp;H Maritime Carriers reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Advocating Vigorous Action on Clean Water
Water has seldom been an issue in New York City in this century, but as the city squares off with Washington over whether a multibillion-dollar filtration plant is needed, environmentalists are working to make clean water as politically urgent as crime or taxes.
The Federal Environmental Protection Agency wants New York City to filter its water, as all other major American cities do, but the plant would cost up to $8 billion to build and $300 million a year to operate, forcing sharp increases in water rates.
The city has won a reprieve with a promise to protect its 2,000-square-mile watershed upstate, by committing $47 million this year for buying property, among other actions.
Forestalling Filtration
But the environmentalists want the city to take more vigorous action to forestall filtration.
They plan an eight-mile Walk for Water on Saturday, part fund-raiser and part protest, at Croton Gorge Park in Ossining.
Lewis Rudin, the real-estate developer, has helped charter a Metro-North commuter train that can carry 1,000 people from Grand Central Terminal to the Croton-Harmon station, near the reservoir.
Organizers say that the Port Imperial Ferry Service will send two boats, each with a capacity of 200 people, up the Hudson from a pier at West 38th Street in Manhattan.


New Video Previewed By Makers
Viacom International and A.T.&amp; T.  provided details yesterday of their plan to market-test new technology to deliver movies, video games and shopping services on demand over cable-television networks.
At a news conference in Manhattan, representatives of the two companies also demonstrated what television programming might look like over such a system.


Young Organizers Lead Labor's Push
Ingrid Nava is a little rabble-rouser in tennis shoes.
She is 5-foot-2, 25 years old and a former student leader at Stanford University.
She lugs a woven shoulder bag stuffed with notebooks, handbills and her pager.
At 8 A.M. six days a week, she sets off from her Long Beach apartment, driving her second-hand Honda Civic to Bellflower, a few miles to the north.
Ms.
Nava is a labor union organizer, working at the Kaiser Permanente hospital in Bellflower.
A few days ago, she distributed stickers the size of playing cards for hospital employees to wear on their smocks.
They depicted a tombstone inscribed, "Short staffing is hazardous to your health."


U.S. and North Koreans Discuss Nuclear Dispute
The United States began a last-ditch effort yesterday to persuade North Korea to ease a dispute over nuclear weapons by reversing its decision to withdraw from the treaty to halt their spread.
But a United States diplomat said his delegation had not made "any significant progress" during seven hours of talks in New York with its North Korean counterpart.
Another meeting is scheduled for tomorrow.


Labor Dispute May Disrupt A Tournament
Less than a week before the Westchester Country Club welcomes some of the world's greatest golfers under the glare of a national television audience, a group of 65 striking kitchen and dining-room employees is threatening to disrupt the tournament unless its nine-month-old dispute with the club can be settled.
The dispute -- in which the two sides have disagreed over wage increases, overtime scheduling, and health and pension benefits -- was heightened this morning when Westchester County authorities evicted 17 striking workers from the dormitory rooms that the club had provided them as part of their jobs.
The workers had received the court-ordered eviction notices last week and most had already moved in with friends or other strikers by the time the authorities arrived.


Lee Coffey, Executive And Philanthropist, 93
Lee Coffey, an insurance company executive and philanthropist, died on Monday at Mount Sinai Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 93.
Mr. Coffey, who lived in Manhattan, died of a stroke, a spokesman for the family said.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about camels that were being led through Cairo to a slaughterhouse referred incorrectly in some editions to the Muslim holy day of Id al-Adha.
It is the Feast of the Sacrifice, marking the sparing of the life of Abraham's son Isaac.
The end of the penitential month of Ramadan, Id al-Fitr, was celebrated in March.


Huge Drug Tunnel From Mexico Into U.S. Is Found
While searching for the killers of a Mexican cardinal who was gunned down in Guadalajara last week, Mexican police discovered an elaborate cocaine-smuggling tunnel that was being dug under the Mexican border leading into Southern California.
The tunnel, about four feet wide and high enough for an average man to stand erect, was lighted, ventilated by air-conditioning units and reinforced with timbers and concrete, Mexican and American drug enforcement officials said yesterday.





Airship International Ltd. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


A Mini-Van Revival at Renault
A decade ago, the large French industrial companyMatra came up with a plan for a mini-van and offered it to the auto maker Peugeot.
For Peugeot, however, the concept was too bizarre in a European market still convinced that people rode in cars not in vans.
But Renault promptly stepped in and started production of the first European mini-van, the Espace.
For Renault, it was not a time for big risks.
It was piling up enormous losses -- 12.1 billion francs in 1984 alone -- and many analysts believed the state-owned auto maker would be the first casualty of a chronically overcrowded European car market.
A Remarkable Success
"The place looked more like an employment agency than a business enterprise," said Karl Ludwigsen, a former executive at Ford who is now an auto industry analyst.


Tougher Odds On Broadway: A special report.; Make Money on Broadway? Break a Leg
On May 1 "The Will Rogers Follies" celebrated its second anniversary on Broadway.
Only 4 of the 19 productions now running have been on Broadway longer.
The show, winner of the 1991 Tony Award for best musical, still regularly fills three-fourths of the 1,420 available seats in the Palace Theater and on one recent week brought in more than $425,000.
A smash hit, yes? The investors are rolling in profits, right?
Well, no.
"Will Rogers" is likely to close, this year or early next, without recouping the $7.5 million it cost to put on.
In fact, it hasn't even come close: one major investor estimated recently that after two years he had gotten back not quite 60 percent of his money.
Joy With a 'But' Clause
This weekend, as Broadway indulges in its annual self-salute and presents the Tony Awards on national television, there is much to celebrate.
More than 7.5 million people spent over $300 million on Broadway tickets in the season just ended, both figures topping those of the Great White Way's much-ballyhooed revival of a year ago.
And half a dozen shows are already announced for October and November, indicating a reversal of the recent fallow-fall syndrome.
Seemingly, by some standards anyway, Broadway has turned off the downward economic path it traced through the 1980's.


St. Petersburg Is Fearful That Its Golden Hopes Will Trample on Its Glories
The people at the St.
Petersburg Inspectorate for the Preservation of Monuments have mixed feelings about what is going on these days at the Yusupov Palace, a mansion on the Moika Canal where Grigory Rasputin, the Siberian monk who wielded a sinister influence over the family of the last czar, met a grisly end in December 1916.
Once the exclusive preserve of the Trade Union of Education Workers, the mansion in the last two years has opened its doors wide to the public -- maybe too wide, some say.
Tour groups tramp through the basement, where the famous murder took place, while upstairs elegant rooms, recently restored, are made available for concerts and private parties, including a New Year's Eve gala organized by NeimanMarcus, the Texas-based department store.


Cesar Chavez Is Remembered


C. S. Witkowski, 86, Jersey City Ex-Mayor
Charles S. Witkowski, a New Jersey lawyer for 60 years and former Mayor of Jersey City, died on Tuesday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
A lifelong Jersey City resident, he was 86.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.
In the convoluted politics of his traditionally Democratic city, Mr.
Witkowski aligned himself with the independents, who did battle with the party machine every election year.


Review/Ballet; Choreographer of the Past Breathes Again
Such are the vagaries of esthetic fashion that Leonide Massine, ballet's dominant choreographer in the 1930's and 40's, is best remembered by the public at large as the shoemaker in the ballet film "The Red Shoes."
Yet Massine, long an international star as a dancer, was a genuine innovator; few works caused more of an uproar than the cycle of grandiose "symphonic ballets" he choreographed, usually with allegorical themes, to the symphonies of major composers.
The first of these, "Les Presages" ("Portents"), was created in 1933 for Colonel de Basil's Ballets Russes to Tchaikovsky's Fifth Symphony.
Massine took the composer's own programmatic idea of man's battle with fate and expanded it into a full-blown image of an everyman's search for happiness and triumph in war.


BRITISH WILL BUY 20% STAKE IN MCI IN BIG U.S. FORAY
In the biggest foray yet by a foreign communications company into the United States long-distance business, British Telecommunications P.L.C. announced today that it would buy one-fifth of MCI Communications for $4.3 billion and form an alliance to provide global networks for multinational corporations.
The pact reflects the urgency with which the world's biggest telephone companies are rearranging themselves into new alliances so they can better compete for corporate customers.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  NO PRISON FOR WINNIE MANDELA  South Africa's highest appeals court upheld Winnie Mandela's conviction for the kidnapping of four black youths, but said she would not go to prison for her role in a crime that opened deep wounds in the anti-apartheid movement.
A1  GUATEMALAN IN EL SALVADOR  News analysis: When President Jorge Serrano Elias startled Guatemalans last week with the announcement that he was dissolving the Congress and suspending the Constitution, his seizure of power seemed to have been accomplished at a stroke.
The military backed his actions.
The President has now fled to El Salvador, this time after the army ousted him.
A3


The Nature Spirits Amid the Concrete
IT'S bizarre, when you think about it.
That here we are on Earth, and there's hardly any earth left to garden on.
"I had to buy soil to put down here," Peter Nieves said last Sunday, standing on a piece of land as hard as concrete on the east side of Avenue C, between 9th and 10th streets, in the East Village.


Bulls Defeat Knicks In a Tense Game 5
Defying the home court advantage, the Chicago Bulls beat the Knicks, 97-94, at Madison Square Garden last night to take a 3-2 lead in their four-of-seven game National Basketball Association playoff series.
Unless the Knicks can return the insult at Chicago Stadium tomorrow night, the Bulls will clinch the series and set their sights on a third straight championship.


Well, the Romans Probably Improvised, Too
DISASTER is often the mother of invention.
Ask Adam Cvijanovic, a Brooklyn artist who was hired to make a mosaic in a dome in the SoHo loft of Henry Buhl, an investment banker who founded the SoHo Partnership, a nonprofit jobs organization for the homeless.
Judith Stockman and Gay Matthaei, Manhattan interior designers, transformed the space into an Italian Renaissance villa.
But a real mosaic would have been too time-consuming.
So Mr.
Cvijanovic (pronounced svee-YAHN-o-vich) applied a mixture of blue and pale yellow paint and plaster, then scored it into square "tiles." Alas, the tiles fell in a dusty shower.
"They were too thin, too small," the artist said.


Ogilvy &amp; Mather Plans a Shift
Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide said yesterday that it would combine oversight of its Houston office, with billings last year of $98 million, and its Atlanta office, with billings last year of $43 million, into a unit called O.&amp; M. South, to be supervised from Atlanta.
Simultaneous with the change, Jim Hine, 54, who has been managing director at Ogilvy Houston, will leave to pursue what the agency described in a statement as "an exciting entrepreneurial opportunity with a client prospect." His position will be abolished, and Ross LeFevre, 53, who had been a senior vice president and group management director, will be promoted to the new position of general manager at Ogilvy Houston.


CHRONICLE
It can be risky business to assemble those lists of, say, "the best dressed" or "the richest" or "the most beautiful" people in the world.
But that didn't deter MILTON ESTEROW, editor and publisher of Artnews, from having a team of editors and correspondents do a survey of top achievers in the art world.
The result, an article and series of short profiles titled "The 50: The Art World's Most Powerful People" is in the magazine's summer issue.


House Tour Shows Diversity of Harlem's Soul
IN 1980, Helen Murray, a nurse anesthesiologist and divorced mother of two, returned to Harlem.
She paid $15,000 for a dilapidated brownstone in the neighborhood where she was born but that she fled in 1949 -- moving first to Riverside Drive and 158th Street and later to Roosevelt Island.
When she showed her new house to her daughter, Georgia, then 15 and a student at the Northfield Mount Hermon School, a boarding school in Northfield, Mass., the girl was shocked.
"I cried for weeks," Ms.
Murray said.
"In the media, the images of Harlem were of violence, of deprivation, of poverty. There was very rarely coverage of the community that remains in Harlem. I was frightened."


Accounts
*
Remy Amerique, New York, to the World's Smallest Ad Agency, Weston, Conn., to handle the account of Mount Gay Rum, which was among several Remy brands previously at Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss, New York.
An outdoor and print campaign is expected to begin soon.
Billings were not disclosed.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Flowers in Shade  Q.  I would like to grow flowers, other than impatiens, in my shady backyard.
What do you suggest? -- William J. Conklin, New York.
A.
Sooner or later, every gardener must confront shade, which varies with the season, time of day and source.
The dappled rays in a woodland glen, for example, do not compare with the unforgiving shadows of a tall building.


Embracing Urban Life Only to Meet With Death
The turquoise mountain bike perfectly blended two of Allyn Winslow's many passions.
He loved to exercise, and he loved Prospect Park.
In the two months between the day he bought the bike and the day he was killed for having it, Mr.
Winslow logged hundreds of miles on his prized possession, many of them around the wooded knoll known as Quaker Hill.
It was a special place for Mr.
Winslow.
He and his wife visited it often, picnicking there with their two children or taking quiet walks alone.


Magna International reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


In Albany, Dinkins's Fiscal Gantlet; Mayor Faces Stumbling Blocks From Allies and the G.O.P.
In the delicate dance that every New York City mayor performs when seeking state aid, Mayor David N. Dinkins has rarely been mistaken for Fred Astaire.
He has been criticized for not comprehending the Kremlinesque intrigue of Statehouse politics, for not lobbying state legislators enough, for crying wolf.
But this is a year Mr.
Dinkins seems destined to stumble despite his best efforts, as he seeks $280 million in state aid to help close a $500 million budget gap.
His allies seem weaker, his opponents more determined and the independents more complacent than usual.
Trouble Across the Divide
For Democrats, the problem is largely the state's tight budget.
Behind public talk about supporting Mr.
Dinkins, there is much private hand wringing about a sluggish economy that has left them few resources for a bailout and many excuses for whittling down the city's plan.


Jurors Decide for Psychoanalyst But Split on Award in Libel Case
The jurors in a $7.5 million libel suit brought by Jeffrey M. Masson against Janet Malcolm and The New Yorker magazine have decided in the plaintiff's favor but told the judge today that they were deadlocked on damages.
The jurors revealed their findings late on the third day of deliberations, in a message to Judge Eugene F. Lynch of Federal District Court here.
They said they had reached unanimous decisions on all the questions except the amount of damages.
Under the judge's instructions, they had to decide that Mr.
Masson was libeled before moving on to consider damages.
No Final Verdict
The jury's unusual message means there has been no final verdict in the closely watched case, which could still end in a mistrial, and the judge asked the panel of seven women and one man to return in the morning and continue their deliberations.


At the Bar; A New York lawyer says his plan for greener pastures turn up weeds of anti-Semitism.
To the writer Alfred Kazin, "New York Jew" was a fitting title for an autobiography.
To a lawyer named Mitchell Mass, it became an epithet that tore his life asunder.
Mr.
Mass is a Jewish lawyer in New York.
Indeed, while he has been a largely lapsed Reform Jew, he is an orthodox New Yorker: born in Brooklyn, reared in Queens, living in Manhattan, sending two children to the Bronx High School of Science.
He and his wife cling to their rent-stabilized apartment, pick up reading tips from their favorite bookseller (Dot at Burlington Books), journey to Zabar's weekly for low-fat cheese and higher-fat knishes.


Harcourt General Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Four Manhattan Agencies Accused of Bilking Travelers
The New York City Department of Consumer Affairs charged four Manhattan-based travel agencies yesterday with deceptive trade practices that bilked more than 100 customers of thousands of dollars.
The accusations come as a number of states are looking at whether to license or regulate travel agencies, and less than two months after Florida passed a law that will require agencies in business three years or less to be registered and bonded.


Day Care Is a Big Concern to Them


Treasury Prices Just a Bit Higher
Treasury prices were only marginally higher yesterday as the bond market awaited today's employment report for May.
The price of the 30-year bond was up 6/32 point, to 10312/32 , as the yield fell to 6.86 percent, from 6.87 percent Wednesday and the lowest it has been since May 12.


A Shortage of Lawyers to Help the Condemned
Overwhelmed by a surge of death sentences and a desperate shortage of money to pay for experienced legal counsel, the small band of lawyers who represent condemned inmates in their final appeals is turning to law firms in distant states for volunteers.
And they say even that well is running dry.
In California, nearly a third of the more than 350 inmates on death row do not have lawyers, according to a public-interest law firm charged with handling their appeals.
In Texas, 48 of the 376 inmates on death row are without representation.


Genovese Drug Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 21


Diner's Journal
Daniel in the Mainstream
Is the new Manhattan restaurant Daniel merely Le Cirque without Sirio?
Well, no and yes.
When Daniel Boulud left his mentor, Sirio Maccioni, owner of Le Cirque, last year to open his own place, fans of his astonishingly diversified French cooking wondered where his talents would lead next.
Would he paddle down some exotic tributary the way Jean-Georges Vongerichten of Jo-Jo did when he opened Vong?
Would he embrace some neglected regional French cuisine?
As a recent visit to Daniel reveals, Mr.
Boulud did no such thing.
Daniel, on East 76th Street near Fifth Avenue, offers the kind of technically impeccable, labor-intensive French cooking that made Mr.
Boulud a star at Le Cirque.
People looking for innovation may be disappointed; those looking for world-class French fare will not be.


John J. Morrissey, 66, Advertising Executive
John J. Morrissey, a retired Detroit advertising and marketing executive, died Monday at his winter home in Maui, Hawaii.
He was 66 and lived in Bloomfield Village, Mich.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


Sounds Around Town
Jeff Harnar on Hollywood
Jeff Harnar, "Dancing in the Dark: Vincente Minnelli's Hollywood," the Oak Room at the Algonquin Hotel, 59 West 44th Street, Manhattan, (212) 840-6800.
In a show that is a model of its type, Jeff Harnar pays tribute to the celebrated movie director by blending biographical anecdotes with astutely chosen songs from the 14 movie musicals Minnelli directed.
A smooth pop baritone who suggests a hybrid of Larry Kert and Johnny Mathis, Mr.
Harnar hits a peak in a rock-and-roll-flavored medley of songs with celestial themes.
Show time is 9:30 tonight and tomorrow.
At the club's 11:30 P.M. late shows, Mr.
Harnar is also performing his equally delightful program "The 1959 Broadway Songbook." For each show there is a $25 music charge and a $10 food-and-drink minimum.
The Three Faces of Betty
Betty, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Chelsea, (212) 244-3005.
A musical-comedy trio featuring Alyson Palmer and the sisters Amy and Bitzy Ziff, Betty is as smart and funny as it is stylistically uncategorizable.
Short sketches, commentary and news media satire with a feminist slant are blended with original songs into a continuous stream of music and talk.
The musical elements include cello, train whistle, bass and electric keyboard.
Performance art meets cabaret meets rock with a hint of funk.
Show times are tonight and tomorrow at 9 and 11:15, and tickets are $25 and $20.


Gunman Kills A Detective In Courthouse
Eluding elaborate security measures, a gunman apparently bent on vengeance made his way to the 11th floor of the Essex County Court Building here today and fatally shot a Newark police detective in the back of the head.
The detective, John Sczyrek, 30, of Belleville, had been returning to the courtroom to testify as a key witness in the drug trial of a relative of the gunman, officials said.


Jack Priestly Is Dead; Cinematographer, 66
Jack Priestly, an award-winning cinematographer who worked in television and film, died on May 26 at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 66.
Mr.
Priestly was born in Richmond Hill, Queens, on July 27, 1926, and began his career as a camera assistant.
His work in television won him many awards, including two Emmys as director of photography for the series "Naked City." He also received Emmy nominations for "East Side, West Side" and "The Trials of Rosie O'Neill."


In Israel, Peace Builds a Consensus
To the Editor:
It is uncommon for more than two days to pass without seeing an article in your newspaper reporting deaths or injuries to Palestinians in the Gaza Strip.
Occasionally, your reports include Jews in Israel who have been stabbed as well.
These are usually factual matters, not open to dispute, except to determine whether the actions of the Palestinians were sufficient to justify a lethal response from the Israeli Army, or if the Israeli Army exceeded reasonable boundaries in using deadly force.


Jordan Ran Up Golf Debts, Book Says
A short night and a plane trip removed from the emotional finish of their Game 5 victory over the Knicks in the Eastern Conference finals, the Chicago Bulls were coping today with yet another series of allegations involving Michael Jordan's gambling habits.
In a book co-written and published by a self-described compulsive gambler and friend of Jordan, the league's three-time most valuable player is reportedly paying off a golf debt of $300,000 that once rose as high as $1.25 million.


The Art Market
Tale of 2 Cities
Many of the late 19th- and early-20th-century masterpieces by such artists as Matisse, Cezanne, van Gogh, Redon and Picasso that are in the Cone Collection, the jewel in the Baltimore Museum of Art's crown since 1949, are traveling to the Museum of Fine Arts in Houston.
Perfect timing made the loan possible.
Originally, the collection was to be dismantled and placed in storage while the Baltimore Museum completed its new $7.5 million west wing.
"While we like to think that everyone will come to Baltimore to see the Cone Collection, we realize it's just not possible," said Arnold L. Lehman, the director of the Baltimore Museum.
"Sending it to Houston is a wonderful opportunity to give a wider audience a chance to see the collection."


Animal Laboratory Evacuated After Power Loss
Scientists were evacuated from a building at the Plum Island Animal Disease Center on Wednesday morning after a brief power failure triggered a release of toxic formaldehyde gas.
Today, officials of the Long Island Lighting Company said that the power failure was caused by an osprey nest atop a transmission line pole.


Let's Introduce Some Common Sense Into Our Drug Policies
To the Editor:
Some drug legalization proponents suggest that anyone who opposes legalization must support all the foolish and ineffective drug-war policies pursued by the last two administrations: eradication of foreign drug crops, massive spending to interdict drug smuggling and draconian sentences for minor-league drug dealers.
It is strange to find A. M. Rosenthal in "Dismantling the War" (column, May 18) using the same twisted logic to argue that anyone, even the Attorney General, who opposes foolish and ineffective drug-war policies must support drug legalization.
Not so.


Raiders to Rocket: Let's Talk
Toronto Argonauts receiver RAGHIB (ROCKET) ISMAIL will be in California this weekend to meet with Los Angeles Raiders' officials and work out for the team's coaching staff.
"We haven't talked about a specific amount or the number of years," said BOB WOOLF, Ismail's agent.
"But if they like him and they put forth an offer that I like, then anything is possible."


Market Place; Thermo Electron bucks the slow growth in environment services.
THE recent recession proved that the environmental services industry is not recession proof.
In a downturn, companies with environmental liabilities can find ways to procrastinate before hiring someone to clean up their mess, even though the cleanup may be dictated by government regulation.
According to the Environmental Business Journal, a newsletter that reports on the industry, revenue growth last year was 3.9 percent, an improvement over the 2.1 percent rate of 1991, but well below the double-digit growth of the mid- to late-1980's.


Reviews/Film; A Former Child Star Managing Stars-to-Be
The lullaby of Broadway wafts helpfully through "Life With Mikey," elevating this film's pat premise to a more sophisticated realm.
Though "Life With Mikey" has the setup of a sitcom, it also has the director James Lapine, who brings with him a theatrical sparkle this material would otherwise lack.
So the film is enlivened by Broadway cameos and humorous audition scenes, touches that come more naturally to Mr.
Lapine than the story's hackneyed elements do.
The breezy, lightweight "Life with Mikey" would have benefited from much more of the same.
This film's not-so-secret weapon is Michael J. Fox, who works tirelessly to keep the comedy afloat even when its sentimental side begins to show.
Mr.
Fox plays Michael Chapman, a former child star whose glory days live mostly in his own memory, though he is occasionally invited to help open a fast-food restaurant in honor of his television past (on the "Leave It to Beaver"-type sitcom for which the film is named).
"I just started to hate the superficiality of the whole scene," he says unconvincingly, to explain why his performing career skidded to a halt.
"I'm an agent now."


Oilers to Marshall: No Deal
Houston called off a trade for Washington Redskins linebacker WILBER MARSHALL after the Oilers apparently agreed to a contract with the Pro Bowler.
"We've decided that we don't want to pursue the trade because we don't want to give the Redskins a first- and fifth-round draft choice for him," said an Oilers spokesman, CHIP NAMIAS.


Dinkins Plans More Cuts To Fill $280 Million Gap
All but giving up hope that New York City would receive much of the state and Federal aid they had been seeking, senior aides to Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday presented their most dire view yet of the city's fiscal condition.
They said they would now be forced to cut city spending by $280 million in the next fiscal year, including scaling back by half the 8,000 workers they had planned to hire.
The spending plan that Mr.
Dinkins presented last month called for a net increase of 1,500 workers during the next year; officials now expect to shrink the work force.


Coach Names Squad for U.S. Cup '93
Bora Milutinovic, head coach of the United States national soccer team, named eight European-based players yesterday to his 22-man roster for the United States Cup '93 tournament, which begins Sunday in New Haven.
Four of the eight players -- Thomas Dooley, Tab Ramos, Frank Klopas and Eric Wynalda -- will miss the opener at the Yale Bowl against Brazil because of previous commitments.
They will join the team in time for matches against Germany and England.


Reviews/ Film; The Good, the Bad And the Beautiful
In "Guilty as Sin," a strange thing happens to Don Johnson when he's called upon to play a slick, handsome operator who is irresistible to women.
In theory, this role shouldn't really have been much of a stretch.
But Mr.
Johnson somehow feels obliged to act most broadly when trying to be charming, which puts this courtroom drama at a needless disadvantage.
It takes a while to figure out who Mr.
Johnson's David Greenhill is supposed to be and where Sidney Lumet's latest film is headed.
David is first seen sizing up Jennifer Haines (Rebecca De Mornay), a famous Chicago trial lawyer with a real flair for sashaying past the jury.
The film tries to make a case for Jennifer's legal brilliance.
But it discredits itself with a post-verdict scene in which she marches to her boyfriend's office, rips off her dress and crows, "Is there anything better than winning?"


With Aid, U.S. Seeks to Sway Ukraine on A-Arms
Reversing a strategy of using diplomatic pressure to persuade Ukraine to give up its nuclear weapons, the Clinton Administration is now trying to woo Kiev with promises of cooperation and economic support.
Les Aspin is to meet with Ukrainian officials in Kiev on Sunday, marking the first time that an American Defense Secretary will visit the capital.
His visit follows one by Strobe Talbott, the United States Ambassador at Large to the former Soviet republics.


Recipe for Diamond
Scientists at Penn State have found a way to whip up diamond, the hardest material on earth, by heating a plastic material in a conventional oven.
The resulting low-grade material might afford a cheap way to coat large objects like airplane windshields with scratch-proof surfaces.
Article, page A14.


Builder of Parade Floats Puts World on Wheels
IF IT'S Friday, this must be Bob DeVito's garage, where the parade floats go when they are not rolling along some avenue somewhere.
Memorial Day, Wayne, N.J.
Tomorrow, Montclair, N.J.
Sunday, the Bronx.
Next week, Fifth Avenue.
Mr.
DeVito's garage, on a long street of warehouses and old factories, is like a back lot in Hollywood, but on wheels.
Somewhere in this Styrofoam-and-papier-mache fantasy land, he's got the whole world on a float.
New York to Moscow?
It only takes a few seconds when the ocean is globs of blue paint.


Draft Starts at Short, Then Stops on Mound
Major league clubs, reflecting the thirst for pitching that always abounds in an expansion year, drafted pitching, pitching and more pitching yesterday in the first round of the 1993 free agent amateur draft.
Still, when it came to making the No. 1 choice, the Seattle Mariners, a club noted for developing talented young arms, went against the trend.
The American League team instead chose one of the most highly touted position players to emerge from high school in years.
The choice was Alex Rodriguez, a 17-year-old shortstop out of Westminster Christian High School in Miami.
Rodriguez is a 6-foot-3-inch, 190-pound right-handed hitter who is noted for both his power and speed.
He batted .505 this season, hit 14 doubles, 9 home runs and stole 35 bases.


Guatemala Army Names Vice President as Leader
Amid signs that the military has again taken control of Guatemala's chaotic political situation, the Government announced today that the Vice President, who was supposed to have resigned when President Jorge Serrano Elias was overthrown, was taking over as the country's new leader.
The Vice President, Gustavo Espina Salguero, had still not been sworn in as President tonight, and it is not clear that he has the necessary political support to be ratified by Congress.


Clinton Abandons His Nominee For Rights Post Amid Opposition
President Clinton tonight withdrew his nomination of Lani Guinier to be the new civil rights chief in the Justice Department, saying that after belatedly reading her legal writings he decided he could not defend many of her views on bolstering the political power of blacks.
Mr.
Clinton, who met with Ms.
Guinier for nearly two hours at the White House before the announcement, conceded that he would not have nominated Ms.
Guinier if he had read her academic papers before he sent her name to the Senate.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Margaretten Financial Corp., Perth Amboy, N.J., is offering $150 million of 6 3/4 percent notes due in 2000 at 99.899 to yield 6.768 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The noncallable issue is rated Baa-3 by Moody's and BBB+ by S.&amp; P.


Jewels by Jordan. Polish By Albert.
NBC's obscene luck with the National Basketball Association continues.
The most profitable big-league network television package around keeps producing memorable games that find Michael Jordan and Charles Barkley playing at spectacular peaks in June, and New York and Chicago, the first- and third-largest TV markets, squaring off in their theaters of operations like Patton and Rommel.
Very little goes wrong on a telecast when Marv Albert is calling the game.
As always, he has maintained his objectivity despite a long Knicks association.
As usual, his vocal intensity (he's far more than a "Yes!" man) during the Knicks-Bulls series has added excitement to the games.


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday about the General Motors Corporation's leasing of used cars and trucks misstated the Chrysler Corporation's leasing strategy.
Chrysler does not offer leasing on used vehicles.
The article also misidentified a G.M. financing plan for car purchases.
The plan is known as Smartbuy.


Times Company Appoints 3 And Adds Managerial Panel
Appointments of three senior executives at The New York Times Company and the creation of a five-member management committee were announced yesterday by Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, the company's chairman and chief executive.
The committee will report for operations to Lance R. Primis, president and chief operating officer, and to Mr.
Sulzberger along with Mr.
Primis for planning, corporate development and other functions outside operations.


Financial Ad Agency Has New President
James Feeney, a managing partner and director of business development at Amil Gargano &amp; Partners of New York, has joined Albert Frank-Guenther Law of New York as president.
That position had been vacant since July, when Walter F. Guarino left the agency, which specializes in financial-service advertising, to join Poppe Tyson New Jersey in Morris Plains, N.J., as general manager.


Art in Review
Kerri Scharlin, Darren M. Brown  Dooley Le Cappellaine 252 Lafayette Street SoHo Through tomorrow
These two solo shows stress the continuing interest in context, in the world around and beyond the art object.
The work in Kerri Scharlin's show has been made by art students, who drew and sculptured from a nude model who was the artist herself.
Their treatments of her face and body attest to different degrees of talent and style. (The small clay sculptures are sometimes rather good.) But the main point here seems to be that it is the female model who occupies center stage.
A new kind of one-woman show.


People
*
Christopher Dean was named to the new position of executive creative director at Anderson &amp; Lembke, San Francisco.
He had been a senior art director at Hal Riney &amp; Partners, San Francisco. *
Ulises Cadilla, president and chief creative officer at Cadilla/ D.M.B.&amp; B., San Juan, P.R., will leave the agency to open a communications company.
His departure comes as D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles, New York, which owned a majority stake in the agency, increased its equity to 100 percent.


Uniflex Inc. (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Knicks Are Somber, Subdued, Shocked
The Knicks departed for Chicago today, perhaps headed for the end of their season.
To avoid elimination Friday night in Game 6 of the Eastern Conference finals, New York must somehow regroup quickly from its most devastating loss of the playoffs.
With Wednesday night's dramatic 97-94 victory, the Chicago Bulls moved a step closer toward winning a third consecutive National Basketball Association championship.
Meanwhile, the Knicks remained a team in shock today, shaken by losing such a crucial game during the final frustrating seconds.


R. Louise McManus, 97, Nursing Educator
R.
Louise McManus, a leader in nursing education who spent 36 years on the faculty of Teachers College of Columbia University, died on Saturday at a nursing home in Natick, Mass.
She was 97 and had lived in Manhattan before retiring to Massachusetts.
Her death came after a brief illness, the college reported.


Norton Simon, Businessman and Collector, Dies at 86
Norton Simon, the restless California industrialist who parlayed a bankrupt orange-juice bottling plant into a billion-dollar conglomerate and spent more than $100 million putting together one of the country's greatest private art collections, died Wednesday night at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 86.
The immediate cause of his death was respiratory failure, said his daughter-in-law, Judy Simon.
She said he had suffered for some years from Guillain- Barre syndrome, which is a paralyzing neurological disorder.


An agency executive's move speaks volumes about the growth of marketing in Spanish.
THE co-founder of one of the nation's largest agencies specializing in advertising aimed at Hispanic consumers is leaving to establish a company specializing in media services in Spanish-speaking countries.
Pedro Font, who with Joseph Vaamonde opened Font &amp; Vaamonde Advertising in 1979, has resigned as chairman and chief executive of the agency, which has offices in Chicago, Los Angeles, Miami, New York and San Antonio.
He departs after selling his 50 percent interest in the shop to Grey Advertising Inc., which had bought the other 50 percent from him in 1987.


Plastic Goes in the Oven and Diamond Comes Out
By cooking plastic in an ordinary oven, scientists at Pennsylvania State University seem to have achieved the chemical equivalent of making a silk purse out of a sow's ear: They have made a form of diamond.
Whether their instant diamond mix proves to have practical uses, the scientists believe they have hit upon a novel method for arranging the carbon atoms in a polymer that mimics the carbon structure of crystalline diamond.
When this polymer is cooked at a relatively low temperature, it is largely converted to diamond.


Bob Fitzsimmons, Personality on TV And the Radio, 53
Bob Fitzsimmons, a New York radio and television host known for his wry interviews with celebrity guests, died on Wednesday.
He was 53 and lived in Tarrytown, N.Y.
He collapsed at a Manhattan restaurant and was taken to Metropolitan Hospital, where he was pronounced dead, said his son Bob.


Public Smiles in a Tough Battle


Musty Academic Speculation or Blueprint for Political Action?
Historically, most law review articles are neither little noted nor long remembered, except by the professors who wrote them and the committees who control their futures.
But twice in six years, Presidential nominations have foundered over esoteric academic writings.
The articles written by Lani Guinier about the Voting Rights Act caused her political death.
In the failed nomination of Robert H. Bork to the Supreme Court, they were merely a contributing factor.


Gay Film Festival: The Personal and the Political
In "I'll Love You Forever . . . Tonight," Edgar Michael Bravo's gritty portrait of gay life in Los Angeles, a sullen young photographer is coaxed by his sometime lover into spending the weekend with some friends at a Palm Springs hideaway.
What is supposed to be a restful little vacation turns into a joyless round of hard drinking and cold-blooded sexual games played by five good-looking men who seem totally at loose ends.
Their emotional cruelty reminds the photographer of his childhood abuse by his father, whom he eventually telephones for an excruciating confrontation.
The tone of Mr.
Bravo's film, which is being shown today and tomorrow at the Cinema Village as part of the New Festival, also called the 1993 New York Lesbian and Gay Film Festival, suggests Mart Crowley's play "The Boys in the Band," as it might be adapted and updated for 1993 in the spirit of Bret Easton Ellis's novel "Less Than Zero." If the film offers a bleak picture of one segment of gay life, it carries a nasty ring of truth.


Japanese Stocks Higher
Japanese stocks were higher today.
At midday, the Nikkei index of 225 issues was up 8.03 points, or four-hundredths of a percent, to 21,084.03.
On Thursday the Nikkei gained 384.30 points.


Tyson and Cayton Settle
After four years, MIKE TYSON and his former boxing manager, BILL CAYTON, decided to settle their legal suits against each other, according to court papers reviewed Wednesday in United States District Court in Manhattan.


Priest Plans a Hunger Strike To Force Meeting With Bishop
A suspended Episcopal priest said yesterday that he intends to go on a hunger strike at the diocesan office this morning until Bishop Richard F. Grein meets with him to discuss the suspension.
His supporters also vowed to continue their protests until he is reinstated, defying the Bishop's insistence that the protests end before any discussions take place.
The Rev.
Luis Barrios, the priest in charge of St.
Ann's Church in Mott Haven, the Bronx, said Bishop Grein had failed to detail the reasons for his May 19 suspension, and he accused diocesan officials of racism.


Cherokee Run Draws Rail for A Big Belmont
Twenty years after her legendary colt, Secretariat, won the Belmont Stakes by 31 lengths, Penny Tweedy fished into the silver bowl yesterday and drew the numbered chips that assigned post positions for the 125th running of the Belmont Stakes tomorrow.
She handed the first number to Bruce Lombardi, the racing secretary, who announced: "No. 1 post. Cherokee Run."
That was fine with Cherokee Run, a speed horse who would now be able to spring from the starting gate and rocket straight ahead while everybody else scrambled to catch him or at least crowd him on the rail.
And, if he could keep rocketing for a mile and a half, which is a pretty big "if," then he might just make some racing history by winning the $500,000 Belmont Stakes, the third and most demanding race in the Triple Crown series.


TV Weekend; An Uneasy Pair: Business and Politics
"Washington Under the Influence" is the first of four programs on the uneasy relationship between business and politics.
Evidently under the influence of the admirable Fred Friendly seminars, the new series, "On the Issues," brings together players from Government, corporate board rooms and elsewhere to be badgered by an immoderate sort of moderator about a hypothetical problem that reflects problems that are only too real.
Tonight's hypothetical, advanced by Jeff Greenfield of ABC News, has to do with a small furniture company that is under attack by workers and environmentalists for using chemicals that cause chronic fatigue syndrome.
Lending themselves to the exercise are lobbyists, legislators, business executives and journalists, generously lumped together by John Chancellor, who introduces each hour, as "distinguished leaders."


Beefier Bradley Ready for Draft
SHAWN BRADLEY didn't want to talk about his pro prospects after flying more than 13 hours from Australia to put his 7-foot-6-inch frame up for grabs in this month's National Basketball Association draft.
Returning from a Mormon mission, Bradley was greeted at Salt Lake International Airport by some 75 to 100 friends, family and reporters.


3 Candidates Striving to Leave No Republican Unturned
Jim Wallwork came here to greet noontime shoppers and noshers around the Morristown Green today at a campaign stop that showed the difficulties of winning votes in the Republican primary for governor.
He shook the hands of Democrats.
He shook the hands of independents.
He even shook the hands of a few of New Jersey's 799,000 Republicans, who make up only about 20 percent of the state's 3.9 million registered voters.


Edberg Derailed by Medvedev
Stefan Edberg referred to himself as being on the right track here at the French Open, where all he needed was the title in order to become the first man to collect all four Grand Slam crowns since Rod Laver mastered that elusive quad in 1969.
But in Andrei Medvedev, an upstart teen-ager from Ukraine, Edberg today ran smack into a runaway train in their rain-delayed quarterfinal on the stadium court.
In the best tradition of the local fountainry, Edberg's hairline was spouting rivulets of water from the effort of trying to counteract the grim power of Medvedev.
And the youngster's seemingly automated service returns pressured the Swede to be perfect.
Which he wasn't.


Review/Art; 20th-Century Latin American Works at the Modern
"Latin American Artists of the 20th Century," the sprawling survey at the Museum of Modern Art, is something of a feast, and something of a fiasco.
The largest exhibition of 20th-century Latin American art ever assembled, it occupies 25 galleries and much of the ground-floor lobby at the museum, achieving a state of almost mind-boggling complexity.
Although clearly intended as a sweeping overview, it is more a sweeping glimpse, partial, fragmented and confused.
The exhibition sets before the visitor nearly 300 works, created by more than 90 artists during the last 80 years.
It begins with the Cubist canvases of the great Mexican artist Diego Rivera and ends with paintings and installation works by contemporary artists like Guillermo Kuitca, Julio Galan, Eugenio Dittborn and Alfredo Jaar, all of whom are increasingly and for the most part deservedly prominent on the international art circuit.
In between, the exhibition seeks to demonstrate how the modernist ideas issuing from Paris, Moscow and Berlin in the early decades of this century ignited an amazing chain of indigenous reactions and permutations throughout Central and South America, as they did in other parts of Europe and in the United States.


BRE Properties reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Russian Male Choir
Akafist, an 18-voice male chamber choir from Moscow, will give a concert on Sunday at 4 P.M. at Trinity Church, Broadway at Wall Street in lower Manhattan.
On the program are Russian folk songs and sacred music from the Russian Orthodox Church.
Tickets are $15 and $20.
Information: (212) 602-0873.


Manufacturing Job Losses Cripple the Economy
To the Editor:
"New Jersey Slump: Go-Go Suburbs Went" (front page, May 20) deals extensively with the symptoms, but relegates the cause to one startling statistic buried deep in the article -- that New Jersey "has lost 200,000 jobs since 1989, and 130,000 of the losses were in manufacturing."


Review/Art; Abstract Expressionism: The Lighter, Quieter Side
Anyone who still thinks of Abstract Expressionism strictly as bullish, monumental painting created by disaffected male heroes can think again.
The Metropolitan Museum of Art's "Abstract Expressionism: Works on Paper," an exhibition drawn entirely from the museum's own collection, is so full of intimate, small-scale incident that it suggests a different sensibility altogether, one in which a supposed compulsion for self-expression is tempered by a concern for nature, for non-Western art, and for the emotional impact of sheer formal beauty.
Not that the old view is entirely wrong.
Of the show's 19 artists, only two are women, and a few of the works included are aggressive in the extreme.
Among them is a pair of Willem de Kooning's images of women done in oils.
One dated 1950 is spiky and keen, the woman's smiling mouth cut from a cigarette ad.
The other, from 1966, is a weird Rubenesque knot of blood-red and flesh-pink.
Disturbingly, it suggests a kind of slashing sexual martyrdom and shows how Mr. de Kooning, uniquely among his peers at this period, found a metaphor for carnality in paint.


U.S. and Japan End Talks, Sparring
With the United States pressing a reluctant Japan to reduce its trade surplus, officials of the two nations sought support today for their opposing positions from the governments of other leading industrial countries, with both sides claiming some success.
Japanese representatives plan to meet in Washington next Friday with Clinton Administration officials to begin negotiating a framework for trade relations.
President Clinton has insisted that such a framework include a Japanese pledge to buy specific levels of American goods as a measure of progress in whittling down the $50 billion trade imbalance in Japan's favor.


Roper Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Score Board Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Rick Saslaw, 40, Dies; Active in Social Issues
Rick Saslaw, a Los Angeles real-estate broker active in social causes and Democratic Party affairs, died on May 25 at his Los Angeles home of AIDS-related causes.
He was 40.
A native of Forest Hills, Queens, Mr.
Saslaw attended Drew University, Harvard University and the University of Southern California and also studied at the American Academy of Dramatic Arts and the L.A.
Actors Lab.
In his business, he dealt chiefly in commercial real estate in the Los Angeles area.


Art in Review
Richard Prince  Barbara Gladstone Gallery 99 Greene Street (near Prince Street) SoHo Through June 12
The women in Richard Prince's blowups of snapshots taken from motorcycle magazines are both creepy and pathetic.
Draping themselves nude over the seats of their boyfriends' bikes or posing in dark glasses and leopardskin tights, they seem to want to embody defiant fantasies of sexual outrageousness.


Resignations Weaken Federal Express Stock
The Federal Express Corporation lost 7.5 percent of its market value yesterday after two top-level executives said they would resign.
The air-freight company has been buffeted in recent years by the departure of several senior managers.
But some industry analysts said investors had overreacted to the most recent announcement.
Federal Express stock dropped yesterday by $3.75, closing at $46.125 on the New York Stock Exchange.
New Opportunities Sought
On Wednesday, Federal Express said Thomas R. Oliver, 52, executive vice president, and Carole A. Presley, 44, senior vice president of marketing, were leaving to pursue new opportunities.
Mr.
Oliver will become president of Voice Com Systems Inc. and Ms.
Presley intends to start a consulting business in Florida.
William J. Razzouk, 45, senior vice president of sales, was named to succeed Mr.
Oliver.
A successor to Ms.
Presley had not been named.


New Round in Custody Battle Begins
A bitter custody fight over a 2-year-old girl has moved to this state's highest court, to which the Michigan couple who raised her from infancy is appealing an order to return her to the biological parents in Iowa.
The case, which has been in the courts for nearly as long as the girl has been alive, reached a turning point in March when the Michigan Court of Appeals ruled that Michigan had no jurisdiction and concurred with rulings by Iowa that the Michigan couple relinquish the child.


Etz Lavud Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
BETTY FRIEDAN has been hospitalized at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center since Tuesday, suffering from an infection that causes severe back pain.
Ms.
Friedan underwent surgery twice last month at the Hospital of the Good Samaritan in Los Angeles, to replace an aorta valve.
One replacement came from a pig, the second from a human.


Sonics Breeze To Force Game 7
Charles Barkley shot his mouth, but not the basketball tonight.
He groused at referees, aimed his index finger at them as if it were a gun, slammed a ball halfway to the rafters, incited fans and made no redeeming contribution to the Phoenix Suns.
Maybe he was saving his aching body for a deciding seventh game in this Western Conference final, which is exactly what he has on his hands.
Seattle was the more stolid team tonight, and the Sonics delivered an emphatic 118-102 victory before 14,812 at the Seattle Center Coliseum.
The series, tame for the first five games, finally has some passion and it will be settled Saturday afternoon in Phoenix.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Car and truck sales rose in late May, extending a string of increases and suggesting strengthening demand.
Ford had record truck sales for the entire month while Chrysler had its best overall May sales in five years.  [ Page D1. ]  General Motors hopes to gain market share by holding the line on retail prices.  [ D4. ]
A small-town lawyer has battled for seven years to return the Pacific Lumber Company, which was acquired in 1986 by Charles E. Hurwitz, a Houston financier, to the Murphy family that had managed it since the turn of the century.  [ D1. ]


Ex-Chief of Sunbeam Files $3.2 Billion Suit
The former chairman of the Sunbeam-Oster Company, Paul B. Kazarian, filed a $3.2 billion lawsuit yesterday against his investment partners in the consumer products company, Michael Price and Michael Steinhardt.
In the suit, filed in Rhode Island Superior Court, Mr.
Kazarian contended that he had been the victim of a conspiracy that led to his ouster from the company, based in Providence, R.I., in January.
He also contended that he had been denied the earnings he was owed and that the partners had attempted to smear his reputation.


Russia Finance Chief Tells of Enemies Within
Providing an extraordinarily frank glimpse of struggles in the Government to stabilize the economy, the Finance Minister directed criticism tonight at his Cabinet colleagues, at the persistence of "pseudo-Soviet thinking" and at the "financial tourism" of Western business executives who visit but do not invest.
The official, Boris G. Fyodorov, 35, is considered the leading economic reformer in the Government and the most tireless proponent of financial and monetary discipline.
But he described a Government in which his small band of Westernized economists are fighting a constant battle against colleagues who wish to restore many of the plans and price controls of the Soviet era, in which they were trained.


Lakeland Industries reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


Daily News to Shift Printing to Jersey City
New Jersey state officials and the owner of The Daily News said yesterday that the newspaper would replace plants in Brooklyn and Kearny, N.J., with one in Jersey City.
The planned move, to a Clorox plant, ends a heated battle between New York and New Jersey for the plant's 1,600 jobs.
The decision is a victory for New Jersey and its Governor, Jim Florio, in an election year in which jobs are an important issue.


Limited Names Official To Vice Chairman's Post
Limited Inc. yesterday promoted Michael Weiss, who presided over the Express women's clothing division as it became one of the company's largest units, to vice chairman.
The move was seen as an attempt to revive sagging sales in the namesake Limited Stores division.
Mr.
Weiss will now oversee the Express, Limited Stores and and Henri Bendel divisions, as well as the Structure men's clothing stores and Limited Too children's clothing outlets.
Howard Gross will remain president of Limited Stores, reporting to Mr.
Weiss.


Questions Rise Over Fate Of Simon's Art Museum
The death of Norton Simon prompted questions and speculation yesterday about the fate of a national treasure, the Norton Simon Museum of Art in Pasadena, Calif., which houses many precious works of art that he collected over the decades.
In the past there was talk that the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif., would eventually pay the Simon Museum's operating costs and that its works would be acquired by the Getty collection.
But Janet Ellis, the executive administrator to the Norton Museum's director, Walter W. Timoshuk, said yesterday, "We are going to continue to function as we have in the past."


Kohl's Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Wyle Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


New President of Columbia Reportedly Seeks Shake-Up of Deans
The president-elect of Columbia University has begun a shake-up that includes replacing the deans of Columbia College, the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences and the School of General Studies, faculty members said.
The changes would give the new president, George E. Rupp, more direct control over the college and the university's budget.
Some faculty members and students characterized the proposals as a brilliant beginning for a visionary new president, while others portrayed them as Draconian measures taken in haste and without consultation.


Majority in Poll Back Ban on Handguns
Americans watching the increase in gunshot injuries and deaths among the country's children are beginning to see gun control as a question of public health rather than just a matter of crime prevention, according to a new survey made public today.
The survey, by Louis Harris of LH Research Inc., showed that one adult in five knows a child who had been shot by another child, and another 12 percent know a child who shot himself by accident.
The study, done under a grant from the Chicago-based Joyce Foundation for the Harvard School of Public Health, found that three-quarters of adults surveyed believed "young people's safety is endangered by there being so many guns around these days."  9 Out of 10 Back Bill
As a result, the new poll found, public opinion is rapidly swinging in favor of more stringent gun control measures.


Voice of Rebel Investor Rejects Wall St. Job
Lilli A. Gordon, a leading voice for rebellious shareholders, has decided against going to work for Dillon, Read &amp; Company.
Her decision, announced yesterday, could stall the firm's campaign to raise $600 million by the fall for a fund that would buy large stakes in laggard companies and then press them to shape up.


Critic's Notebook; Garbo's Grittier 'Anna Christie'
WHEN Garbo talked in the 1930 Hollywood version of "Anna Christie," she had to speak not only English but also the language of Eugene O'Neill.
Fighting her way through the "Py gollys" and "Now, me old buckos" of the 1922 play (which gives Anna a Swedish father and an Irish suitor), Garbo struggled visibly to match the expansiveness of the material.
She gave a stirring but stagy performance under the direction of Clarence Brown, who had guided her through the 1927 "Flesh and the Devil," would later direct her in "Anna Karenina" (1935) and clearly understood the Garbo mystique.
At the same time, in another language, Garbo did something unusual with "Anna Christie": she made it again.
"Her contralto voice seems better suited to talking German than English," wrote the New York Times critic Mordaunt Hall when the German "Anna Christie," directed by Jacques Feyder on the same sets that Mr.
Brown had used, opened here briefly in 1931.
"Her presence is if anything more striking in this current work than in the English version."


Accounts
*
National Geographic, Washington, to Goldberg Marchesano Kohlman, Washington, to handle the magazine's trade advertising account, previously at DDB Needham Washington.
Goldberg Marchesano was selected after a review that included DDB Needham and four other agencies.
Billings are not set. *
Quintessence Inc., Chicago, to Arian, Lowe, Travis &amp; Gusick, Chicago, to handle the introduction in October of Jovan Musk2 , a men's fragrance.
Arian, Lowe was awarded the account without a formal review; Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, Chicago, remains Quintessence's agency of record.
Billings are not set.


Leyritz Puts His Bat Where His Bravado Is
The day he made the major leagues, Jim Leyritz called his father.
Don Leyritz did not say congratulations.
He did not say, "I'm proud of you." He told his son, succinctly, "to go out there and do something." He expected him to make an immediate impact, he expected him to produce.
Jim expected the same thing.
He arrived in the Yankee clubhouse with huge minor league numbers and an ego to match.
He was brash, and admittedly arrogant, and he drove his teammates wild with his constant posturing.
"Give me an opportunity," he said to anyone who would listen, "and I'll show you what I can do."


RESULTS PLUS
TRACK AND FIELD  L.S.U.
Women Near 7th Straight Title  Danyel Mitchell won the women's discus throw yesterday as Louisiana State's women's team rolled toward its seventh consecutive National Collegiate Athletic Association championship at Tad Gormley Stadium in New Orleans.
Mitchell's winning throw was 186 feet 6 inches, 40 inches better than the 183-2 of runner-up Dawn Dumble of U.C.L.A.
Third was Stacy Schroeder, a University of Florida freshman from Grand Island, N.Y.
Schroeder, last year's New York state high school champion in the shot-put and discus, registered the best performance of her career with a throw of 180-1.
Kelly Blair of Oregon, with 6,038 points, won the heptathlon.
Fourth in the seven-event competition was Shana Williams of Seton Hall (5,640).
Randy Jenkins of Tennessee won the men's high jump.
Jenkins, who finished second in in 1991 but missed last year's meet because of Hodgkins' disease, won with a jump of 7 feet 5 3/4 inches.
Powell Long Jumps 27-10 3/4 for Victory  Mike Powell of the United States, the world-record holder at 29 feet 4 1/2 inches, got off his best long jump of the early outdoor season, leaping 27-10 3/4 to win the event at the Madrid International in Spain.
Ivan Pedroso of Cuba, the 1993 world indoor champion, was second at 27-7 1/4.
In the day's major upset, China's Li Tong defeated the Olympic silver medalist Tony Dees of the United States in the 110-meter hurdles in 13.62 seconds.
Dees ran 13.70.
Renaldo Nehemiah, the former world-record holder from the United States, was fifth in 13.82. (AP) COLLEGE BASEBALL  Cal Poly Eliminates Adelphi From Tourney  Grant Munger hit a pair of home runs to lead Cal Poly to an 11-5 victory over Adelphi in Montgomery, Ala., yesterday that propelled the Mustangs (39-18) into tomorrow night's championship game and eliminated the Panthers (32-17) from the National Collegiate Athletic Association Division II tournament.
Dom Gatti, the Division II player of the year, led the losers from Garden City, L.I., with three singles. (AP) ROWING  Brown and Penn Win Heats in Eights  Eighty-five crews from 23 colleges competed on the opening day of the Intercollegiate Rowing Association's 91st regatta, at the Cooper River in Cherry Hill, N.J.
The Brown varsity eight, which last month won the first part of rowing's triple crown, the Eastern Sprints, breezed through its qualifying heat yesterday, winning in 5 minutes 37.6 seconds.
The other varsity heat winner, as expected, was Penn in 5:38.4.
The 10 non-winners will row today in two repechage races, with first and second-place finishers qualifying for tomorrow's six-boat finale.
Brown and Northeastern crews won the second varsity heats while freshman eights from Brown, Navy and Princeton placed first in their three heats.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday about the sale of the Circle K Corporation misstated the number of creditor groups that supported the company's bankruptcy reorganization plan.
Three groups will receive payments under the plan -- bank lenders, noteholders and unsecured creditors.


Edison Brothers Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


U.S. and Europeans Planning U.N. Vote on Bosnia Havens
The United States and its European allies decided tonight to call a Security Countil vote on Friday on their plan to send troops to guard six Muslim enclaves in Bosnia and Herzegovina that have been designated as safe havens.
But nearly two weeks after Secretary of State Warren Christopher and the Foreign Ministers of Britain, France, Spain and Russia first approved the plan in Washington, members from developing countries are trying to block action on putting put it into effect.
It was unclear tonight whether they would support the plan, abstain or adopt divergent positions if the vote is taken by the Council's 15 members.


No Headline
"Libel law is about providing compensation for damages to one's reputation. It's not about punishing journalists for not adhering to the highest standards of their profession. The danger is you are turning libel trials into some kind of journalism ethics tribunal." -- JANE E. KIRTLEY, executive director of the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press.  [ A16:3. ]





Backing Away Again, Christopher Says Bosnia Is Not a Vital Interest
Taking another step back from the war in Bosnia, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said today that the conflict "involves our humanitarian concerns, but it does not involve our vital interests."
The end of the cold war, Mr.
Christopher said, has changed the stakes in such conflicts and is a primary reason the Clinton Administration has failed to persuade its European allies to follow its lead on Bosnia.


Coroner Says Man Died of Beating While in New York Police Custody
An epileptic prisoner who died in police custody at a Manhattan hospital 10 days ago was beaten to death while he lay face down on a floor with his wrists manacled behind him, unable to breathe adequately, New York City's Chief Medical Examiner said yesterday.
He ruled the death a homicide.
Pending further investigations, legal culpability was uncertain.
The police said necessary force had been used to restrain a heavily built, violent man trying to escape.
But the victim's mother and a civil rights lawyer called it a case of murder by the police.
They said there had been no attempt to escape, only a medical problem, and that a witness had said that two white officers had stomped, kicked and fatally beaten the black man while calling him "nigger."


Executive Changes
AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL GROUP INC., New York, named Brian Duperreault, president of American International Underwriters, its overseas property-casualty insurance unit, to the additional position of executive vice president of foreign general insurance at the parent company.
BANK OF AMERICA, San Francisco, appointed Julia Chang Bloch executive vice president.


N.B.A.'s Latest Serial: Superman vs. the Cult
So now we have to make the choice: Do we want Superman or the Cult?
Do we want to fly toward summer with Michael Jordan, his rakish dog tongue loose as he clicks into overdrive, clears a runway, lifts off and leaves us breathless or do we want to hang with the Knicks, this nineties version of "Father Knows Best," call it Coach Dad and the Posse?
No answers here, only more questions.
Is Superman dying, worn down by this longest of all basketball seasons, from the fall of 1991 through the spring of 1993, two National Basketball Association campaigns bridged by a Dream Team dalliance?
Or is he toying with us, unrolling the suspense for his own amusement and the box office?
Is Jordan's gambling the controlled passion of a man whose avocation also is competition, or is it out of bounds, needing further investigation by a game that has never completely outjumped its old scandals?


Hard-Hit Military Contractors Plead for Loans
With economists predicting continued decline for Long Island's military industry, a group representing more than 100 Defense Department subcontractors yesterday implored Federal and state officials to help them find the money to convert their companies to peacetime operations.
Without an infusion of cash, in the form of low-cost loans from banks and Government agencies, small and medium-sized companies that have long depended on military contracts will be unable to compete for commercial contracts and will close their doors, leaders of the newly formed group say.
They say that during the last 18 months Long Island subcontractors seeking commercial business would have won $500 million in contracts if they had had the money to finance startup work.


Laoretti Is Struggling To Regain His Stroke
Larry Laoretti went from club pro to overnight hero last year when he scored his first victory on the Senior PGA Tour in the Senior United States Open.
Laoretti, from Mahopac, N.Y., played pretty well for about a month after his triumph, but his game has since declined.
In 14 events this season, Laoretti's best finish has been a tie for 10th at the Bell Atlantic Classic, two weeks ago.


Walker O. Cain, Architect, Dies; Recipient of Rome Prize Was 78
Walker O. Cain, an award-winning architect whose designs included a Manhattan cathedral and a Smithsonian museum, died Tuesday at his home in Southhampton, L.I.
He was 78.
The cause was heart failure, said his wife, Elizabeth.


Perot Parades a Republican But Is Mum on Endorsement
Ross Perot's Texas organization called a news conference today, put Mr.
Perot and Kay Bailey Hutchison, the Republican Senate candidate, on the same stage, and announced its members' support for her in the election on Saturday.
Then the organization took pains to emphasize that this was not an endorsement of her.
Bill Walker, the Texas director of United We Stand America Inc., said the announcement that the group's members were supporting Mrs.
Hutchison was based on a questionnaire mailed to the Texas membership of the group that Mr.
Perot formed after his independent bid for President last year.


On Stage, and Off
Like a couple of evenly matched heavyweights, the two top-nominated musicals will go head to head on Sunday night when the Tony Awards are announced on CBS, and, not surprisingly, the debate over which will wear the ultimate crown -- "Kiss of the Spider Woman" or "Tommy" -- has dominated a week of speculation.
Interviews with some two dozen of the 668 Tony voters, and a few well-informed nonvoters (all were guaranteed anonymity) indicated that the two shows, each of which garnered 11 nominations, were in a dead heat for the best-musical award and that otherwise a division of the spoils is likely.
Many agree that the best-musical award could go to one and best director to the other.
One prediction -- call it the necessary-but-not-sufficient theory -- espoused by Rocco Landesman, the president of Jujamcyn Theaters, is this: Because the Broadway musical tradition revolves around a good story, "Kiss" isn't likely to win best musical without winning best book.
And because the pleasure of "Tommy" is so tied to its fantastical staging, it isn't likely to win best musical without winning best director.
Terrence McNally's book could win, he added, and "Kiss" could still lose; ditto for Des McAnuff's direction and "Tommy."


Clinton's Reversals; As President Drops Justice Nominee, Many Wonder What He Stands For
President Clinton is talking once again about giving the middle class a tax cut, although no time too soon.
As he urgently hunts for the middle ground, or at least the stable ground, he has turned to the man who once helped package what Democrats like to call the Decade of Greed.
And he spent the better part of the week dancing between his party's left and right flanks before ditching an old Yale Law School friend as his choice to enforce the nation's civil rights laws.
"This has nothing to do with the political center," Mr.
Clinton said tonight at the White House in announcing his decision to drop the nomination of Lani Guinier to be the new civil rights chief in the Justice Department.
"This is about my center."


Crash Kills Cyclist On Lower East Side
A 22-year-old man who was on his way to buy a soda was killed early yesterday morning when a car ran a red light and rammed into the bicycle he was riding on the Lower East Side, the police said.
The victim, Emilio Rodriguez, had just left his home at 610 East 11th Street and was heading around the corner to a bodega when he was struck at the intersection of 10th Street and Avenue B.


METRO DIGEST
PRISONER'S DEATH RULED A HOMICIDE
An epileptic prisoner who died in police custody at a Manhattan hospital was beaten to death while he was lying face down with his wrists manacled behind him and unable to breathe adequately, the New York City Medical Examiner said.
He ruled the death a homicide.
A1.
TEEN-AGE JOBLESSNESS AT 40 PERCENT
Unemployment among New York City's teen-agers rose to 40 percent in the first three months this year, the city says.
That is nearly double the rate of two years ago and the worst in the 25 years that records have been kept.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  PRIEST PLANS HUNGER STRIKE
A suspended Episcopal priest says that he intends to go on a hunger strike at the diocese office until Bishop Richard F. Grein meets with him to discuss the suspension.
His supporters also vowed to continue their protests until he is reinstated to his Mott Haven church.
B2.
ONE-MONTH SENTENCE IN DEATH
A man has been sentenced to barely a month's time in jail, to be served on weekends, for his role in the death of an artist in a Greenwich Village street fight in 1991.
The sentence drew angry responses from the victim's friends, who have assailed the handling of the case.
B2.
DIRE FINANCIAL PICTURE UNVEILED
All but giving up hope that the city would receive much of the state and Federal aid they had been seeking, senior aides to Mayor Dinkins have presented their most dire view yet of the city's fiscal condition.
B3.
DAILY NEWS PICKS JERSEY CITY SITE
New Jersey state officials and top officials of The Daily News said the newspaper would put a new printing plant in Jersey City.
The planned move to an unused Clorox plant ends a heated battle between New York and New Jersey, which have both been seeking to win the plant's 1,600 jobs.
B3.
A 1776 copy of the Declaration of Independence is the subject of a suit.
B3.
New York City officials closed a busy section of Park Avenue to traffic for two hours.
B3.
The Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide delivered the main address via videotape at the Brooklyn campus of Long Island University for its 63d commencement.
B4.
REGION  CAMPAIGNING FOR GOVERNOR
Jim Wallwork came to Morristown to greet shoppers and noshers around the Morristown Green at a campaign stop that showed the difficulties of winning votes in the Republican primary for New Jersey governor.
B5.
LONG ISLAND COMPANIES SEEK HELP
With economists predicting continued decline for Long Island's military industry, a group representing more than 100 Defense Department subcontractors implored Federal and state officials to help them.
B5.
Gov.
Florio signed bills toughening penalties in car thefts.
B5.
A power failure at the Plum Island Animal Disease Center forced an evacuation.
B5.
Chronicle B4  Our Towns by James Barron B5


Finding the Rhythm of the Road, at 10 Miles an Hour
I SING the body exhausted.
Dehydrated and jelly-legged, sunburned and sweat-grimy, I'd been bicycling the road from Boston since dawn and had spent a big part of the warm afternoon on unexpectedly vertical terrain in northeastern Connecticut.
New York City, my final destination, seemed as distant as China.
And for an hour, ever since Union, Conn., (the gateway to Nipmuck State Forest, an extremely popular place among black flies), I'd been saying two words in my head, over and over, repeating them like a mantra: Stafford Springs, Stafford Springs, Stafford Springs.
In college, there'd been a guy who lived on my hall whose hometown was Stafford Springs, Conn.
I didn't know him at all, don't know what happened to him, but 20 years later, huffing and puffing through the pretty hills of nowhere, I conjured him up, remembered him as an affluent sort.
And putting that memory together with the bold print with which the town was emblazoned on my wrinkled Connecticut road map, I concluded: there will be a motel in Stafford Springs.
There will be an excellent restaurant there.


YOUTH JOBLESSNESS IS AT RECORD HIGH
Unemployment among New York City's teen-agers rose to 40 percent in the first three months this year, the city said yesterday.
It was nearly double the rate of two years ago and the worst in the 25 years that records have been kept.
The sharp increase indicated that the long recession has had an especially severe impact on young job seekers.
"Our young people used to be on the bottom of the list -- now they are not even on the list," said John Bess, executive director of the Manhattan Valley Youth Program, a nonprofit group that helps teen-agers find work.


Vehicle Sales Rose 15% in May
United States sales of cars and light trucks rose 15 percent in May, compared with May 1992, the leading auto makers reported today.
The big gain, which included sales of domestic and imported vehicles, came as the Ford Motor Company said it had record truck sales for the month.
In addition, the Chrysler Corporation reported its best overall May sales in five years.


Graf and Fernandez Waste No Time in Gaining Final
The two women's semifinals at the French Open this afternoon turned out to be brief affairs but momentous occasions.
Top-seeded Steffi Graf not only pulverized her German understudy, Anke Huber, 6-1, 6-1, to reach her sixth final at Roland Garros, she also regained the No. 1 ranking she lost to Monica Seles just over two years ago.
Graf had reigned supreme on the women's circuit for a record 186 weeks.
Then Seles, who is currently recovering from a stab wound inflicted on April 30 by a deranged fan of Graf's, usurped the top ranking in March 1991 and held it with a pit bull's tenacity.


Safety Changes Discussed for Prospect Park
Brooklyn officials met with community leaders yesterday to discuss how to improve safety in Prospect Park, two days after a 42-year-old drama teacher was shot to death in an apparent robbery there.
Hoping to convince residents of the borough that the park is safe, the officials said increased police patrols should prevent incidents like the slaying of Allyn Winslow, who, the police said, was killed for his mountain bike.


20 Years After, Foreman Is Again Stalking a Title
George Foreman stopped sparring long enough to give a lesson in syntax.
He was surprised at reports he would retire after his fight Monday against Tommy Morrison for the vacant World Boxing Organization heavyweight crown.
"I only said, 'This will probably be the last time you'll see me in the ring,' " Foreman said.
He paused, and added, "But I never said I was going to retire."


Topics of The Times; "A Confusion Happened"
Charles Dickens's Department of Circumlocution has found a new recruit in Mahfouz al-Ansari, an Egyptian editor.
When his semiofficial newspaper erred by quoting President Hosni Mubarak too accurately, the editor published this elegantly fuzzy correction:
"A confusion happened and a mistake was made. I attributed these comments to the President, but in fact they came in the analysis, explanation and information which the editors put before the President, quoting American newspapers and media."


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLIED SIGNAL INC., Morristown, N.J., said it would develop a multimission advanced tactical terminal for the Special Operations Command at MacDill Air Force Base near Tampa, Fla.
The agreement has a potential value of $180 million.
CRAY RESEARCH INC., Eagan, Minn., said the National Center for Scientific Research in Paris had ordered a Cray C98 supercomputer system, a new eight-processor system with a list price of at least $12 million.
Terms were not disclosed.


Good Life in Gabon Comes at a Heavy Price
Against a backdrop of opulent residences and elegant restaurants, Boulevard Georges Pompidou, a scenic roadway overlooking the Atlantic coast here, could easily be mistaken for a glittering stretch along the French Riviera.
It is all part of the good life that this tiny Central African country of sandy beaches, isolated coves and ruggedly beautiful mountains can offer.
It is a splendor, however, that costs dearly.


INSIDE
Fatal Courthouse Shooting
A gunman apparently bent on vengeance shot and killed a Newark police detective on the 11th floor of the Essex County Court Building.
Page B1.
Shake-Up at Columbia
The president-elect of Columbia University has begun a shake-up that includes replacing at least two deans, faculty members say.
Page B1.
Norton Simon Is Dead
The industrialist, who amassed one of the nation's great art collections and endowed the California museum that bears his name, was 86.
Page A22.


Review/Piano; Undaunted By Inimitable Predecessor
There was probably a bit of hubris at work when Mordecai Shehori titled his concert at Weill Recital Hall on Wednesday night "A Tribute to Vladimir Horowitz." When it comes to pianism, the only possible tribute to Horowitz is in one of his recordings.
Who else could convincingly combine nearly inaudible pianissimos and thunderous exclamations in a single phrase?
Or, with an almost childlike fascination, seductively toy with inner voices or twisting rhythms?
Or create a brittle yet truly singing fortissimo?
But Mr.
Shehori was undaunted by the challenge.
He programmed music that was meant to recall Horowitz's achievements and even offered a performance of a piece that Horowitz composed when he was 14 years old: the Etude-Fantasy in E flat ("Les Vagues").
And there were times when Mr.
Shehori almost managed to suggest, in a distant, slightly fuzzy fashion, the Horowitz style of pianism.


Thousands of Germans Rally for the Slain Turks
Thousands of residents of this once-placid town, now known around the world as the site of a terror attack that killed five Turkish women and girls, gathered today to lament the attack and bid farewell to their slain neighbors.
"We are horrified," Solingen's Mayor, Gerd Kraimer, told the crowd.
"We are deeply ashamed. We ask for forgiveness."


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
May 28
May 21
May 29
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.5
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.1
3.1
Gasoline stocks
223.4
222.6
214.4
Distillate stocks
100.6
100.0
93.3
Crude imports, daily
7.0
6.7
5.4
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.4
1.9
Crude stocks
352.2
357.4
344.5
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
7.0
Refinery utilization (%)
91.9
89.8
90.0
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Some Friends Fret as Clinton Is Slow in Choosing Envoys
Early this year, the White House asked two veteran Democrats whether they would like to be ambassador to Japan.
Both of them said they would.
But President Clinton has not gotten around to making a choice.
And now the two old friends and allies, former Vice President Walter F. Mondale and Richard C. Holbrooke, a seasoned Asia hand, find themselves reluctant warriors in an unseemly contest that pits political eminence against diplomatic experience.


The Solingen Tragedy
Only days after the Bonn Parliament yielded to pressure from the right by scrapping Germany's liberal asylum laws, extremists stepped up their campaign against foreigners.
Five Turkish women and children died in a firebombing ascribed to neo-Nazi skinheads.
The Solingen tragedy, the worst of its kind since unification in 1990, ignited violent demonstrations by Turkish immigrants.
Yet Chancellor Helmut Kohl's generalized condemnation of all violence does not begin to deal with the valid grievances of a vulnerable minority.
Germany's 1.5 million or so Turkish inhabitants are not asylum-seekers fleeing persecution at home.
Nearly all are guest workers, or the offspring of guest workers, whose toil has been an essential element in Germany's "economic miracle." However, few are citizens, hardly any are civil servants and none sit in the national Parliament.


Man in the News; The Mercurial Prince: Norodom Sihanouk
He was a King when he was 18, a prisoner at 20, an exile at 31, a Prime Minister at 32, a chief of state again at 38, a prisoner again at 54, an exile again at 69.
Now, at 70, Norodom Sihanouk has once again come to the brink of power, and characertistically pulled back, at least for the moment.
His approach to the situation appears to be not much different from what it was in the days when his business cards simply said, "Sihanouk du Cambodge," Sihanouk of Cambodia.


Harry Levin, Dean And Researcher, 68; Led Project Literacy
Harry Levin, former dean of the Cornell University College of Arts and Sciences, died on Sunday at Tompkins Community Hospital in Ithaca, N.Y.
He was 68 and lived in Ithaca.
His wife, Deborah, said the cause was heart failure.


On My Min; Our Friend Qaddafi
For a while, many Americans asked themselves a sensible and healthy question every time they walked aboard a passenger plane -- is this another Pan Am 103?
The question was sensible because terrorists can do again what they did on Dec. 21, 1988 -- bring down a planeload of 259 people.
And it was healthy, because as long as Americans asked it, there was a chance that terrorism could be stopped permanently.


BET Holdings Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Gaetti Is Released by Angels
GARY GAETTI, a free-agent third baseman who failed to live up to his All-Star credentials after signing an $11.4 million, four-year contract with California, was placed on release waivers yesterday by the Angels.
The move made room for KELLY GRUBER, who will join the team today after completing a rehabilitation assignment at the Angels' farm team in Vancouver, British Columbia.
The 31-year-old Gruber, acquired from Toronto in a trade last winter, has been on the disabled list since spring training after he underwent rotator cuff and shoulder surgery in February.


The Spoken Word
"WOMEN IN FILM: YOU GO GIRLS!" Flatbush and DeKalb Avenues, Flatbush, Brooklyn.
A panel discussion featuring Julie Dash, the director of "Daughters of the Dust"; the producer Grace Blake, the actress Joie Lee and others, part of the Spike Lee 40 Acres Film Institute lecture series.
Saturday at 11 A.M.
Admission: $25; $15 for college students; $10 for high school students.
Information: (718) 858-9620.
READING, Way of Action, 316 Seventh Street, Park Slope, Brooklyn.
Sixteen poets and fiction writers read from their work in a benefit for the Brooklyn Bound Reading Series.
Sunday at 3 P.M.
Admission: $7.
Information: (718) 965-1541.


Art in Review
Robert Mallary  Mitchell Algus Gallery 25 Thompson Street SoHo Through June 19
Robert Mallary, who is 76, first gained attention in the early 1960's for his Neo-Dadaist "junk" sculptures, wall reliefs made from materials he found in the streets of New York City.
In the same decade he began to explore the field of computer graphics, then budding, with its potential for generating images through the manipulation of photographs of real and invented forms.


American Reliance Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Next Title Defense for Bowe?
ROCK NEWMAN, manager of heavyweight champion RIDDICK BOWE, asked the International Boxing Federation to make Bowe's first mandatory defense against either MICHAEL MOORER or OLIVER McCALL.
Moorer is listed second in the latest I.B.F. rankings and McCall is rated third.
But first, Newman said, he expected Bowe and former champion EVANDER HOLYFIELD to agree to a rematch in the near future.(AP)


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  SOUTH AFRICA SETS ELECTION  The Government and most of South Africa's opposition parties settled tentatively on April 27, 1994 as the date when the country's black majority will cast their first votes.
A1  CAMBODIA FORMS A GOVERNMENT  Prince Norodom Sihanouk announced on Thursday that he had forged a coalition Government in which he would be Prime Minister, then said today that he was abandoning the plan, apparently because of a long-standing family dispute.
A1


DENTAL CENTER FINANCED BY MARS SETTLES LAWSUIT
A dental information center financed by Mars Inc. has paid $25,000 and agreed to stop misrepresenting dental information as part of an agreement to settle a lawsuit by the Attorney General of New York State.
The Princeton Dental Resource Center produced publications that contended that eating chocolate could inhibit tooth decay.
The center did not acknowledge any violations of law but agreed to disclose its relationship to the candy maker in future publications, and also agreed that it would not represent that the consumption of chocolate and caramel would produce fewer cavities than consumption of starches like crackers.
The center receives about $1.5 million annually from Mars, a contribution that accounts for most of its funds.


U.N. Told of Cease-Fire in Muslim Town
The commander of the United Nations military forces in Bosnia said today that the leader of the Bosnian Serbs had told him that he had ordered a cease-fire around the besieged Muslim town of Gorazde.
Lieut.
Gen.
Philippe Morillon has been pressing Bosnian Serbs for days to allow military observers into Gorazde, which has been designated a safe area by the United Nations.
"I have insisted that these observers must be deployed no later than tomorrow to show good faith," the general said after his meeting with Radovan Karadzic, the Bosnian Serb leader.


Three's Company: Guinier, Reagan, Bush
The shrill attacks on Lani Guinier, President Clinton's nominee to head the Justice Department's civil rights division, give to those who know her a sense of Kafkaesque unreality.
Her experience, character, respect for the law and balanced approach to the issues would make her one of the finest assistant attorneys general ever to serve our country.
She is superbly qualified, mainstream and pro-integrationist in the tradition of Thurgood Marshall.
It is essential, if democratic principles are to be preserved, that President Clinton give her the opportunity to defend her record before the Senate Judiciary Committee.
For him to yank the nomination now would not only be unfair but, some would say, political cowardice.





For Children
Sea Cliffs  Aquarium for Wildlife Conservation West Eighth Street  and Surf Avenue Coney Island, Brooklyn (718) 265-3474 Recommended for all ages
Out in Coney Island, where the fish still hang out in schools and the Cyclone roller coaster has been carrying riders since 1927, there is a new marine mammal habitat, Sea Cliffs, at what used to be called the New York Aquarium.


Art in Review
'The Apple of America'  Berry-Hill Gallery 11 East 70th Street Through June 26
This off-beat theme show opens with a sight as absurd as it is spectacular, a room filled with dozens of 19th-century American still-life paintings of apples.
What seems like an exercise in overkill turns out to be, painting by painting, of considerable interest.
Familiar artists -- William M. Harnett, William Sidney Mount -- mingle with such attractive lesser-knowns as Joseph Decker, represented by a sumptuous close-up of apples green on the bough (circa 1883-88), and William J. McCloskey, whose image of lady apples tumbling from a nest of gray tissue dates from around 1896.


Park Ave. Car Ban May Clean Air, but Not Words
New York City officials closed a busy section of Park Avenue to traffic for two hours yesterday, and this is what happened:
Electric-powered cars were displayed, volunteers with pedicabs offered free rides and assorted politicians showed up to voice support for anything that would cut pollution and to urge car owners to change their wicked ways.


Kurds and Christians Live in Harmony
To the Editor:
In "Christian Sects in Kurdish Lands Dwindle" (letter, May 24), Alastair Bruton claims that the numbers of Christians living in the Kurdish area in the north of Iraq and southeast of Turkey have been reduced from 25,000 to 200 or 300 "because the Kurds told them they had no future in a land the Kurds would soon control." Mr.
Bruton concludes by appealing for the linkage of "safeguards" to Western aid earmarked for the peoples of Kurdistan-Iraq because otherwise the West will be facilitating "ethnic cleansing" there.
Throughout this century, Muslim Kurds and Christian Assyrians and Chaldeans in Kurdistan-Iraq have enjoyed good and cooperative relations.
In the 1930's, for example, the Kurds did not retaliate against Christians who displaced them, in collaboration with British colonialists, from the oil-rich area of Kirkuk.
More recently, some Christians have joined Kurdish political parties.
In the 1980's, many Christians left the Kurdish area for Baghdad or destinations abroad for economic reasons.
Iraqi Kurds, themselves victims of chemical warfare and an operation that, it is estimated, claimed the lives of 180,000 Kurds, were hardly in a position to force any other people out of the region.
Some Christians fled to Turkey in the April 1991 refugee exodus and refused to return for economic reasons or because they had no homes to which to return.
This is documented in reports released by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and in an April 1992 investigation report by the Lawyers Committee for Human Rights.
In the last year, in preparation for the May 1992 election, the Kurdistan Front set aside 5 seats (out of 105) for Christians in the new Kurdish Parliament.
This quota assured the representation of Chaldeans and other Christian groups.
Because the two major parties hold 50 seats each, the Christian members of the Kurdish Parliament will cast the deciding votes should a stalemate arise.
As the Iraqi military again looms as an ominous presence on the horizon of Kurdistan-Iraq, the fledgling democracy deserves and needs Western humanitarian aid as long as its leaders apply the law equitably to all people.
SALAH AZIZ  President, Badlisy Center for Kurdish Studies Tallahassee, Fla., May 25, 1993


IQ Software Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Exiled Haitian Leader Addresses L.I.U.-Brooklyn
The Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the exiled President of Haiti, delivered the main address via videotape at the Brooklyn campus of Long Island University for its 63d commencement, which was held yesterday at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
Father Aristide, who was deposed in a September 1991 coup, spoke to the 1,000 graduates about the movement to restore democracy in Haiti.


Manufacturing Job Losses Cripple the Economy; Worst Isn't Over
To the Editor:
Re "New Jump in Inflation Rattles Markets" (Business Day, May 14): If the statements by some economists and law makers that recent statistics presage a return to inflation does not constitute sophistry, it borders on it.


NCH Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


CHRONICLE
When LEANZA CORNETT was crowned Miss America 1993 in September, she vowed to talk about AIDS at her appearances during the year.
Since then, she has learned that not everyone wants her to talk about the disease, in particular not to schoolchildren.
On Tuesday, for example, she was scheduled to speak at three elementary schools and one high school in Bradford County in north central Florida.
But a week ago, she said, "I received a letter saying that the school board had asked I not mention the word AIDS or talk about it or sex, but that I talk only about self-esteem and saying no to drugs."


Dole Waves G.O.P. Flag in California
He has tempered his criticism of President Clinton with words of encouragement.
He has held his fire when asked about the President's wife.
But he has allowed himself a sly haircut joke or two.
On a three-day fund-raising and morale-boosting tour of California, Bob Dole, the Senate minority leader, has offered the balm of professionalism to a shaken state Republican Party, urging members to focus on the issues that unite rather than divide them.


Shoney's Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 9


Stocks Mostly Lower, With Dow Off 8.58
The stock market was mostly lower yesterday in seemingly heavy trading.
But much of the volume came from two big active issues -- Hanson P.L.C. and the initial public offering of the Allstate Corporation.
The two stocks accounted for one-fourth of yesterday's Big Board volume of 285.6 million shares.
In contrast, 295.6 million shares were traded on Wednesday.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
3.12
3.68
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
3.04
3.67
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.15
3.18
3.81
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.61
5.64
6.97
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.86
6.87
7.87
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.78
7.80
8.81
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.87
5.87
6.64
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Babbitt a Candidate for High Court
President Clinton said today that "we're close" to announcing a choice for a Supreme Court seat, and White House officials said the short list for that nomination now included Bruce Babbitt, the Interior Secretary.
Presidential aides said that although Mr.
Clinton might yet select a sitting judge to replace Justice Byron R. White, who will retire this month, he wanted a candidate with whom he is close and comfortable, as he is with Mr.
Babbitt.


Revenge on Two Whistle-Blowers
No top official loves a whistle-blower.
Consider two scientists at the National Institutes of Health, Walter Stewart and Ned Feder, who have waged a lonely battle to expose fraud and misconduct in scientific research.
They have written papers on scientific misconduct, investigated plagiarism and served as a conduit for other scientists charging misconduct.
Along the way they have angered many in the scientific establishment who deemed them obsessed, arrogant and too willing to tarnish reputations on flimsy evidence.
Now the two crusaders appear to have gone too far, giving their enemies an excuse to muzzle them.
Their sin: using a cluster of software programs they developed (dubbed a "plagiarism machine") to look for examples of copying in a biography of Abraham Lincoln.
It was always murky how much leeway the self-appointed crusaders, hired as research scientists, should have to pursue investigations.
But it seems indisputable that the field of history is remote from their responsibilities.


Sihanouk Names a Government In Cambodia, Then Withdraws
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's former monarch, announced Thursday that he had formed a coalition government in which he would serve as Prime Minister and supreme military commander, only to abandon the plan this morning in the midst of what is apparently a long-running family psychodrama pitting Prince Sihanouk against one of his sons.
The son, Prince Norodom Ranariddh, had originally been named Deputy Prime Minister in the new newly proclaimed National Government of Cambodia.


Comair Holdings (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Abroad at Home; Anatomy Of a Smear
In a speech last year, Lani Guinier said she hoped that South Africa would move toward majority rule -- modified to assure participation by the white minority.
Only a coalition government including whites, she said, would have the legitimacy needed in a new South Africa.
Is that the same Lani Guinier, nominee to be Assistant Attorney General, who was dumped by President Clinton after the political right painted her as some kind of black racist?
Yes, it is.
How can that be?


Spanish Students Rebelling Against the Left
One day in the mid-1960's, when Manuel Fraga Iribarne went to speak at the University of Seville, a long-haired undergraduate named Felipe Gonzalez was in the crowd of young leftists who cheerfully yelled and booed Franco's Minister of Information.
The irony was not lost on Mr.
Gonzalez when he visited the Autonomous University of Madrid on March 25.
Now in his 11th year as Spain's Socialist Prime Minister, it was his turn to be heckled -- this time by student sympathizers of the conservative People's Party founded by Mr.
Fraga himself.


Canadian Imperial Bank reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


SOUTH AFRICA FOES SET DATE FOR VOTE OPEN TO ALL RACES
The Government and most of South Africa's opposition parties settled tonight on a date -- April 27, 1994 -- for elections in which the country's black majority will cast their first votes.
The tentative agreement, coming after a year and a half of fitful negotiations, would set a timetable for ending more than three centuries of white rule.


A Top Executive At Ketchum Resigns
Robert W. Kroyer, one of the top four executives at Ketchum Communications Inc. of Pittsburgh, unexpectedly resigned yesterday, after a 19-year career with the company, the last five as president of its Ketchum Advertising U.S.A. subsidiary.
"Paul had his vision for growing and managing the company, and I had mine," Mr.
Kroyer, 53, said in a telephone interview, referring to Paul H. Alvarez, Ketchum's chairman, president and chief executive.


Jerusalem Journal; Strike! Strike! Strike! Some Arabs Feel Cudgeled
Commercial strikes?
In the Muslim Quarter of the Old City, a shoe-store owner repeated key words of the question put to him, then raised a hand to forehead level to make his point about having had it up to there.
"I'm tired of the whole thing -- the strikes and the intifada," he said, using the Arabic word for the Palestinian uprising against Israel.


Impasse Over Damages in New Yorker Libel Case
The celebrated libel trial pitting Jeffrey M. Masson against Janet Malcolm ended inconclusively today when a Federal jury deadlocked on monetary damages after deciding that the writer had defamed him with five fabricated quotations in her article about him in The New Yorker.
A new trial is now likely in the tortuous, decadelong case between a prim East Coast writer and a flamboyant West Coast analyst.
But it remains to be decided by Judge Eugene F. Lynch of the United States District Court here whether the entire case will be heard again or merely the damage portion, and whether The New Yorker will remain a defendant.


Love Swings Straight Back Into 1992
A few short months ago it seemed the surest thing in golf was that 1993 would belong to Davis Love 3d.
He was coming off a PGA Tour season in which he won three official tournaments and more than $1 million, and he had added three more unofficial victories in the last two months of the year.
To top it off, Love won this year's opening event, the Tournament of Champions.


Need a Player? Got Young Talent? Call Trader Al
Trades, from the minor to the major to the no-brainer, have not been Al Harazin's strength as general manager of the Mets.
He remains on trial for his trading of David Cone last August.
And even the deals that the public embraced -- Bret Saberhagen's acquisition and the addition of shortstop Tony Fernandez -- have been undermined by injury and circumstance and maybe a lack of research and constructive suspicion.
Well, Harazin is on the telephone again, and the Shea Stadium faithful might as well take the opportunity to get on the edge of their seats.


Topics of The Times; Reaching Out for Love -- and Money
What do these numbers say about America?
A.T.&amp;T. handled roughly 120 million long-distance calls on an average weekday in 1989.
On Oct. 18, the day after the San Francisco earthquake, that number leaped to 145 million. (America has a loving heart.)


Critic's Choice/Comedy; New Kind of Arts Festival, With Laughs
Since comedy has become ubiquitous, thanks to cable television and a nationwide network of stand-up comedy clubs, it was only a matter of time before the form was celebrated in its own version of an international arts festival.
The 10-day Toyota Comedy Festival, which continues through June 12, is a well-conceived series of 52 events, many free, that seriously attempts to take the measure of the field.
The festival, produced by Alan King and George Wein, will be spread out all over New York.
Two Toyota Comedy Caravans of rising local comedians will travel around the city giving free performances at Seaside-Asser Levy Park in Brooklyn (4 P.M. tomorrow), Clove Lakes Park in Staten Island (4 P.M. tomorrow), Crotona Park in the Bronx (1 P.M. Sunday) and Forest Park in Queens (3 P.M. Sunday).


Maneuvering in Bombing Inquiry; Possible Deal to Get Trade Center Suspect to Turn Witness
Providing an unusual glimpse of sensitive behind-the-scenes manuevering, lawyers and investigators say a prime suspect in the World Trade Center bombing has had sporadic discussions with Federal authorities over the possibility of becoming a cooperating witness.
The suspect, Mahmud Abouhalima, has not agreed to any plea bargain, but officials said prosecutors believed they had been close to a deal with him at least once.
But a new lawyer for Mr.
Abouhalima, who was retained late last week, said he thought that the Government had a weak case against his client and that he would advise against cooperation.


A Legal Thicket Amid the Redwoods
In a cluttered office overflowing with filing boxes and legal briefs, William H. Bertain is standing fast in his quixotic campaign to wrest back control of the Pacific Lumber Company, which was acquired in 1986 by Charles E. Hurwitz, a Houston financier.
A child of the lush redwood forests in this fog-shrouded country, Mr.
Bertain has dedicated the last seven years to a legal fight that few believe can be won, returning the company to the Murphy family that had managed it since the turn of the century.
Seeking to Undo a Buyout
Mr.
Hurwitz's Maxxam Inc. bought Pacific Lumber for about $900 million in a buyout financed largely with junk bonds handled by Drexel Burnham Lambert, and three members of the Murphy family have retained Mr.
Bertain to have the buyout undone, asserting that shareholders were defrauded.
Maxxam also faces a barrage of lawsuits from employees, shareholders and environmentalists seeking to halt the harvesting of old-growth timber.


Met-Pro Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Sotheby's Challenged In Selling Declaration
It is a first printing of the Declaration of Independence -- a clear, crisp copy that sold for $2.4 million two years ago -- and yesterday it became enmeshed in a Manhattan court fight over ownership and resale rights.
A fine arts investment firm, Visual Equities Inc., of Atlanta, obtained a court order temporarily blocking Sotheby's from selling the Declaration after charging that the Manhattan auction house had misled the firm and tried to defraud it at an unsuccessful auction last month.


Sounds Around Town
Remembering Sun Ra
Sun Ra Tribute, Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6300.
Sun Ra will be remembered this weekend in a club that played a big part in his revival during the mid-1970's.
If all goes well, his big band will make its boss's ascent back to Saturn a joyous occasion.
There are two shows tomorrow, at 8 and 11 P.M.
The cover charge is $12.50.
Boukman Eksperyans
Boukman Eksperyans, S.O.B.'s, 204 Varick Street, South Village, (212) 243-4940.
The best of the young Haitian bands in the city, Boukman Eksperyans mixes old-style Haitian compas with modern Caribbean music, along with carnival and voudon rhythms.
The group is exciting, and traditional, and pure pop.
The shows tonight start at 11 P.M. and 1 A.M.
Tickets are $16.
Conjunto Imagen
Conjunto Imagen, New Music Cafe, 285 West Broadway, at Canal Street, TriBeCa, (212) 941-1019.
The conjunto sound has been overlooked in salsa recently, which is too bad because the style grooves deeply.
Conjunto Imagen is one of the best groups working in New York City, and their shows always rock, with tight horns and percussion working over and around the metallic, percussive ostinatos of the guitarlike tres.
Shows are tonight at 9:30 and midnight, and there is a $7.50 cover charge.
P.
W.


Merry-Go-Round Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


In Trial's Wake, Rethinking What to Put in Quotes
As word spread yesterday about the Federal jury's findings in the New Yorker libel case, writers and editors disavowed the journalistic practices that were described at the trial and said these disclosures had tarnished journalism as a whole.
"I think it is always dangerous when the public is given any reason to doubt what they have been reading, especially in a magazine like The New Yorker, which has been famous for its accuracy," said James R. Gaines, managing editor of Time magazine, echoing the comments of other editors.
Time itself was the subject of a celebrated 1985 libel case involving the Israeli Defense Minister, Ariel Sharon.


G.M. to Hold Down Prices On Its 1993 Cars and Trucks
The General Motors Corporation, hoping to gain additional share of the United States vehicle market, said today that it would hold the line on the retail prices of its cars and light trucks through the 1993 model year, which will end in four months.
With competing auto makers having raised prices lately, the action by General Motors would exploit an opportunity to highlight its cars and light trucks as superior values and to gain market share, analysts said.
For 1992, the No. 1 auto maker had roughly a 34 percent share of the United States vehicle market.


Allstate Shares Sell Strongly
The Allstate Corporation entered the stock-market history books yesterday, but not everyone was cheering.
Some investors thought the stock was just too darned hot, with 28.3 million shares changing hands.
Shares of the insurer ended their first day of trading at $29.375, up from the $27 that underwriters paid Wednesday to bring the company public.


A Day at Bergdorf's Just for the Fun of It
I MISS the violets on the Bonwit Teller bag.
Not to mention the three-tiered Lenox candy dishes B. Altman used to sell.
Go ahead, scoff.
No one even eats candy anymore.
But in this era of diminishing department stores, I'm feeling sentimental.
I know I'm partly to blame for their demise.
Like millions of other people, I've become a devoted catalogue shopper, ordering everything by phone, from dishes to shoes.
On Saturday afternoons, the last thing I want to do is fight the midtown crowds.
Once you learn to shop lying down, it's too hard to get up again.


IWC Resources Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.S. Agency to Review Case Of Scientist on Hunger Strike
The Department of Health and Human Services will review the case of Walter Stewart, the National Institutes of Health scientist who is in the 25th day of a hunger strike to protest the halting of his investigations of scientific misconduct.
Dr.
Audrey Manley, the Acting Assistant Secretary for Health, phoned Mr.
Stewart, 48, and his co-worker, Dr.
Ned Feder, 65 and pleaded for an end to the hunger strike while the department looked into their contentions that they had been treated unfairly.
The investigation will be conducted by Harriet Rabb, the department's general counsel.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "SALTIMBANCO," Cirque du Soleil, Battery Park City, West Street and Battery Place.
An all-new production with an original musical score and 40 international performing artists.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 6 and 9:30; tomorrow at 4:30 and 8:30 P.M.; Sunday at 1 and 5 P.M.
Tickets: $15 to $39.50 for adults; $7.50 to $27.50 for children under 12.
Information: (212) 809-6969.
"BEYOND THE SUBJECTIVE," Synchronicity Space, 55 Mercer Street, SoHo.
Photographs by James Lane and Yoshitake Saito.
Through Sunday.
Hours: today through Sunday, noon to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 925-8645.
Closing Next Weekend  "AVENUE X," Playwrights Horizons, New Theater Wing, Studio, 416 West 42d Street, Manhattan.
An a cappella musical by John Jiler and Ray Leslee, set in the early 1960's, about two young singers who try to take an interracial act to the Brooklyn Fox Theater.
Through June 13.
Performances: Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Friday at 8 P.M.; Saturday, 3 and 8 P.M.; Sunday, 2 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $5.
Information: (212) 279-4200.
AMERICAN BALLET THEATER, Metropolitan Opera House.
Through June 12.
Performances: Monday, Tuesday, Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M.; Wednesday and Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $16 to $95.
Information: (212) 362-6000.
"PICASSO AND THE AGE OF IRON," Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 88th Street.
Through June 13.
Hours: 10 A.M. to 8 P.M. daily; closed on Thursdays.
Admission: $7; $4 for students and the elderly; free for children under 12.
Information: (212) 423-3500.
"1993 BIENNIAL EXHIBITION," Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
Works by more than 80 contemporary artists, including installations, drawings, photography and video.
Through June 13.
Hours: Wednesday, Friday, Saturday and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Thursday, 1 to 8 P.M.
Admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly; free for children under 12.
Information: (212) 570-3676.


Weak Sales Sped Coup at Tambrands
With the ceaseless challenge of private-label products for shelf space and market share, few changes rankle a board of directors more than watching a trusted premium brand lose its cachet.
When the company makes only one product, the disappointment is sharper.
Now imagine the same board hearing its chairman and chief executive predict that performances would reach one level, then learning later that actual numbers were well below predictions.


Money Fund Assets Down
The total assets of the nation's 632 retail money market mutual funds decreased $834.2 million, to $388.94 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, the Investment Company Institute said yesterday.
The assets of the 396 taxable retail money market funds were down $1.17 billion, to $307.52 billion, while the assets of the 236 retail tax-exempt funds increased $331.2 million, to $81.42 billion.


Clinton and Powell Discover That They Need Each Other
It was during the transition, and President George Bush, Defense Secretary Dick Cheney and Gen.
Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, were sitting around the Oval Office with some aides, musing about Bill Clinton and the merry band of baby boomers about to storm the White House.
Mr.
Bush and Mr.
Cheney were teasing General Powell with the ease of friends who had been through wars together, one participant in the meeting recalls.
"Well, Colin, you're going to have to deal with these guys now," Mr.
Bush said.
"Not for long," General Powell replied with raised eyebrows as the others let out a hearty laugh.
Matter of Mutual Survival
Indeed, when Bill Clinton took office, General Powell already had one eye on the exit, considering retirement even earlier than his currently planned departure in September.
Since then, though, the two men have developed an intriguing relationship, one that neither of them could have expected.


Curve Too Far Sinks the Kings
Marty McSorley of the Los Angeles Kings, sometimes the center of controversey for his rough play, had something new to explain tonight.
He talked of his illegally curved stick, which cost him a penalty, which helped create Montreal's late power-play goal, which sent the game into overtime, which ended in a 3-2 victory for the Canadiens.
"It won't happen again," said McSorley, blood trickling down his cheek from a scratch below his eye.
"I don't feel good. I made a mistake."


Medical Experts See No New Cases of Mystery Epidemic, So Far


Montreal Gets Desperate And Then It Gets Even
The Stanley Cup finals are tied at one game each, thanks in part to a low-scoring Montreal defenseman, who had a hat trick, and in part to a Los Angeles defenseman, who had an illegal curve on his stick.
The three goals were scored by Eric Desjardins, who got the game winner on a short shot from the right-wing circle at the 51-second mark of overtime to give the Canadiens a 3-2 victory over the Kings tonight before a grateful and relieved crowd of 17,959 at the Forum.


Let's Introduce Some Common Sense Into Our Drug Policies; Ever-Present Threat
To the Editor:
A.
M.
Rosenthal is to be commended for his efforts to keep the drug crisis deeply imbedded in the hearts and minds of every American ("Dismantling the War," column, May 18).


Restaurants
Like a long-running Broadway show, Orso has remained vital and fresh despite many cast changes over the years.
This offshoot of the Joe Allen empire opened in 1985 when Restaurant Row on West 46th Street seemed headed toward gastronomic senescence.
Almost single-handedly, Orso brought back the Broadway movers and shakers, instilling new life into the block.
Orso's step-down main dining room is dominated by a high arching skylight that creates a cheerful, sunny setting at lunch; in the evening it creates a sense of spaciousness.
Soft ocher tones and wood trim contribute to a casual, contemporary setting.
Walls are covered with publicity photographs of sports and entertainment celebrities.
In the back an open tile-and-steel kitchen churns out pizzas, pastas and appealing grilled fare.


ShoLodge Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 18


Pay Too High?
To the Editor:
"At What Point Is Pay Too High?" asks the headline over your article on the compensation of Leonard Tow, chief executive officer of Citizens Utilities (Business Day, May 21).
I suggest an appropriate answer to that question is one my manager at a major corporation gave me years ago.
"Your salary," he told me, "is designed to keep you sullen but not mutinous. If you're satisfied, it's too high. If you quit, it's too low. The right amount is somewhere between these two limits." SHERMAN SIEGEL  King of Prussia, Pa., May 21, 1993


Gift of the Heart
Music by Chopin, Liszt, Bach and Richard Strauss, as well as folk music and cabaret, are on the program tomorrow night at a concert to benefit Gift of the Heart -- Insight Seminar, an annual event for people with life-threatening illnesses.
The concert begins at 7:30 P.M. at the Christ and St.
Stephen's Church, 120 West 69th Street.
Tickets may be bought at the door; suggested contribution is $15.


Art in Review
Jutta Koether  Pat Hearn Gallery 39 Wooster Street SoHo Through June 26
Jutta Koether, a 35-year-old artist from Germany who has spent much of the last two years in New York City, is one of several women helping to breathe new life into painting.
In two-dimensional works, as well as in performance and installation pieces, the artist has seemed to circle painting from a somewhat ironic distance; in this exhibition, she gets down to work.


ARTISOFT FOUNDER IS DISMISSED AS COMPANY CHAIRMAN
Artisoft Inc., a personal computer networking company in Tucson, Ariz., said yesterday that its board had dismissed C. John Schoof 2d as chairman and chief executive and named William C. Keiper as chief executive.
Mr.
Keiper, 42, joined Artisoft in January as president and chief operating officer.
The board said it would name a chairman at its regularly scheduled board meeting next week.


Good With Violins, Not With People
"Un Coeur en Hiver" ("A Heart in Winter"), a coolly elegant romance directed by Claude Sautet, is centered on Stephane (Daniel Auteuil), who is solemn and expert when it comes to his craft (repairing fine violins) but has no skill in matters of emotion.
There is a certain irony to this film's title.
Stephane is hardly more wintry-hearted than the story's other two principals, with whom he becomes involved in a subtle and difficult romantic triangle.
Each of these refined, self-involved characters has his or her own form of chilly isolation, but it is Stephane who pays most noticeably for his shortcomings.


The Pentagon Sheds a Myth
For more than 40 years the armed forces bolstered their drive for new weaponry and bigger budgets with the argument that America must be prepared to fight two wars in distant parts of the world at once.
But in fact they've never had the capability to do that, and the Pentagon, in a long overdue and healthy concession to reality, is ready to end the masquerade.
Instead of planning to wage simultaneous wars in two different theaters, it is considering a new strategy of "win-hold-win" -- in effect, fighting wars one at a time.
Under the new doctrine, the Pentagon would fight one war on the ground, while it tries to hold off another aggressor with air power and forces from allied countries until it can commit its own ground troops.


Books of The Times; Echoes of the Vietnam War Are Still Resounding
The late, great Vietnam War lasted more than 10 years -- longer than the United States engagement in two World Wars and the Korean War -- and it continues to be a guiding fact in American foreign and military policy.
The Vietnam Syndrome remains a cautionary warning against adventurism in no-win wars or, contrariwise, as a lingering attitude that some unrepentant hawks want discarded.
The famous hundred-hour victory in the Persian Gulf was sui generis; it hasn't changed the views of key American decision makers, who do not want to stumble into the current ethnic-religious-border war in the Balkans.
Nearly two decades after the end of the Vietnam War, a new round of books explores the war's aims; how and why the United States got involved; who the Vietnamese people are and what they thought about the foreigners who came to their villages as warriors; the behavior of American soldiers in battle; the campus wars and the peace movement at home, and how correspondents reported the war while facing pressure from their publications, networks and government.


Applied Signal Technology Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Ain't Nothing but a Draft Pick
They call his cousin Elvis the king of rock 'n' roll.
Kirk Presley can only hope to be king of the hill every fifth day.
The Mets are offering him that chance, having drafted the 18-year-old right-hander from Tupelo, Miss., in the first round yesterday.
Kirk Presley, who was only 2 1/2 when his famous third cousin died, did not know Elvis, but he has known his shadow: public-address systems serenaded him with the song, "Elvis Is Dead" throughout his high-school career.


Sports of The Times; Nightmare The Knicks Won't Forget
IT could be a psychologist's lifework, this collective nightmare.
All 12 Knickerbockers and half the population of New York will share the same bad dream, the old slipping-on-ice dream, the old falling-through-air dream, the old cannot-make-a-layup dream.
In this dream, they are all Charles Smith, all 6 feet 10 inches of him, with those long arms, battling bravely under the basket, trying to make a layup against many grasping hands.
Time is running out.


Out of Fashion
Charming Shoppes Inc. operates women's apparel stores in the East, South and Midwest under the names of Fashion Bug and Fashion Bug Plus.
In the last few months, its stock has languished far below its high of $19.125 on Feb. 3.
Yesterday, analysts expressed disappointment in Charming Shoppes' sales report for May, and the company's stock fell.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Frederick Glass, 79, a former transportation industry exective who died on Wednesday in Manhattan, misidentified a college on whose board he served.
It is the College of Aeronautics in Flushing, Queens.


Review/Film; Games Meticulous And Mean
"The Music of Chance" was shown as part of the recent New Directors/ New Films series at the Museum of Modern Art.
Following are excerpts from Janet Maslin's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 19, 1993.
The film opens today at the Fine Arts, 4 West 58th Street, Manhattan.
A miniature city is the haunting centerpiece of "The Music of Chance," Philip Haas's cool, methodical film version of Paul Auster's equally meticulous 1990 novel.
Called City of the World, it is the bizarre play thing of Willie Stone (Joel Grey), a former optometrist who made his fortune by winning the lottery.
Together with his friend Bill Flower (Charles Durning), Stone lives in an isolated mansion and contemplates the meaning of fate while playing childlike games.
The City of the World is his masterwork.
James Nashe (Mandy Patinkin) and Jack Pozzi (James Spader) are his victims.


Art in Review
Dario Urzay  Pamela Auchincloss Gallery 558 Broadway (near Prince Street) SoHo Through June 30
Sealed beneath shiny layers of varnish, pale clouds of color drift across Dario Urzay's canvases.
Mr.
Urzay, a Spanish painter who lives in New York City, uses cosmetics as pigments, and as a result his palette runs to pastel pinks, pale greens and tawny browns with a few fiery reds and metallic golds thrown in.


Colombian Goalie Higuita Is Arrested
Police in Medellin, Colombia, yesterday arrested one of Latin America's most colorful soccer stars, Colombian national team goalkeeper RENE HIGUITA, on charges of kidnapping and drug trafficking.
The prosecutor-general's office said Higuita, who plays full time for the Medellin team Atletico Nacional, was accused of acting as an intermediary in the freeing of an abducted young woman.


Clerk Is Charged in Courthouse Killing
An employee of Superior Court was charged today with smuggling into the courthouse here a gun that was used to kill a police officer just before he was scheduled to testify at a drug trial.
Clifford J. Minor, the Essex County Prosecutor, identified the gun smuggler as Tinesha James, 22, a clerk-typist in the probation department and the girlfriend of a defendant in the drug case.
Mr.
Minor said the young woman entered the building on Thursday through an employee's entrance, wearing a jacket belonging to the man accused in the shooting and hiding his .357 Magnum in her waistband.
Meanwhile, the man passed through one of the metal detectors that guard all public entrances to the 12-story building.


Following the Ways of an Urban Bird
"You take a flamingo -- you think a flamingo could make it in New York City?" asked Sithandivine Frazer, who is 10 years old.
"Nah," answered his brother Amos, 9.
" A flamingo would probably get hit by a truck and break his skinny legs."


Steelers Place Brister on Waivers
BUBBY BRISTER, Pittsburgh's starting quarterback from 1988-91, was placed on waivers yesterday by the Steelers.
The 30-year-old Brister started 57 of the 61 games he played during the last seven seasons.


No Headline
"The young men who stand accused of this crime range in age from 14 years old to 16 years old. Fourteen years old to 16 years old. It boggles the mind and crushes the heart to think of it." -- MAYOR DAVID N. DINKINS, on the slaying of a bicyclist in Prospect Park.  [ 26:1. ]


A Gay Actor's Temptation to Keep Good Health in the Closet
When Stephen Spinella takes his clothes off on stage, the murmurs in the audience are frequently audible: "He's so skinny!" "The lesions, are they real?"
The bond between the audience and Mr.
Spinella, who has been nominated for a Tony Award for his performance as Prior Walter, an AIDS patient with apocalyptic visions in Tony Kushner's "Angels in America," is unusually intimate.
Indeed, on stage, naked and shivering, he appears so strikingly frail that one prominent critic, John Simon of New York magazine, even worried in print that Mr.
Spinella was starving himself for his craft.
People know it's an actor up there; he's not the character.
But still, is that guy all right?


BMW Picks New Chief For U.S. Holding Unit
BMW today named Helmut Panke chairman and chief executive of the new BMW (U.S.) Holding Corporation.
It was Mr.
Panke who spearheaded the auto maker's move to build an assembly plant in Spartanburg, S.C.
The recently organized North American subsidiary, based in Woodcliff Lake, N.J., will oversee Canadian and United States sales as well as manufacturing at the Spartanburg plant, which is to begin operating in the fall of 1994.


Collins Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Review/Theater; In Africa and America, Black Women's History
Qedusizi Maphalala is South African.
Mary Ruby Lee Thomas Johnson is American.


Teltronics Inc. (NSC) reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Gambino Jury Deadlocked
Two reputed mobsters, John and Joseph Gambino, were convicted yesterday only of jumping bail as a jury deadlocked on charges that they distributed thousands of pounds of heroin smuggled into the United States.
Judge Peter K. Leisure of Federal District Court in Manhattan declared a mistrial and scheduled a conference for Thursday to discuss a new trial.


Election of a Bishop Divides Episcopalians
If, as the saying goes, religion and politics don't mix, it might well follow that the nastiest of politics often involve the church itself.
There may be no better example than in the Episcopal Diocese of Connecticut, in a church with a long and distinguished reputation for civility, in which a six-way contest to select a bishop has turned into a free-for-all with charges and countercharges, suspicions and rumors.


Commentator Criticizes NBC
NBC's Peter Vecsey last night rebuked the network for giving broad coverage to accusations by a compulsive gambler and friend of Michael Jordan who alleged that Jordan ran up golf debts with him totaling $1.25 million.
The accusations were contained in book by the gambler, Richard Esquinas.
"It was an embarrassment to the media, to NBC especially," said Vecsey, one of NBC's group of studio insiders for National Basketball Association games.
"Personally, I'd have never gone on with a story like that." He added: "We were irresponsible. I think that the guy's motives were clear. He's a publicity seeker. He's looking to make financial gain and we gave a story of no importance credibility."


Youth Counselor Is Accused of Sexual Abuse
A youth counselor who served as the president of the community advisory council of a Brooklyn police precinct was arrested yesterday and charged with sexually abusing a 14-year-old youth an average of once a week for nearly a year.
The man, Solomon Kemp, 49, has worked as an assistant custodian at Public School 287 on Navy Street in Fort Greene, Brooklyn, for a quarter-century and for two decades has worked at a youth club across the playground from the school, where he had a reputation as a civic leader.


JOB GROWTH IN U.S. SURPRISINGLY HIGH WITH SURGE IN MAY
In a surprisingly upbeat economic report, Government figures showed today that job growth picked up smartly in May as the unemployment rate edged below 7 percent -- to 6.9 percent -- for the first time since late 1991.
Analysts found much to cheer in the Labor Department data, which seemed to portray an economy finally shifting into a higher gear after two years of generally weak recovery, particularly in jobs.


The Kings Play a Little Traveling Music
Even before the closing arguments were concluded in the Marty McSorley stick-curve case, the Los Angeles Kings were subtly changing the subject, looking to regain a psychological edge against the Montreal Canadiens as their Stanley Cup final series headed back to Los Angeles.
Having split the first two games in Montreal, the teams resume the four-of-seven-game championship round on Saturday night at the other forum, the one located more than 2,500 miles southwest of Montreal.


Oneida Casino Approved
The United States Department of the Interior today approved an agreement allowing the Oneida Indians to open a high-stakes gambling casino near Syracuse.
The decision removes the final hurdle from the Oneida's plan to open a sprawling glass-and-metal casino this summer that could draw tens of thousands of gamblers each day and generate more than 2,000 jobs in a largely poor, rural region.
The compact approved today, which has been signed by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, allows the Oneidas, a tribe of about 1,100 Indians, to operate a variety of games.
It will not allow for slot machines.


Germans Arrest 3 More in Bombing Fatal to Turks
The German police have reportedly arrested three men in connection with the fatal firebombing last week at a home occupied by Turks, and say they believe that the bombing was motivated by their anger after having been thrown out of a nearby bar.
Acting on information given by a 16-year-old who was arrested soon after the bombing, the police today arrested another 16-year-old and two men aged 20 and 23.
All are believed to have belonged to far-right groups.


Going for the Gold Could Take On More Meaning
The executive committee of the United States Olympic Committee was expected tonight to approve a bonus-per-medal resolution in a closed session, then present it to the U.S.O.C.'s board of directors at an open meeting Sunday.
The action would allocate cash awards to all American athletes who win medals at coming Olympics: $15,000 for a gold medal, $10,000 for a silver, and $7,500 for a bronze.
In addition, there would be a $5,000 prize for fourth place and $1,000 for a performance that represented a significant improvement within a particular sport.


Baffling Epidemic Gripping Navajos' Land of Mysteries
In this land of swaggering sky and wind-carved red sandstone, where the black tongues of ancient lava flows still stain the pale plateau and the sediments everywhere are freckled with dinosaur fossils, imagination and mystery have an easy foothold.
But perhaps never before has a mystery held the Navajo Nation and surrounding towns in such a tight vise as has the devastating flu-like illness that has swept through the Four Corners region of New Mexico and Arizona, killing 11 people and gravely sickening at least seven others.


Aircoa Hotel Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


U.N. IS AUTHORIZING ALLIED AIR STRIKES AGAINST THE SERBS
The United Nations Security Council voted overwhelmingly today to authorize the United States and its allies to use air strikes against Serbian forces besieging six Muslim enclaves in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
But Washington and its European allies differed on the precise circumstances under which such air strikes would be carried out.


Warsaw Journal; Paper's Fare Adds the Spice of Life To Politics and the Poles Devour It
A healthy serving of political analysis, a restaurant critic who can be both caustic and reverential and an elegant color Sunday magazine wrapped around classified advertisements.
Does it sound like a well-established American newspaper with a respectable number of readers?
Well, this is Gazeta Wyborcza, the biggest circulation daily in Poland.
Since the fall of the Communist Government four years ago, newspapers and magazines have blossomed in Poland, appealing to virtually every conceivable interest.


British Chief, Under Fire, Declares, 'I'm Staying'
Clearly irritated by a growing chorus of critics who say he is not up to the job, Prime Minister John Major offered a fighting defense of his Government today, telling an audience of Conservative Party women: "I am fit. I am well. I am here -- and I'm staying."
In departing from the prepared text of his speech, the Prime Minister lashed out after a series of recent reports in British papers that cited anonymous sources and unidentified ministers who described Mr.
Major lost in a fog of gloom and depression as a result of declining public confidence in his leadership and faltering Tory morale.


Nutmeg Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


F.C.C. Seeks Added Funds
Swamped with paperwork by a new law that regulates cable television prices, the Federal Communications Commission warned Congress today that it would stop handling customer complaints unless it got an extra $28 million to do the job.
Two months ago, in response to a law passed by Congress last fall, the F.C.C. adopted tough new rules that are expected to roll back cable television prices by about $1 billion.
But agency officials warned that the law would generate a mountain of new pleadings and consume vast amounts of staff time.


Clayton Goes North and Signs With Packers
Wide receiver MARK CLAYTON, who made the Pro Bowl five times in 10 seasons with the Miami Dolphins, signed a one-year deal with the Green Bay Packers yesterday.


Haitian Rulers Are Target of New Sanctions by U.S.
In a tacit acknowledgment that its diplomacy has failed to restore Haiti's democratically elected Government, the Clinton Administration today imposed sanctions on supporters of the military-backed Government and said it would begin consultations on further economic measures, including a possible oil embargo.
Administration officials said the assets in the United States of 83 individuals and 35 institutions would be frozen, including cash accounts, real estate and other property.
They will also be blocked from any financial transactions in the United States, and the individuals and members of their families will be barred from entering the country.


Jordan Disputes Wager Amounts
Although he continued his boycott of the news media today, Michael Jordan acknowledged in a statement distributed by his agent that he had made wagers during golf games with Richard Esquinas, who claims in a new book that Jordan is a compulsive gambler.
But in a strongly worded response, Jordan maintained that the amounts of bets and losses that Esquinas said the Chicago Bulls' star ran up -- a figure that reached as high as $1.25 million -- were "preposterous."


North Korea Isn't Convinced It Should Stay in Nuclear Pact
United States negotiators failed again today to persuade North Korea to drop its plans to withdraw next week from an international treaty intended to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons.
Expressing disappointment at the outcome of the talks, the State Department said in a statement tonight that North Korea had "showed no willingness to meet most of our concerns and those of the international community."


Mets and Tanana Cave In Under the Astros' Roof
The formula for success against Frank Tanana is to balance patience with aggression.
The deal is to wait for the moment of opportunity and then not waste a second seizing it.
It's a formula that can't be followed any more perfectly than the Houston Astros did tonight in beating the Mets, 7-2, at the Astrodome.


The Payoff Is in Picking the Right Countries
The 57 world stock funds can invest anywhere, and the countries they choose dictate their investment returns: Avoiding Japan and investing heavily in the United States was the winning formula for the last three years.
For investors who want some diversification abroad, the world stock funds offer one-stop shopping.
After an investor buys shares, the fund manager decides which parts of the world look best.


Fishermen Protest Ban on Fish-Rich Spawning Grounds


Review/Dance; For the Joyce's 10th Birthday, a Hearty Party
The Joyce Theater gave itself a birthday party on Tuesday night in celebration of its 10th anniversary, complete with balloons, eloquent speeches and a fast-forward jaunt through contemporary dance.
It is hard to remember New York dance without the Joyce.
It has played an invaluable role as a well-appointed, welcoming home for middle-sized dance companies who have outgrown theaters like Dance Theater Workshop and Performance Space 122 but are not yet ready for City Center.
The Joyce has also developed a new and faithful audience for dance.
All that was hard to imagine a decade ago, when Cora Cahan and Eliot Feld, then administrator and choreographer of the Feld Ballet, looked at the Elgin, a rundown neighborhood movie house, and imagined the Joyce.
Ms.
Cahan and Mr.
Feld were on hand to talk of that decade on Tuesday, along with Linda Shelton, director of the Joyce, and Kitty Carlisle Hart, the head of the New York State Council on the Arts and a spirited early believer in the theater.
A seat, K 108, has now been named for Miss Hart.
Then it was time for dancing, in an impressively staged but rather dizzying succession of works performed by nine individuals and groups.


Squaring Off Over Cigarette Taxes
Never friends, seldom respectful of each other, the tobacco industry and antismoking forces have renewed their hostilities over industry claims that a higher excise tax on tobacco products, as part of the Clinton Administration's health-care plan, would devastate large parts of the economy.
Braced for the current tax of 24 cents a pack to at least double, and possibly amount to more than $2, tobacco interests predict those levels would cut consumption enough to kill hundreds of thousands of jobs in industries from farming to retailing, close businesses and deprive state and local governments of millions of dollars in taxes.
Another Point of View
Yet opponents cite the industry's own behavior of the last 13 years to dispute those arguments.
Until April -- when Philip Morris announced price cuts of up to 40 cents a pack on Marlboro, and other cigarette makers followed suit -- the companies had raised prices 33 times, by more than 350 percent, notwithstanding a tripling of the Federal excise tax.
Yet jobs did not disappear at nearly the rate the tobacco interests are now predicting they will.


Stand-Pat Advice for Payers of Estimated Taxes
Tax professionals have unusually simple advice for high-income people wondering what to do about their June 15 payment of estimated taxes now that Congress has begun approving retroactive increases.
They say to ignore the politicians, at least for now.
"There's no reason to do anything," said Peter K. Scott, tax partner in the Washington office of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, the accounting firm.
"It's better to hold on to the money."


Campus Lesbians Step Into Unfamiliar Light
At a recent academic convocation at Ohio State University here, 21-year-old Rebecca Woods, honors student, athlete and campus government leader, walked toward the podium to claim yet another award.
Elated, Ms.
Woods, a junior, heard herself being cited for, among other things, her work with the Bisexual, Gay and Lesbian Alliance.
"For a moment I thought, 'Now, 500 more people know I'm a lesbian,' " Ms.
Woods said, talking about the ceremony.
"I didn't care. I went onto the next thought: 'I got the award!' "


New Snag in Folk Art Museum's Hunt for a Home
On and off again for a dozen years, the plan to build a permanent home for the Museum of American Folk Art at the base of a new office tower in mid-Manhattan now seems to be unraveling.
An affiliate of Investcorp, the international investment bank that was once a partner in the development project, has moved to foreclose the mortgage on four of six vacant brownstones owned by the museum on West 53d Street, said Ralph Esmerian, the president of the museum's board.


Rotech Medical Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
CPC INTERNATIONAL INC., Englewood Cliffs, N.J., will build a bouillon-manufacturing plant in China for its Knorr brand.
CPC owns 80 percent of the new plant, with the Yuexing Enterprise Group owning the remaining 20 percent.
GRAND CASINOS INC., Plymouth, Minn., announced the dismissal of lawsuits brought against it last January contending that it had violated Federal laws in its management of two Indian casinos in Minnesota.


Stemming Slaughter in the Streets
The gun lobby is finally losing its grip on America.
Despite heavy lobbying by the National Rifle Association, two states -- New Jersey and Virginia -- have placed limits on sales of assault weapons within their borders.
Connecticut is on the verge of doing the same.
Now a survey by Louis Harris shows that Americans as a whole approve of stringent weapons control to stem the rising tide of handgun deaths.


2 Southern Textile Makers Gear Up for Takeover War
Even over such cloistered territory as the American bathroom, it seems, a good brawl will draw the attention of Wall Street, judging by the market's response to a takeover war brewing between two Southern companies that make bed and bath products.
Springs Industries, which makes Springmaid and Wamsutta towels and linens, offered last week to buy Fieldcrest Cannon Inc., and its controlling shareholder, the Amoskeag Company, in a $354 million deal that would create the country's largest textile company.


Panel Sees Flaws in Plan For Encoding
A Commerce Department advisory committee issued two draft resolutions today raising "serious concerns" about a Clinton Administration plan to standardize a high-technology coding system that would permit law-enforcement officials to tap telephone calls and computer data transmissions.
The resolutions call on the Administration to hold extensive public hearings on the new technology, known as the Clipper chip, and they urge that the technology not be deployed beyond the executive branch of the Government until the public review is completed.


CONFLICT IN THE BALKANS: Serbs Feel Invincible; Having Out-Bluffed the West, They May Now Press Their Bosnia Drive
Serbian leaders here and in Bosnia are now acting with increasing confidence, sensing that they have out-bluffed Europe, Russia and the United States, and no longer see any major obstacles to their drive for hegemony in former Yugoslavia.
This is the conclusion of foreign diplomats here and a number of Serbs, who say recent events have made it clear that the major powers have no stomach for direct military intervention in the republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.


4 Youths Arrested in Killing of Bicyclist in Park
Four Brooklyn teen-agers were arrested yesterday in the fatal shooting of a drama teacher who had fought off their efforts to steal his $250 bicycle on a wooded dirt trail in Prospect Park, the police said.
The youths -- two 14 and two 16 -- had a simple motive, the police said, when they attacked the teacher, Allyn Winslow, on Tuesday: three of them had bikes and they wanted a fourth.


InterPharm Labs reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Weather Becomes a Factor in Belmont
Along the backstretch on the eve of the 125th Belmont Stakes, trainers were scanning the skies for the approach of rain yesterday, and some were predicting that rain was one chance factor that could tilt the balance.
Nobody can sweep the Triple Crown this year because Sea Hero won the Kentucky Derby five weeks ago and Prairie Bayou won the Preakness two weeks later.
But both horses still have shots at the $1 million bonus for best performance in the series, depending on how they run in the Belmont, the third and most punishing race.


New Sanctions on Haiti
The Clinton Administration imposed new sanctions on supporters of Haiti's military-backed Government and said it would consult with the United Nations and the Organization of American States on further sanctions, including an oil embargo.
The action was a tacit admission of failure in diplomatic moves to restore the democratically elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Article, page 2.


Fernandez Looks for One More Upset
Unless ennui should get the better of Steffi Graf as she gets down to business in her 19th Grand Slam final on Saturday, and it rarely does, the 23-year-old German seems poised to collect her 12th Grand Slam title.
She hasn't, after all, ever lost a match to Mary Joe Fernandez, the only obstacle between herself and a third French Open title.
Graf, who hasn't won the title here since 1988, would appear to have the upper hand when she marches onto center court at Roland Garros with her newly regained No. 1 ranking.
She has reached a final 96 times in her career, 86 times more than Fernandez has.
And she has won 11 Grand Slam tournaments, while Fernandez, in two previous finals, both in Australia, has come up empty.


Child Killed, 2 Wounded In a Spray of Stray Bullets
Two 7-year-old boys playing in a courtyard behind a Bronx housing project shortly before dark yesterday were struck by stray bullets from a nearby gun battle, killing one and injuring the other, the police said.
A 28-year-old man, apparently the intended victim, was also shot.
The police said two gunmen were seen arguing with the adult victim, Abraham Smith, before they shot him five times and escaped.
Officers estimated that the men fired at least 13 shots


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  DETROIT TIGERS -- Activated John Doherty, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Placed Rob Deer, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
National League


New Details Emerge in Killing of Man in Police Custody
Besides blows to the head and neck, a prisoner's inability to breathe while he was trussed up and left face down on a bed for more than a half hour may have been a major factor in his death while he was in police custody last week, a person familiar with the case said yesterday.
Many new details of the last hour of the prisoner's life emerged yesterday as the Manhattan District Attorney and the Police Commissioner promised thorough investigations, and civil rights advocates representing the dead man's family amplified on charges that the victim, a black man, had been beaten to death by white officers as they used racial epithets.


Head of CUNY Drops Plan to Cut Course Offerings
The Chancellor of the City University of New York has abandoned a plan to eliminate or consolidate scores of majors at many colleges in the 21-campus system.
The action by the Chancellor, Dr.
W.
Ann Reynolds, came after the plan was sharply criticized by faculty members, students and legislators.
In the end, the opposition proved so powerful that she was forced to scale back the proposal.


The City Budget: Still Gimmicky
With a bow to reality, Mayor David Dinkins and his advisers have revised the New York City budget.
They've deleted the worst examples of undue optimism and agreed to make deeper spending cuts.
That's progress.
But in what might be the administration's theme song, the revision doesn't go far enough.
Like the first version, it relies too heavily on money that isn't likely to materialize, and on gimmicks that will raise money in the short run but cause pain down the road.
The Mayor's budget for the fiscal year that begins July 1 now anticipates $150 million in Federal aid instead of $250 million, though even the $150 million is not guaranteed; $55 million from the sale of the Offtrack Betting Corporation, though no sale has been arranged, and $215 million from borrowing against property tax delinquencies, which robs the future to collect cash now.


Jonathan Eddy, 91, Founder of a Union
Jonathan Eddy, a former New York newspaperman who helped to found the American Newspaper Guild in 1933, died on Wednesday in Houston, where he was visiting family.
He was 91 and had homes in Barcelona, Spain, and Dickinson Center, N.Y.
He had been in failing health for two years, his family said.


Charter Power Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Sunrise Energy Services reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Older but Still Hip, the Velvet Underground Rocks Again
The New Musical Express, Britain's leading pop-music weekly, indulged its taste for puns by headlining its cover story "The Revival of the Hippest." The Independent, a London daily, contented itself with "the comeback to end all comebacks." Whatever you called it, the reunion of the Velvet Underground this week at the Edinburgh Playhouse -- with a European tour, a live album and no doubt more to come -- was very big news indeed.
Not bad for three men over 50 and a 48-year-old mother of five.
What made the excitement all the odder was that during its brief existence (1965 to 1968, in this configuration), the Velvet Underground sold hardly any records at all.
Hostile to peace-and-love banalities, irreducibly New York in attitude, the band epitomized the coolness of the downtown Manhattan art scene and the sex-and-drugs danger of the city at night.
Division, Then Reunion
Ignored or reviled by the American public and the record industry, the Velvets still had an enormous influence, especially when they were taken up by Andy Warhol and given a temporary new lead singer in Nico, his latest "superstar." Blending Lou Reed's adult poetry with John Cale's vanguard musical experimentation, the Velvets were the parents of the entire art rock, punk, new-wave and college rock scenes worldwide.
Bitterness kept the Velvets apart.
Mr.
Reed had forced Mr.
Cale out in 1968 and embarked on his solo career in 1970.
Sterling Morrison, who had been a college classmate of Mr.
Reed's at Syracuse University, wouldn't talk to his old friend for years, until a new band contract was signed in 1986, redistributing record royalties.
Mr.
Reed was the only one to sustain a visible career.
Mr.
Cale made and produced some admired records, but his most notable recent achievement was a 1988 commemoration of Warhol, in collaboration with Mr.
Reed, called "Songs for Drella." Maureen Tucker, the band's drummer, lived in Georgia, brought up her children, worked in the computer business and played in underground bands.
Mr.
Morrison eventually earned a Ph.D. in English literature in Texas, working on tugboats in the Gulf of Mexico and playing in Ms.
Tucker's latest band.
Nico was killed in a bicycle accident in Ibiza in 1988.
In 1990, at the invitation of the Cartier Foundation, the four surviving band members got together in Paris for a Warhol tribute.
That led to a quasi-impromptu public rendition of one of their most famous songs, "Heroin," but was no proper reunion.
For that, another meeting in New York, followed by two days of trial-run practice sessions, was necessary before the current European tour got the go-ahead.
The watchword for the reunion is fun.
Band members have used the word in many interviews, and while it may be their actual motivating factor, it is also a conscious strategy to subvert cosmic expectations.
The problem with a Velvet Underground reunion is that nothing the band will do can match the legend that has grown up around it.
As David Sinclair wrote on Monday in The Times of London, "The group's unique godhead status will begin to diminish almost from the moment they start their first number." Fun and Money
Clearly their ambitions are serious, and include the courting of a mass audience that was never theirs in the 1960's.
The first big concert takes place tomorrow at the 13,000-seat Wembley Arena in London, with four stadium dates with the Irish band U2 at the end of the month and an appearance at the huge Glastonbury Festival in England on July 25.
All of this for a band that never played in Europe.
The four musicians say they have no plans for further activity, but they surely have expectations.
An album to be recorded live in Paris from June 15 to 17 will be released by Sire, presumably to coordinate with American performances.
The issue is not whether the band will perform in the United States, but when and under what circumstances.
"We're all going our separate ways," Mr.
Reed said in a group interview between shows in Edinburgh.
"But if anything came up and it seemed very special and it seemed like fun, we'd be receptive."
This will mean money, which most of the band members can use.
But all four seem sufficiently aware of -- proud of, burdened by, amused at -- their legend not to wish it squandered out of simple greed.
They insist they reunited only because they became convinced that their material still held up, still made sense and could still be played best by them.
Above all, they resented being intimidated by their own reputation.
"Should we stay in hiding just because a myth is loose in the land?" Mr.
Morrison asked.
No attempt has been made to recreate the exact sound of the old, technically primitive recordings.
New equipment lends the band's sound a solidity and variety it never had before.
Sylvia Reed, Mr.
Reed's wife and manager, is now the Velvets' manager and the designer of their contemporary-looking stage lighting.
Mr.
Cale has fretted about looking and sounding too slick.
At rehearsals, they relearned the words and musical structures of the old songs and then developed them at will. (Mr. Cale had to learn songs created after his departure; he also now sings a couple of Nico favorites.)
"We never played them the same way twice back then, so why should we now?" Mr.
Reed asked.
As Mr.
Cale has said, "We're in the business of remythologizing, not demythologizing." Although repertory for this tour consists basically of old band material, they are gingerly working in some new numbers, including a most effective -- and inescapably Velvet Undergroundish -- item called "Cast the First Stone" as the third and final encore Thursday night.
Building Enthusiasm
British critics have so far been mixed in their reactions, "Cleaning up their act seems like cheating," one wrote before he had heard a note.
Another came right out and argued that since the members of Velvet Underground had purveyed death, they should have died, long ago.
But others seemed more impressed then they had expected to be.
"The language the Velvet Underground invented still communicates the rock 'n' roll verities," wrote the critic for The Glasgow Herald.
Mr.
Sinclair, in The Times of London, seemed to recant his earlier pessimism: "This show did not produce a feeling of deja vu," he wrote on Thursday, "more an impression that, after 25 years, the rest of the world has only just caught up with them."
Those who attended both Edinburgh shows found the second, on Thursday, far superior to the first.
Nervousness had receded, and the band was beginning to generate an excitement that will surely build over the tour.
Certainly the audience loved it, standing throughout the two-hour set and cheering wildly.
Indeed, there was much to cheer.
Mr.
Reed still sings with the same ominous distinctiveness; Mr.
Cale is still the same multi-faceted musical saboteur; Mr.
Morrison still contributes a guitar sound of weight and solidity.
The revelation on Thursday, though, was the diminutive Ms.
Tucker's drumming.
Standing at her kit and whacking away, she makes a tom-toms-of-doom sound that inspired straight-ahead punk drumming for a generation.
The effect is not quirky or amateurish; it is rocklike in the granitic sense of that word, the foundation on which the band could build a creative future to match its potently nostalgic past.


A New Field For a Firm Of Architects
One of the nation's largest architectural design firms, Daniel, Mann, Johnson &amp; Mendenhall, has hired as its president an executive who intends to use his expertise in hazardous-waste cleanup to push the firm into new environmental work.
Raymond W. Holdsworth, 50, a former sales and marketing vice president for the International Technology Corporation, an environmental cleanup company, was named president of Daniel, Mann last month.
He succeeds M. Paul Brott, who left the firm to pursue unspecified interests on the East Coast.


Anatomy of the Failure To Confirm a Nominee
While President Clinton and virtually every member of his senior staff spent last week intent on getting the Administration's budget bill passed, storm clouds were gathering over Lani Guinier's nomination to head the Justice Department's civil rights division.
They were ignored.
But by the time the President met with Ms.
Guinier for more than an hour on Thursday evening, several officials had told him that she could not be confirmed by the Senate.


In New Jersey, Candidates Look to Undecided Republicans


Bears Drop Veteran Linebacker
Veteran linebacker RON RIVERA was waived yesterday by the Chicago Bears.


Sun Close to Setting on England for '94 Cup
ALAN ROTHENBERG, chief executive of World Cup '94, called England's precarious qualifying situation for next year's Cup, which will be played in the United States, a "mixed blessing." He said yesterday at a news conference in Manhattan that the absence of the English would diminish the threat from hooligans but could also eliminate tradition.
"When people think about the thugs, unfortunately they think about England," Rothenberg said.


Stuart Entertainment Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Stemming Slaughter in the Streets
The gun lobby is finally losing its grip on America.
Despite heavy lobbying by the National Rifle Association, two states -- New Jersey and Virginia -- have placed limits on sales of assault weapons within their borders.
Connecticut is on the verge of doing the same.
Now a survey by Louis Harris shows that Americans as a whole approve of stringent weapons control to stem the rising tide of handgun deaths.


Simula Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Rise in Jobs Roils Bond Markets
The Treasury market was rocked by a surprisingly strong employment report yesterday, driving yields higher on everything from bills to bonds.
The surprise in the May jobs report was twofold.
First, the increase in nonfarm payroll jobs of 209,000 in the month was higher than the consensus forecast of about 140,000, showing that the economy was spunkier than expected.
The second surprise was the revision of the April increase, which was raised to 216,000 from the initial report of 119,000.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about slowness in the selection of American ambassadors referred incorrectly to a statement by Richard C. Holbrooke, a former Assistant Secretary of State.
He wrote in Foreign Affairs in 1991 that an American troop withdrawal from East Asia "in the long run" was "probably inevitable." Mr.
Holbrooke did not say he favored such a step.


Officer for Debt Monitor
Charles H. Dallara, a managing director of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, has been named managing director of the Institute of International Finance, effective in July.
The institute, based in Washington, monitors the debt and financial condition of about 60 countries, providing the information to its membership of 175 banks and financial institutions.
Mr.
Dallara, 44, will be responsible for developing and executing programs under the guidance of the institute's board.


Evans Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


Broadway Box Office Registers A Big Rise
Broadway theatergoers spent a total of $327.7 million at the box office in the 1992-93 season, according to figures made public yesterday by the League of American Theaters and Producers, the Broadway trade group, which says the sum is the highest ever.
The figure was $34.7 million higher than last season's box office tally, which held the previous record.
Attendance was also up 477,000 over last year, for a year-end total of 7.9 million.
But there were fewer new productions this year (33, compared with 37 last season), and attendance did not come close to the 11 million admissions in the early 1980's, when there were many more shows.


Step Up Savings Goals, Pension Experts Urge
MOST working Americans desperately need to increase their retirement savings, benefits consultants say.
Increased longevity and low interest rates are the primary reasons, but provisions of President Clinton's economic package create a new sense of urgency.
"Don't wait until a tax bill is signed" to review retirement savings, said Alan Glickstein, a partner in Kwasha Lipton, benefit consultants based in Fort Lee, N.J.


Barrington D. Parker, 77, Is Dead; Trial Judge for Reagan's Attacker
Judge Barrington D. Parker of the Federal District Court in Washington, who presided over the trial of John W. Hinckley Jr., the would-be Presidential assassin, and in other major cases, died on Wednesday at Holy Cross Hospital in Silver Spring, Md.
He was 77.
The cause was complications from a heart attack and stroke he suffered in 1989, a family spokesman said.
Judge Parker lived in Northwest Washington.


Review/Theater; A Playwright Intoxicated With Words
Mac Wellman's theatrical riffs liquefy language into rapturous conundrums of onomatopoetry and un sprocketed metaphor.
Imagine James Joyce as a rap artist, and you might have an inkling of the effect in performance of the playwright's monologues: brief blank-verse adjuncts to his lexiconically liberated plays like "A Murder of Crows" and "Sincerity Forever."
In "Three Americanisms," at the SoHo Repertory, he has written a trio of etherized soliloquies circling the subject of justifiable paranoia.
Just as it is difficult to comprehend the precise meaning of the rodomontade stream of subconsciousness, one cannot easily identify individuals, although one or more of the three speakers may be a homeless person.
All three, in the author's word, have "hadituptohere," and they want to do something about it.


Skyline Chili Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 9


From Powerful Pulpit, a Moral Warrior Takes Aim
When the Rev.
Calvin O. Butts 3d announced last month that he would unleash a campaign against explicit rap lyrics, he and his allies characterized the move as logical step for a charismatic pastor who increasingly uses his pulpit to speak out on moral issues in the black community.
But when that pulpit is at the Abyssinian Baptist Church, the 186-year-old, 5,000-member Harlem institution that was a springboard to political power for Adam Clayton Powell Jr., the sermons draw careful scrutiny.


One Crazy Inning, One Scripted Setback
The scenario was set: Kevin Brown almost always tames the Yankees, the Yankees usually lose to Texas at Arlington Stadium and Jim Abbott rarely gets enough support to win close games.
Last night, though, the script looked as if it might change.
Until the seventh inning.
Clutching loosely to a 2-1 lead and facing a bases-loaded plight in the seventh, Abbott surrendered a two-out single to center field by Billy Ripken that momentarily tied the score because Dean Palmer stopped at third base.
But Gerald Williams overran the ball, which allowed two more runs to score and pushed the Rangers to a 4-2 lead.
They eventually won, 5-3, their 20th victory over the Yankees in the last 25 games here.


Guatemala's Vice President Is Said to Resign
Under pressure from the same business, political and social groups that backed the military overthrow of President Jorge Serrano Elias on Tuesday, Mr.
Serrano's Vice President renounced his claim to the presidency tonight, politicians said.
The opponents of the Vice President, Gustavo Espina Salguero, effectively turned aside the powerful army leadership, which had surprised and angered many Guatemalans by publicly endorsing Mr.
Espina's attempt to take over as President.


Clayton Goes North and Signs With Packers
Wide receiver MARK CLAYTON, who made the Pro Bowl five times in 10 seasons with the Miami Dolphins, signed a one-year deal with the Green Bay Packers yesterday.


PCC Group reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Results Plus
COLLEGE BASEBALL Texas A&amp;M Captures World Series Opener Brian Thomas's 15th homer of the season leading off the sixth inning broke a 1-1 tie and helped left-hander Jeff Granger and top-seeded Texas A&amp;M beat Kansas, 5-1, in the opening game of the College World Series yesterday in Omaha.
Granger (15-3) scattered five hits and struck out seven in eight innings of work.
The Aggies (53-9) move to a game Sunday against L.S.U., which defeated Long Beach State, 7-1, last night.
Kansas will play Long Beach in an elimination-bracket game Sunday. (AP) TENNIS Navratilova Advances to Beckenham Final Martina Navratilova avenged a rare grass-court upset yesterday by beating fourth-seeded Linda Harvey-Wild, 6-3, 6-1, in one semifinal match at the Beckenham event in England.
Harvey-Wild beat Navratilova in three sets at the Eastbourne tournament last year.
Navratilova plays Dutch teen-ager Kristie Boogert in today's final of the exhibition tournament.
Boogert, seeded No. 5, beat Kristine Radford, 6-4, 6-2, to gain the final. (AP) GOLF Baker Ties a Record at British Masters Peter Baker of England shot an eight-under 64 yesterday to tie the course record and open a three-stroke lead with a 131 after two rounds of the Dunhill British Masters in Woburn, England.
By contrast, British Open champion Nick Faldo ended his round with a 9 on the 18th hole after hitting two drives out of bounds.
He finished with a 73 and fell 10 strokes off the lead.
Bernhard Langer, who is aiming to add the British Masters title to the Masters he won this spring at Augusta, Ga., shot a second-round 67 and is six strokes off the lead. (AP) Ritzman and King Tie for Lead: A six-stroke swing on the first three holes left Alice Ritzman and Betsy King tied for the lead with 136 totals after two rounds of the Ladies Professional Golf Association Oldsmobile Classic in Meridian Township, Mich.
Ritzman, the first-round leader with a six-under-par 66, bogeyed the first three holes at Walnut Hills Country Club, and finished with a 70.
King birdied those same holes on her way to her second 68. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD Parilla Takes 2d Straight 800-Meter Title Jose Parilla, a junior at the Univeristy of Tennessee, won the 800 meters for the second straight time in the National Collegiate Athletic Association championships in New Orleans last night.
He took the lead from Scott Peters of Florida with 200 meters to go and pulled away to a 4-yard victory in 1 minute 46.51 seconds.
Peters held on for second in 1:47.01.
Kim Sherman of Wisconsin won the women's 800 by outleaning her teammate, Amy Wickus, 2:02.99 to 2:03.00.
Another Badger runner, Clare Eichner, won the women's 3,000 meters in 9:03.06.
Lauren Gubicza of Fordham finished third in 9:12.03.


Judge Reverses 3 Convictions In Gang Cases
After working for more than 20 years to smash El Rukns, one of the city's most powerful street gangs, local and Federal prosecutors reveled in their victory over the gang two years ago, when dozens of El Rukns and their associates were convicted or pleaded guilty on the testimony of gang leaders turned Government witness.
But today, in a blistering 137-page decision, a Federal judge granted three of the defendants a new trial, citing a long and "disturbing" list of prosecutorial misconduct.
The three defendants, Tom Burnside, Codell Griffin and C. D. Jackson, were not members of El Rukns but were convicted of supplying the gang with drugs.


New Jersey's Jobless Rate Down to 7.4%
A surprising surge in employment after three months of economic deterioration cut the unemployment rate in New Jersey to 7.4 percent last month, according to Federal data released yesterday.
The May unemployment rate was the lowest since January and it was appreciably below the 9.1 percent in April, when New Jersey had the highest rate of any large industrialized state.


RTI Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


In Statues of Women, Numbers Aren't the Story; Sculptors Also
To the Editor:
The bronze statue by Jeanne Rynhart of Annie Moore ("Statues, With Limitations," editorial, May 23), the first immigrant to pass through the great registry room on Ellis Island, certainly conveys the aspect of youth and hope appropriate to the site.
In writing of the vast preponderance of males who have been honored with outdoor sculptures, you mention the great equestrian statues including those dedicated to Latin American liberators.
Your readers might be interested in knowing that the statue of Simon Bolivar that stands at the entrance of Central Park, just east of the Avenue of the Americas, was the work of Sally Farnham, a highly successful artist, who worked in the early years of this century.


Hach Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Observer; The Rain In Spain Stays . . .
Instructions for a President:
1.
Know thyself.
You may not have peaked too soon, but you have certainly peaked very young.
A man elected President at age 46 will be a mere 54 when he loses the job.
That's if he is lucky.
If he is not, the best job he can ever have will be over and done with when he is 50.
Nowadays 54 is young and 50 is very young.
2.
Act on this self-knowledge.
In short, this is the whole ball game, right here and right now.
After this, all else will be small cheese unless you think spending the final 30 or 40 years of your life reading history's judgments will be tons of fun.
You must do something to make the historians respect you.
Quit dawdling and do it now.


A Testing and Tiring Two-Week Marathon for Jordan
Michael Jordan looked tired last night.
Tired, and frustrated by being harassed by the Knicks, nagged by the press and haunted by skeletons from his closet.
He missed just about everything he threw up in the second half.
He lashed out, Knick style, at Doc Rivers for nothing more than being played hard.
It was almost two long weeks for basketball's Superman, who was shown to be vulnerable, if not beatable, by the Knicks.
"I thought Michael was exhausted tonight," said Bulls Coach Phil Jackson.
"I think there was a tremendous strain with all the controversy."


Corrections
An article last Saturday comparing President Clinton's job aproval rating with that of his predecessors mischaracterized the timing of a Gallup poll taken in August 1945.
That poll, in which 92 percent of those surveyed approved of the way Harry S. Truman was handling his job as President, was taken several months after the German surrender and two weeks after the Japanese surrender, not several months after the end of World War II.


Ramirez Announces Candidacy for Public Advocate


Hartford Bill on Integration Is Approved
A bill promoting racial integration in public schools across Connecticut won final approval tonight in the State Senate.
Although weakened by its supporters to win passage, the bill is a significant step toward addressing the issue of segregated schools, by requiring the state's cities and towns to participate in regional talks and offering financial incentives if they create schools that draw students across municipal boundaries.


Q and A
Under the Umbrella Q. What is meant by umbrella insurance?
KEITH BALDWIN, Middletown, N.J.
A.
If you are sued as a result of an accident involving your car or your home, liability insurance included in your auto and home policies will offer some protection.
But this liability insurance usually has upper limits, typically $300,000.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a news analysis article on Thursday about the Guatemalan political crisis misstated the day of the military ouster of President Jorge Serrano Elias.
It was Tuesday, not Monday.


U.N. Press Corps Put Strain on Diplomacy
To the Editor:
Re "Dumb Censorship at the U.N." (editorial, May 26): The invitation by the United Nations correspondents to Shen Tong, a leading Chinese dissident, to meet with them in their club led a member state of the United Nations, China, to protest to Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali what it considered a political activity at odds with its standing as a member state of the world organization.
The club of the United Nations Correspondents Association is inside the Secretariat building.
Imagine, for example, if the National Press Club were at the Department of State building.
This imposes certain limitations on the use that may be made of such space, in contrast to situations where journalists' associations occupy independent quarters.


Evergreen Resources Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Year to March 31


Summer Buying Sprees Could Lift Retail Stocks
AS summer approaches, Wall Street is preparing a favorable forecast for the stocks of many retailing companies.
The message is simple: after a long dry spell, customers may finally be ready to open their wallets, and retailers are poised to benefit from increased sales.
As retail specialists see it, sales momentum will lead to higher earnings and to rising stock prices for selected companies.


Chi Chi Putts-Putts Into the Picture
After shooting his best round in eight tournaments with help from an old putter he found in the bagroom at Sleepy Hollow Country Club, Chi Chi Rodriguez, one of golf's biggest rib-ticklers, announced today he has been playing with a broken rib for the last five weeks.
"I broke the rib falling in an airplane," Rodriguez said.
"I couldn't sue anybody because it was my own plane."


Religion Notes
Studying Lifting a Ban
Contrary to official policy, girls serve as, well, altar boys in many Catholic parishes around the United States, helping priests at mass with tasks like distributing the communion bread.
Now there is talk that the Vatican may lift the prohibition against girls serving at the altar.


Battle Between Creditors Of Olympia Is Intensified
The tug-of-war between creditor groups of the Canadian and United States branches of the distressed Olympia &amp; York real estate empire intensified yesterday.
Court papers filed by the head of the United States branch argued that new disputes over a governing board to administer the American assets had made it "virtually impossible" to run the organization.
The papers were filed by John E. Zuccotti, the head of the company's United States branch.
He said in light of the latest developments that "such a situation is untenable." Series of Hearings
Mr.
Zuccotti made his comments in an affidavit filed in Federal Bankruptcy Court before Judge James L. Garrity Jr.
Judge Garrity has held a series of hearings on the governance of the American company, Olympia &amp; York USA, whose management has been trying to restructure the United States holdings without seeking Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law protection.
Last spring, the Canadian parent company, Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., filed for such protection.


C. Preston Stephens, Coca-Cola Executive, 78
C.
Preston Stephens, a former senior vice president of the Coca-Cola Export Company, died on Wednesday at his home in Atlanta.
He was 78.
The cause of death was bone cancer, a company spokesman said.


Despite Promise, Serbs Keep Up Fire on Safe Area
Bosnian Serb forces kept up their offensive on a designated safe area in eastern Bosnia today, despite their political leader's assurance to United Nations officials on Thursday that they would unilaterally hold their fire.
A weeklong assault against the Muslim enclave around the town of Gorazde, designated as a safe area by the United Nations, has killed 300 people and wounded hundreds more, reports on the Muslim-controlled Bosnian radio said today.


Sihanouk Is Blaming His Son for Collapse of Coalition
Struggling to explain how his coalition government had collapsed only hours after its creation, Prince Norodom Sihanouk made clear today that he placed the blame for the debacle on his 49-year-old son, the leader of the opposition political party that won last week's internationally supervised Cambodian elections.
United Nations peacekeepers said it was still likely that Prince Sihanouk, Cambodia's ceremonial head of state and its former monarch, would form some sort of coalition government.
The Prince, who has a reputation for being unpredictable, has changed his mind before.


Medrad Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Williams Honors Jim Lehrer
Jim Lehrer, associate editor and co-anchor of "The MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour" on PBS, delivered the main address yesterday at the 204th commencement of Williams College in Williamstown, Mass.


President Blames Himself for Furor Over Nominee
His skin was ruddy as ever.
He seemed resolute enough.
But there was a star-crossed look on President Clinton's face when he joined his dinner guests Thursday night, two hours late, after what he described as "a brutal, heartbreaking day" wrestling with the fate of Lani Guinier.
He blamed neither Ms.
Guinier, whose nomination as head of the civil rights division in the Justice Department he had just withdrawn, nor his staff.
He blamed only himself for the hurt he had caused his friend and himself.


Times Sees Soft Profits
The New York Times Company announced yesterday that it expected to post second-quarter earnings that will be at or below the levels of the comparable period last year.
The company said the quarterly earnings were expected to be in a range of 23 to 27 cents a share, compared with 27 cents a share in the second quarter of 1992.
That falls below the average estimate by Wall Street analysts of 29 cents a share, according to Bloomberg Financial Markets.


INSIDE
4 Arrested in Park Killing
Four Brooklyn teen-agers were arrested in the fatal shooting of a bicyclist who tried to fend off an attempted robbery in Prospect Park.
Page 23.
Court Worker Held in Slaying
A New Jersey court employee was charged with smuggling in a gun used to kill a police officer.
Page 26.
Integration Bill Passes
A bill promoting racial integration in Connecticut public schools won final approval in the State Senate.
Page 23.
Child Killed While at Play
A 7-year-old playing behind a Bronx housing project was killed by stray bullets, the police said.
Page 25.
Juror's Account in Libel Case
The jury in the libel case against a New Yorker writer disregarded character and professional questions, concentrating only on the quotations at issue, one juror said.
Page 7.


A Bit of Ambivalence About Shooting


Sports of The Times; The Issue Is Bigger Than Jordan
ACCORDING to Richard Esquinas, a San Diego businessman turned author, Michael Jordan took the floor last night for Game 6 against the Knicks owing Esquinas $100,000 in golf gambling debts.
In his book, titled "Michael &amp; Me: Our Gambling Addiction . . . My Cry For Help!" Esquinas, who owns the company that published the book, claims that Jordan has paid $200,000 but still owes $100,000 as settlement of a debt that reached more than $1 million.
Esquinas said he finally reduced the debt to $300,000 because he was convinced Jordan would not pay the entire amount.


Going for the Kill on the Energy Tax Plan
When Jerry Jasinowski, the president of the National Association of Manufacturers, was asked by a large company in April to form a broad coalition to lobby against the Clinton Administration's proposed energy tax, he was not optimistic.
At the time, he had reason to worry.
The Democratic Congress wanted to help the new President reduce the deficit, and the tax plan, which also promised to promote energy conservation, seemed to have a good chance of passage.


MCorp reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Old And New To Meet In Final
The prize, the Musketeers Cup, is crafted of sterling silver, but two-time French Open champion Jim Courier is continuing to play unvarnished lunch-pail tennis in his effort to do what no other American man has done by claiming the trophy a third time.
Today Courier extended his undefeated streak in Paris, the city whose perfumed lilt has come to replace his Dade City, Fla., twang, to 20 matches by deflating the serve-and-volley bravura of 12th-seeded Richard Krajicek, 6-1, 6-7 (2-7), 7-5, 6-2.
Courier, who hasn't lost a French Open match since 1990 and has become so comfortable here that he sometimes spouts French in the heat of battle, reached his third consecutive final in his usual way: He battered his opponent into sad-eyed submission.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY REYNOLDS DROPS PLAN
The Chancellor of the City University of New York has abandoned a plan to force colleges in the system to eliminate or consolidate programs.
The Chancellor, W. Ann Reynolds, bowed to criticism but said the goal of the original plan, to allow the university to invest in remaining programs, was still crucial.
Page 1.


Corrections
A review of the film "Life With Mikey" in Weekend yesterday referred incorrectly to the actress who plays the little girl Judy.
She is Barbara Hollander.


Acmat Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Where Ideas That Hurt Guinier Thrive
Despite the uproar that doomed her nomination to head the Justice Department's civil rights division, some of the voting plans Lani Guinier advocated to increase the political clout of minorities are being used successfully and with minimal controversy in many municipalities and legislative districts, particularly in the South.
Much of the criticism of Ms.
Gui nier's scholarly writing focused on proposals like cumulative voting, which calls for allowing voters to cast multiple votes for a single candidate as a way to enhance the voting power of minorities.
It is assumed that minorities would unite behind a single candidate and thus have greater power than they would ordinarily in the electorate.


3Com Moves to Reassure Investors
Officials of the 3Com Corporation were hoping today that their efforts to help their company's stock recover from a steep plunge last week would be successful.
"The only thing we can do is to bring as many facts to the table and stop the speculation," Eric Benhamou, 3Com's president and chief executive, said in a telephone interview today.


CHRONICLE
Picture yourself as a Nobel Prize winner who is forced into house arrest because of your political beliefs.
You are then asked, Of all the books in the world, which one do you want to read while in confinement?
It turns out that DAW AUNG SAN SUU KYI, the confined opposition political leader in Myanmar who was awarded the 1991 Nobel Peace Prize, chose the Encyclopedia Britannica.


Stemming Slaughter in the Streets
The gun lobby is finally losing its grip on America.
Despite heavy lobbying by the National Rifle Association, two states -- New Jersey and Virginia -- have placed limits on sales of assault weapons within their borders.
Connecticut is on the verge of doing the same.
Now a survey by Louis Harris shows that Americans as a whole approve of stringent weapons control to stem the rising tide of handgun deaths.


Reaching a Decision in the New Yorker Trial: a Juror's Account
Rather than judging the journalistic techniques of Janet Malcolm or the amorous history of Jeffrey M. Masson, the Federal jury at their libel trial focused on a precise and painstaking form of detective work, a juror said today: figuring out whether five quotations in Ms.
Malcolm's articles about him were made up and then whether the fabrication was accidental or deliberate.
The monthlong trial ended on Thursday, when the eight jurors deadlocked over how much money to award Mr.
Masson.
But the juror's account made clear how much they agreed on and how they decided that two of the five quotations were not just made up but libelous.


Bridge
The semifinal and final of the Reisinger Knockout Team Championship will be played today and tomorrow at the Manhattan Club, 27 West 72d Street in Manhattan.
Quarterfinal play began Thursday night at Honors Club, 42 East 74th Street, and ended last night at the Beverly Club, 130 East 57th Street.
The scores by captain at the midpoint of the quarterfinals were: Josh Parker of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., led Jane Dillenberg of Manhattan by 59 imps; Al Rahmey of Brooklyn led John Roberts of Manhattan by 6; Greg Woods led Peter Parella, also of Manhattan, by 11, and Richard Schwartz of Floral Park, Queens, led Christal Henner of Manhattan by 17.


The Lani Guinier Mess
President Clinton's nomination and subsequent rejection of Lani Guinier to head the Justice Department's Civil Rights Division has been an unmitigated mess for the White House.
Ms.
Guinier, in interviews defending herself, has at least shown considerable grace and courage; she is a serious individual who conducted herself well under enormous pressure.
Mr.
Clinton, by contrast, has appeared either inept in choosing nominees or unwilling to fight when challenged.
Although he handled the nomination miserably, the President had good reason to drop it.
Ms.
Guinier's writings suggest that, despite her obvious talents as a civil rights attorney, she was not the right person to be Washington's civil rights enforcement chief.
Mr.
Clinton, already wobbling from other setbacks, had no stomach for a fight he couldn't win on behalf of a candidate whose views he now says he does not entirely endorse.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.93
3.03
3.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.02
3.66
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.27
3.15
3.80
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.72
5.61
6.90
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.91
6.86
7.84
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.83
7.78
8.77
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.89
5.87
6.62
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Inside Communications
To the Editor:
Your report about Johnny Carson's appearance at the Center for Communication's luncheon May 24 (arts pages, May 25) captured every nuance but one.
The center's central purpose, when not earning its keep through its annual gathering, is to offer college students up-to-date, inside information about the news media and every field of mass media, present and future.
That takes in television, radio, newspapers, books, magazines, films, advertising and public relations, as well as new technologies bringing them together at a dizzying pace.


California Cracks Down On Insurers
California's Insurance Department has temporarily barred 247 unlicensed insurers from writing policies in the state after the companies failed to meet a new financial requirement that took effect May 24.
The new rules, which state officials and industry executives say are the most stringent in the nation, are intended to kill off sham companies that have flourished in recent years, particularly in states like California where insurance is costly.


Stage II Apparel Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Aerosonic Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Drug Agency Says It Seized Big Puerto Rican Trafficker
Federal narcotics officials called Manuel Gustavo Delgado Valencia one of Puerto Rico's leading drug traffickers.
His associates called him Al Capone.
He owned a restaurant, a video shop and a fleet of drug smuggling boats in San Juan, P.R., Federal authorities said, and he employed an army of couriers that smuggled cocaine and heroin into New York, Boston and Miami.
And although he had been on the run since being indicted in San Juan in February, he had continued to direct his smuggling operation by cellular telephone.


CHRONICLE
PHIL DONAHUE has been known to dance around a guest or two in his more than 25 years as a talk-show host.
But now he is doing a bit of hoofing for real.
On Monday evening, he and seven schoolchildren from 8 to 12 years old will perform a tap-dance routine of "Me and My Shadow" as part of the annual recital and benefit for the National Dance Institute.
The event will be held at the Paramount at Madison Square Garden.


Paul Harris Stores Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to May 1


G.O.P. Undecideds Respond to Ads
Deep in the leafy lushness of Morris County, where George Washington's beleaguered army holed up more than two centuries ago, battalions of Republican campaign workers are joined in the last struggle of the race for their party's nomination for Governor.
But as the workers pass out campaign brochures and candidates attend rallies, the real battle is waged by the paid political messages now filling the airwaves.
Their target is the hearts and minds of undecided Republicans like Cora Parello.


Barra Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Sihanouk Is Blaming His Son for Collapse of Coalition
Struggling to explain how his coalition government had collapsed only hours after its creation, Prince Norodom Sihanouk made clear today that he placed the blame for the debacle on his 49-year-old son, the leader of the opposition political party that won last week's internationally supervised Cambodian elections.
United Nations peacekeepers said it was still likely that Prince Sihanouk, Cambodia's ceremonial head of state and its former monarch, would form some sort of coalition government.
The Prince, who has a reputation for being unpredictable, has changed his mind before.


Prab Robots reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


American Holdings (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


C. Preston Stephens, Coca-Cola Executive, 78
C.
Preston Stephens, a former senior vice president of the Coca-Cola Export Company, died on Wednesday at his home in Atlanta.
He was 78.
The cause of death was bone cancer, a company spokesman said.


In Statues of Women, Numbers Aren't the Story; For Mrs. Roosevelt
To the Editor:
Further on your May 23 editorial about the lack of public sculptures of women in New York City, please note that the Eleanor Roosevelt Monument Fund has been working since 1986 to place a statue of Mrs.
Roosevelt in Riverside Park at 72d Street and also to rehabilitate two acres of deteriorated parkland.


For Stephanopoulos, Power's Within Reach
If access is power, George Stephanopoulos has not been pushed as far out of the loop as initial information may have indicated.
The floor plans on the White House shakeup are out, and Mr.
Stephanopoulos, who is now senior adviser to the President, will take over office space now occupied by Nancy Hernreich, the President's personal secretary.
The office, while smaller than Mr.
Stephanopoulos's current capacious digs, has the advantage of direct access to the Oval Office and the President's private dining room.


Value City Department Stores reports earnings for Qtr to April 24


Reporter's Notebook; Presenting Two Cliburn Nonwinners
With the Ninth Van Cliburn International Piano Competition in progress, Fort Worth is a city filled with good intentions, but despite the ungodly heat of recent days it seems far from the road to hell.
One of the more bizarre sidelights to the competition was also one of the more touching.
On Wednesday evening, a free night between the semifinal and final rounds of the contest, the official event was a chuck-wagon supper at a ranch some 25 miles north of the city.
But Milton T. Moore Jr., a businessman from Dallas, quietly staged a concert of his own at Caravan of Dreams, a big, brash downtown jazz club, presenting two of his favorite pianists who had been eliminated in the preliminary round: HaeSun Paik, a 27-year-old Korean who studies with Russell Sherman in Boston, and Francesco Cipolletta, a 23-year-old Italian.


Esterline Technologies Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Bulls Snatch 4th Straight to Earn Shot at 3d Title
The Knicks will spend the off season wondering what could have been.
The Chicago Bulls will spend next week trying to win their third consecutive championship.
Ending the Knicks' season and their quest to dethrone the Bulls, Chicago won its third consecutive Eastern Conference title with a 96-88 victory tonight in Game 6 of the conference finals.
Chicago advances to the National Basketball Association finals and will face the winner of Saturday's Western Conference championship game between the Phoenix Suns and the Seattle SuperSonics.


How They Do It; Selling a House Without a Broker
Profile: When Matthew DiPietro retired on disability from the police department, he and his wife, Donna decided to move to Florida.
First, they had to sell a 24-year home in Ronkonkoma, L.I..
Given the market, they realized that they would not make a lot of money.
"But we didn't want to wind up losing money," Mrs.
DiPietro said.
To Keep costs low the couple chose not to use a broker


Across the Country, Public Access TV Gives Free Speech Form
To the Editor:
I strongly disagree with the observation in your May 23 article about TCI Cable of New York's Westchester County and public access television that public access is for the most part "sometimes amateurish entertainment and often lifeless talk, with a handful of compelling programs." The value of successful access programming goes beyond those traditional measures.
The local church choir is not the technical equivalent of the Mormon Tabernacle Choir, but that doesn't keep us from appreciating the joy of a community coming together to raise its voice in song.
TCI Cable of Westchester has long been a vocal supporter of our access channels.
The fringe group programs you cite were indeed hateful, but they do not represent the majority of programming on these channels.
In Mamaroneck there are four access channels, which offer our community hundreds of hours of locally produced television each week.
This includes a local news program, live coverage of town, village, school board and community meetings, telecasts from the local theater and daily programming from the schools.


The Whole World Was in His Hand
Eight years and counting now for Patrick Ewing.
He will celebrate his 31st birthday in August without a championship ring.
A man who seldom opens himself to the public, Ewing did not try to hide the fact tonight that it hurt.
"I thought this was my year," said Ewing after the Knicks were eliminated by the Bulls, 96-88, at Chicago Stadium.
"It was right there in the palm of my hand."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the first paragraph of an article yesterday about Lani Guinier's legal articles paraphrased Lincoln's Gettysburg Address incorrectly.
The passage should have read, "Historically, most law review articles are little noted nor long remembered, except by professors who wrote them and the committees who control their futures."


Sigma Designs Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Richard Parker, 87, A Scholar at Brown In Egyptology, Dies
Richard A. Parker, professor emeritus of egyptology at Brown University and an author and researcher on the subject, died on Thursday in Providence, R.I.
He was 87.
He had remained active in his work and died peacefully at his home, the university said.


In Statues of Women, Numbers Aren't the Story
To the Editor:
The point of "Statues, With Limitations" (editorial, May 23), on the quantitative discrepancy between statues of men and of women in New York City can be conceded, with a view to future increase in the number of women.
Yet you do not sufficiently recognize the artistic excellence and symbolic importance of the female figure in the city's statuary.
The decision of the sculptor of the Statue of Liberty, Frederic A. Bartholdi, to depict the theme of "Liberty Enlightening the World" for the centennial of both the American and the French revolutions with a woman holding a lamp, has had significance for American cultural attitudes.
One bit of evidence is the response found in the Emma Lazarus inscription.


Charles Leighton, 54, Top Merck Researcher
Dr.
Charles Cutler Leighton, a research scientist and senior officer at Merck &amp; Company, the pharmaceutical giant, died Tuesday at his home in Ambler, Pa.
He was 54.
The cause had not been determined, a spokesman for Merck said yesterday.


With State Concessions, Pratt &amp; Whitney Accepts Jobs Deal
Pratt &amp; Whitney, Connecticut's largest private employer, said today that it had tentatively agreed not to move 2,300 jobs to plants out of state in return for a package of tax cuts and other incentives.
Company officials said their final decision would be contingent on the state legislature's approval of the package, worth $32 million a year, in the next few days, and on the company's unions agreeing to concessions of about the same amount, or about $2 an hour.


Clinton Tries to Cut Losses After Abandoning a Choice
President Clinton today set about trying to deal with the political damage from his decision to drop Lani Guinier as his choice to be the Justice Department's new civil rights chief.
But she remained defiant, saying the President did not understand her theories and should have given her a chance to explain them to the Senate.
Mr.
Clinton sought especially to soothe new political irritations in his relationship with members of the Congressional Black Caucus, who were among the most angered at his decision to abandon the Guinier nomination in the face of mounting Senate criticism of her proposals to increase the political power of black voters.


Endevco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
DONALD J. TRUMP finally got his way yesterday when the town council of Palm Beach, Fla., voted 4 to 1 to approve the planned conversion of his 140-room home, Mar-a-Lago, into a beach club and health spa.
Mr.
Trump originally planned to subdivide the property, which faces both the ocean and the Intracoastal Waterway and was formerly the home of the Post cereal heiress, Marjorie Merriweather Post.
But in deference to the town and to his wealthy neighbors he decided instead to convert it to a private club.


Clinton Worries Europe
President Clinton's rocky start and sharply dipping polls are beginning to cause serious concern abroad.
Nobody cares how much he pays for a haircut or who charters planes for the White House press.
But if what Europeans see as trivia is undermining his Presidency, they worry.
They have watched waffling on Bosnia, the need to twist the arms of a Democratic-controlled Congress for a narrow endorsement of the budget, the withdrawal of a Justice Department nominee whom Mr.
Clinton might have known was unacceptable and the arrival of David Gergen, a former opposition spokesman, to be the voice of a tongue-tied White House.


Texfi Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


In Sri Lanka, Negotiation May Yet Prevail
To the Editor:
"In Sri Lanka, Partition Can Stop the Violence" by Rajan Sriskandarajah (letter, May 7) states that the "easiest solution" to the continuing violence in Sri Lanka's northern and eastern provinces is to segregate the Sinhalese and the Tamils by separate self-rule for each area.
This solution may be easy, but it is simplistic.
What he argues for is creation of ethnically pure areas in a multiethnic and multireligious society.
The professed solution would be tantamount to legitimizing "ethnic cleansing" or "ethnic segregation" on racist lines, which the United Nations and international community have unequivocally rejected, whether in Bosnia or South Africa.


Executive Changes
AUTOALLIANCE INTERNATIONAL INC., Flat Rock, Mich., named Bruce E. Bowman general manager of manufacturing.
BIOGEN INC., Cambridge, Mass., named Michael J. Astrue vice president and general counsel, replacing Daniel A. Cuoco, who resigned.


Broadway Blues
Once upon a time -- if we are to believe the movie version of these events -- a bunch of investors sat in somebody's living room while somebody like George Gershwin pounded out an overture, six or seven new tunes and a finale.
The investors, a.k.a. angels, promptly clamored for a piece of the action, slapped down their checks and before you could say "Jack Barrymore," there it was.
Another opening, another show.
Well, that was then and this is now, and now isn't looking so good on Broadway.
The Great White Way is ailing.
According to a recent article by Bruce Weber of The Times, the angels have dwindled down to a precious few; even a hit may not make a profit ("Jelly's Last Jam," winner of three Tonys, still hasn't recouped its investors' money).


Beverly Hills Fan Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Sorting Out the Medical Claims Jumble
A family of five can generate dozens of medical insurance claims in a year.
Just ask Barbara and David Blumenthal, who at one point this year accumulated a pile of unpaid claims for doctor visits, lab tests, outpatient procedures and regular checkups for themselves and their three children.
With their medical coverage split between two insurers, Phoenix Home Life and Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the Blumenthals were not sure which bills were covered and whether they were being paid fairly for claims.
"I had lost track of what was outstanding," Mrs.
Blumenthal said.
"All I knew was that I was missing a lot of money.
Like many two-career couples, the Blumenthals are pressed for time.
Both run importing businesses and juggle responsibilities at their home in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
Overwhelmed by the paperwork, Mrs.
Blumenthal acted on a friend's recommendation and hired a medical claims agent.
Such agents are accustomed to dealing with insurance companies and can handle all the filings and follow-up calls.
They also know how and when to challenge insurers over a rejected claim or a paltry reimbursement, say, $15 for a $100 office visit.
Since hiring their insurance go-between, the Blumenthals have received $3,000 in previously unpaid claims and paid the agent $575 in fees, including a $120 annual retainer.
Other families, the chronically ill, the elderly and even some companies are turning to medical claims agents to sort through the maze of insurance red tape.
These agents can handle the paperwork arising from a catastrophic illness, address a backlog of claims or be a consultant on retainer.
People in the fledgling industry operate under several names: medical billing agents, public health adjusters and medical insurance consultants.
The businesses are so new that there is no classification for them in the Yellow Pages.
And they are not licensed or regulated in most states, including New York, which means consumers should check references carefully before selecting an agent.
Even their trade organization, the National Association of Claims Assistance Professionals of Downers Grove, Ill., is only two years old.
"People still don't know we exist," said Norma Border, the association's national director.
The association, which has 800 members, puts the number of adjusters nationwide at 3,000 to 6,000, and expects business to continue growing even if the Clinton Administration overhauls the nation's health-care system.
Gila Bash Katz, who is the Blumenthals' agent, has enlisted 46 regular clients and one small company, which pays her to handle its employees' claims, since founding Quick Claims Inc. of Eastchester, N.Y., two years ago.
After initial contact, the adjuster will likely agree to make a house call, at no charge, to discuss your claims situation.
If you decide to proceed, you will need to sign a limited power of attorney giving the professional the authority to deal directly with the insurance company.
The claims adjuster will also need copies of all medical insurance contracts.
The agent's fees may be structured in several ways: a percentage, usually 10 to 15 percent, of the reimbursed amount; an hourly charge of $25 to $55; a specified amount for each claim, or an annual fee.
Rarely do adjusters set a minimum fee, although clients say it is seldom worth signing up until you have amassed at least $2,000 in contested or delayed claims.
Threatening letters from hospitals and doctors who have not been paid often send consumers to a medical adjuster.
For the Blumenthals, the medical claims agent has taken on the status of the family lawyer or accountant, handling all medical insurance paperwork and providing advice on related matters.
The family permits Ms.
Katz to cash its insurance checks, deduct her 15 percent fee and consolidate the smaller reimbursements into a single check.
But others may prefer to pay the agent separately.
The elderly, many of whom are covered by Medicare and a supplementary private policy, may look for a claims adjuster familiar with the vagaries of overlapping policies.
The Berryhill Medical Claims Service of Danbury, Conn., says about 80 percent of its clients are covered by Medicare and a Medigap policy.
Ursula Milde, director of an elderly outreach program for New Rochelle Hospital in Westchester County, regularly sends people to adjusters.
"I see people who don't know what to send where anymore," she said.
"You need itemized bills. You may need to make copies. You must know what's in your policy if they try to reject your claim."
Insurance companies are only beginning to become familiar with medical claims adjusters, and insist it is too soon to gauge their effectiveness.
But reimbursement is not necessarily quicker, cautioned John Gras, a spokesman for the Prudential-AARP Group Health Insurance.
Still, finding an intermediary to handle insurance headaches has its appeal.
Even the Mellon Bank of Pittsburgh has hired a medical adjuster, Claim Guard Plus of Indianapolis, to assist its trust clients.
"The volume of paperwork and the number of clients got too high," said Marylee Steinmetz, supervisor of the trust insurance unit.


Corrections
A table yesterday with an article about the jury's findings in Jeffrey M. Masson's libel case against Janet Malcolm and The New Yorker, comparing five quotations in Ms.
Malcolm's article with passages from her taped interviews with Mr.
Masson, mislabeled two quotations.
The passage quoting Mr.
Masson as saying Maresfield Gardens, home of the Freud Archives, would be a place of "sex, women, fun" was not on Ms.
Malcolm's tapes but in typewritten notes she said she made afterward.
The passage quoting Mr.
Masson as saying, "I don't know why I put it in," in speaking of a remark about the "sterility of psychoanalysis" in a scientific paper, was not on tape or in the typewritten notes; Ms.
Malcolm said she reconstructed it from memory.


Making Her Case


Copley Pharmaceutical (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Taro Vit Industries (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Knicks Sent Home for Good
There will be no Sunday in New York.
Not for the Knicks, who ran out of road in Chicago as the Bulls scored a 96-88 victory to capture their National Basketball Association semifinal series, 4 games to 2.
Michael Jordan led the Bulls with 25 points, while Scottie Pippen finished with 24.


Job Surge Hurts Stocks, But Dow Gains Fraction
Most leading stock indexes moved lower yesterday on a largely lackluster trading day, uninspired by strong jobs data issued yesterday morning.
An exception was the Dow Jones industrial average, which was down as much as 14 points but shot up 5.5 points in the last five minutes of trading.
The Dow closed at 3,545.14, up 0.27 point for the day and up 17.71 for the week.


Couples and Stewart Weather a Storm
As usual, the weather was dark gray at the Memorial Tournament, but it didn't keep the leader board from sparkling today as Fred Couples and Payne Stewart took the lead during the rain-interrupted second round.
In a roller-coaster effort that included eight birdies, two bogeys and a double bogey, Couples shot a four-under-par 68 for a nine-under-par total of 135.
Stewart matched that total with a somewhat steadier 66 that included seven birdies against one bogey.


Business Digest
The Economy
The unemployment rate edged below 7 percent in May, for the first time since late 1991, and Government figures showed that job growth picked up smartly.
Analysts found much to cheer in the data, which seemed to portray an economy finally shifting into higher gear after two years of generally weak recovery.
The report showed that payroll jobs grew by 209,000 last month, nearly double the estimates of many experts.
The gain was even more impressive because it came on top of upward revisions for March and April.  [ Page 1. ]  A surprising surge in employment after three months of economic deterioration cut New Jersey's jobless rate to 7.4 percent.
Elsewhere in the New York region, the data showed little change.  [ 49. ]


ESPN 2 Ready For Prime Time
ESPN will unveil on Monday the full details of ESPN 2, a second cable sports network designed to be heavy on sports news, to appeal to a young audience and to be the home of National Hockey League games.
ESPN 2, which will debut in the fall, has been in the works for some time.
Its formal unveiling has been delayed while the company spent considerable time working out agreements with cable systems to carry the service.


Agency Rent-A-Car (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


New York's Budget Maze; Dinkins and Cuomo Jousting Over a Plan Wrapped in a Series of Conflicting Motives
Mayor David N. Dinkins and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo have squared off in a test of wills over New York City's plea for state help to balance its budget that is more than the usual fiscal endgame.
Because the Mayor faces re-election this fall, and the Governor next year, they are playing at three levels.
Of them, money may be the simplest.
So sensitive are the egos and so high the stakes that no official in either camp would speak for attribution.
But up and down the Hudson, from Albany to City Hall this week, the standoff has left both sides asking: With friends like this, who needs friends?


Home Intensive Care (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Maverick Restaurant Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6  U.N. BACKS FORCE AT ENCLAVES
The U.N.
Security Council voted 13 to 0 to authorize the U.S. and its allies to use air strikes against Serbian forces besieging six Muslim enclaves in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The resolution also authorized the deployment of as many as 10,000 troops to protect the enclaves.  1
A weeklong Serb assault on Gorazde has killed a reported 300 people.  6
News analysis: Serbian leaders are acting with increased confidence.  6  U.S.
FREEZES HAITIANS' ASSETS
The U.S. imposed sanctions on supporters of the military-backed Government in Haiti, including the freezing of assets of 83 people and 35 institutions.  2  SIHANOUK BLAMES HIS SON
Norodom Sihanouk attributed the abrupt collapse of a coalition Government in Cambodia to his son, who leads the opposition political party that won elections for a National Assembly.
The U.N. cited the likelihood of a new coalition.  3  U.S.
FAILS TO SWAY NORTH KOREA
U.S. officials failed again to persuade North Korea to drop its plans to withdraw from a treaty intended to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons, but the two countries are to resume talks.  3  GERMANY ARRESTS 3 IN BOMBING
The German police are reported to have arrested three men in the firebombing that killed two Turkish women and three Turkish girls last week in western Germany.
The police say they believe that the bombing was motivated by the men's anger at being thrown out of a bar.  4  'I'M STAYING,' JOHN MAJOR SAYS
With the lowest popularity rating in Britain since the 1930's, the Prime Minister presented an aggressive defense of his Government, telling an audience of Conservative Party women: "I am fit. I am well. I am here -- and I'm staying." 5  IN POLAND, READ ALL ABOUT IT
Since the fall of Communism in Poland four years ago, newspapers and magazines have blossomed, appealing to virtually every conceivable interest -- from fashion to business to soft porn.  4  Guatemala's Vice President has reportedly halted his effort to rule.  2  National 7-10  SURGE ON JOBS GROWTH
Job growth picked up smartly in May as the unemployment rate fell to 6.9 percent, the lowest in 18 months.
The figures, the first comprehensive look at the May economy, were stronger than expected and inspired rethinking of the prospects for the balance of the year.  1  CLINTON RUMINATES AT DINNER
After announcing that he was withdrawing his nomination of Lani Guinier, President Clinton joined dinner guests and explained his agonizing decision.  1  EX-NOMINEE SPEAKS HER MIND
Lani Guinier remained defiant, saying the President did not understand her theories and that he should have given her a chance to explain them before the Senate committee.  8  VOTING ALTERNATIVE IN EFFECT
The alternative voting plans Lani Guinier advocated in her writings are being used in many localities, particularly in the South.  9
The President knew there would be trouble, but ignored the signs.  9  SEEKING CAUSES FOR OUTBREAK
Communities in and around the Navajo reservation in the Four Corners region of New Mexico and Arizona are struggling to explain the flu-like illness that has killed 11 people.  1  CAMPUS LESBIANS STEP INTO LIGHT
A new generation of lesbians, buoyed by the convergence of the feminist and gay rights movements, are asserting themselves on college campuses around the country.  7  LIBEL JURY FOCUSED ON FACTS
The jury in the libel case against a New Yorker writer veered away from character and professional questions, concentrating only on the quotations at issue.7  NEW TRIALS FOR GANG MEMBERS
After officials worked for 20 years to stop one of Chicago's gangs, charges of prosecutors' misconduct prompted a Federal judge to grant three of the gang members new trials.  7  GIRLS MAY BE ALLOWED AT ALTAR
Religion notes: Contrary to Vatican policy, girls serve at the altars of American Catholic churches.
An end to the ban is now being studied.  27  Federal narcotics officials arrested a Puerto Rico drug smuggler.  10  Metro Digest 23  A POLITICAL TEST OF WILLS
News analysis: Mayor Dinkins and Gov.
Cuomo have squared off in a test of wills over New York City's plea for state help to balance its budget that is more than the usual fiscal endgame, with money and politics fueling the fight.  1  A NEW PATH, AGAIN, FOR CUNY
The Chancellor of the City University of New York has abandoned a plan to eliminate or consolidate scores of majors at many colleges in the 21-campus system.
The Lani Guinier mess.
Stemming slaughter in the streets.
Broadway blues.
Letters  Russell Baker: The rain in Spain stays . . .
Al From: Guinier had to go.
Now.
Flora Lewis: Clinton worries Europe.
Wakako Hironaka: Through rosy glasses, darkly.
Chronicle 22 Bridge 14  Crossword 15


Alfresco Dining, Mediterranean Style
WHEN Ed Brown, who is the executive chef at Tropica, the Manhattan seafood restaurant, catered the wedding last year of Pierre Franey's son Jacques to Trish Cancalosi on the beach in East Hampton, he prepared a spectacular outdoor meal for 200 guests.
But instead of making stews and casseroles to be reheated, everything was either cooked on the spot or served at room temperature.
To do this, he brought along a convoy of chefs from Manhattan who had worked through the night to prepare the meal.
"I went for the Provencal style," he said.
"I chose the sort of things you see on the Cote d'Azur, in Tuscany or Tunisia: roast vegetables, grains, herbs, olives, oil, garlic -- boldly, highly seasoned food." While an army of chefs may have been needed to put together the food for the wedding, the individual dishes are simple enough for the home cook to prepare with ease.
They are great for a summer picnic or outdoor meal on a warm day.


Profile/James Allchin; Bill Gates Has a Vision; Can This Man Deliver?
They are an elite fraternity, the programmers who create the heart and soul of computers -- the operating systems that build bridges from the intricate hardware to screens full of words and symbols that a child, or a corporate vice president, can understand.
In that fraternity, James Allchin is a legend.


Kay Beyer, Hilary Childs
Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Beyer of Tewksbury, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Katherine Lesley Jones Beyer to Hilary Thomas Childs, a son of Margaret Burden Childs of Fairfield, Conn., and Daniel R. Childs of East Norwalk, Conn.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Beyer, 27, is known as Kay.
She is the administrator in the Impressionist and modern paintings department of Sotheby's in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father is a founding partner in Beyer Blinder Belle, the New York architectural firm.


The Problem Is Waste Itself
To the Editor:


Renu Nanda and Sanjoy Goyle
Renu Nanda, a daughter of Dr.
Veena Nanda of West Simsbury, Conn., and Dr.
Ravindra Nanda of Avon, Conn., was married yesterday in Simsbury, Conn., to Sanjoy Kumar Goyle, a son of Drs.
Vimal and Krishan Goyle of Wichita, Kan.
Punditji, a Hindu priest, performed the ceremony at the Simsbury Inn.
Ms.
Nanda, who is keeping her name, is an associate at the law firm of Hebb &amp; Gitlin in Hartford.
She and her husband graduated from Duke University and received law degrees from Boston University.
Her father is a professor and chairman of orthodontics at the University of Connecticut Health Center in Farmington.
Her mother is a periodontist in East Hartford and Bristol, Conn.


BEST SELLERS: June 6, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
43 THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
12
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
3
3
5
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences when she covers a story.
4
1
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $23.95.) A former naval officer tracks down a terrorist conspiracy headed by a vengeful woman.
5
1
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $24.) A lawyer in pursuit of his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
6
6
8
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
7
4
129
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
8
5
5
GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Delacorte, $27.50.) Cordial relationships and terrorism between the Japanese and foreigners in Yokohama in 1862.
9
7
7
THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/ Bantam, $21.95.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
10
8
6
A SEASON IN PURGATORY, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $22.) The political and social machinations of a wealthy Irish Catholic family.
11
9
5
ANGEL, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $23.) The reunion of four people is transformed by the appearance of two celebrated men.
12
10
8
"J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $21.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man who apparently committed suicide.
13
11
6
PERFECT, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $22.) A model young woman is abducted by a onetime award-winning film maker.
14
13
6
CHARMS FOR THE EASY LIFE, by Kaye Gibbons. (Putnam, $19.95.) The fortunes of three indomitable North Carolina women.
15
1
THE CAT WHO WENT INTO THE CLOSET, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $19.95.) A collection of junk helps Jim Qwilleran solve a mystery from the past.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
43
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
2
2
38
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
3
5
4
THE REAL ANITA HILL, by David Brock. (Free Press, $24.95.) A journalist's account of the relationship between the law professor and Clarence Thomas.
4
3
16
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) The relationship between sickness and emotions.
5
4
25
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Spirituality and everyday life.
6
6
7
THINKING OUT LOUD, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) Essays on current topics.
7
7
4
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
8
10
29
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under Government debt.
9
9
3
TURMOIL AND TRIUMPH, by George P. Shultz. (Stewart/Scribners, $30.) The memoirs of Ronald Reagan's Secretary of State.
10
8
4
CULTURE OF COMPLAINT, by Robert Hughes. (New York Public Library/Oxford University, $19.95.) Essays critical of current cultural trends.
11
11
5
CONDUCT UNBECOMING, by Randy Shilts. (St. Martin's, $27.95.) The roles that gay men and lesbians have played in our armed forces.
12 *
12
8
A WORLD WAITING TO BE BORN, by M. Scott Peck. (Bantam, $22.95.) A call for people to make civility part of their lives.
13
1
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $17.95.) Life in a tiny Georgia town; by a first-grade teacher and radio commentator.
14
1
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Morrow, $20.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
15
13
37
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Taoism explained through an A. A. Milne character.
16 *
1
OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS, by Anne Lamott. (Pantheon, $21.) A novelist recalls her first year as a single parent.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, how-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
6
A WOMAN'S WORTH, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $17.) Advice for women.
2
3
47
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf.
3
2
12
BEATING THE STREET, by Peter Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Investing.
4
1
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 22, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
BALKAN GHOSTS: A Journey Through History, by Robert D. Kaplan. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) A reporter's gallery of heroes and villains, past and present, who made Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Romania and the former Yugoslavia the sweethearts they are.
THE BUTCHER BOY, by Patrick McCabe. (Fromm International, $19.95.) A grueling and all too believable novel that enters the deranged mind of a love-starved Irish schoolboy who endures horrors and perpetrates them.
CHIMNEY ROCK, by Charlie Smith. (Holt, $22.50.) Mr.
Smith's novel appropriates the language and vision of Southern Gothic to the dwellers in a nasty, dusty Hollywood through a narrator completely lacking in ethical consciousness.
COMPULSORY HAPPINESS, by Norman Manea. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) Four cranky, brilliant novellas about the soul's deterioration in a totalitarian state by a Romanian who came to America in 1986.
G.
M.
TREVELYAN: A Life in History, by David Cannadine. (Norton, $32.95.) Trevelyan (1876-1962), a Cambridge historian and Whig aristocrat, hoped to see decent liberal values established in Europe in the 20th century, but lived to see them disappear everywhere.
THE INVENTION OF TRUTH, by Marta Morazzoni. (Knopf, $18.) An absorbing novella about artists and lookers at art; it concerns John Ruskin and 300 women working on the Bayeux Tapestry.
ISLAM AND THE WEST, by Bernard Lewis. (Oxford University, $25.) Learned essays on political culture, encounters and confrontations, including the author's responses to the critics of the "Orientalism" they say he practices.
JUDGE ON TRIAL, by Ivan Klima. (Knopf, $25.) Mr.
Klima's novel describes the crisis of conscience of a jurist in Czechoslovakia.
LENIN'S TOMB: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire, by David Remnick. (Random House, $25.) Decline and fall, observed by a wise, industrious Washington Post reporter in the disappearing Soviet Union, 1988-91.
LIFE'S DOMINION: An Argument About Abortion, Euthanasia, and Individual Freedom, by Ronald Dworkin. (Knopf, $23.) Mr.
Dworkin contends that the relevant choices proceed from the idea that life is sacred, and that therefore the state must not interfere.
THE MAN WHO WASN'T MAIGRET: A Portrait of Georges Simenon, by Patrick Marnham. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) A thoughtful account of a man whose diligence -- 76 Maigret books, more than 300 others -- makes his claim to have made love to 10,000 women plausible.
After his mother died, he stopped writing.
Odd.
SWORDFISH: A True Story of Ambition, Savagery, and Betrayal, by David McClintick. (Pantheon, $25.) A grimly fascinating and sometimes funny account of a successful sting operation by an entertaining lot of Federal drug agents against a Colombian cocaine ring.


BEST SELLERS: June 6, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
43 THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
12
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
3
3
5
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences when she covers a story.
4
1
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $23.95.) A former naval officer tracks down a terrorist conspiracy headed by a vengeful woman.
5
1
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $24.) A lawyer in pursuit of his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
6
6
8
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
7
4
129
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
8
5
5
GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Delacorte, $27.50.) Cordial relationships and terrorism between the Japanese and foreigners in Yokohama in 1862.
9
7
7
THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/ Bantam, $21.95.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
10
8
6
A SEASON IN PURGATORY, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $22.) The political and social machinations of a wealthy Irish Catholic family.
11
9
5
ANGEL, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $23.) The reunion of four people is transformed by the appearance of two celebrated men.
12
10
8
"J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $21.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man who apparently committed suicide.
13
11
6
PERFECT, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $22.) A model young woman is abducted by a onetime award-winning film maker.
14
13
6
CHARMS FOR THE EASY LIFE, by Kaye Gibbons. (Putnam, $19.95.) The fortunes of three indomitable North Carolina women.
15
1
THE CAT WHO WENT INTO THE CLOSET, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $19.95.) A collection of junk helps Jim Qwilleran solve a mystery from the past.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
43
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
2
2
38
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
3
5
4
THE REAL ANITA HILL, by David Brock. (Free Press, $24.95.) A journalist's account of the relationship between the law professor and Clarence Thomas.
4
3
16
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) The relationship between sickness and emotions.
5
4
25
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Spirituality and everyday life.
6
6
7
THINKING OUT LOUD, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) Essays on current topics.
7
7
4
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
8
10
29
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under Government debt.
9
9
3
TURMOIL AND TRIUMPH, by George P. Shultz. (Stewart/Scribners, $30.) The memoirs of Ronald Reagan's Secretary of State.
10
8
4
CULTURE OF COMPLAINT, by Robert Hughes. (New York Public Library/Oxford University, $19.95.) Essays critical of current cultural trends.
11
11
5
CONDUCT UNBECOMING, by Randy Shilts. (St. Martin's, $27.95.) The roles that gay men and lesbians have played in our armed forces.
12 *
12
8
A WORLD WAITING TO BE BORN, by M. Scott Peck. (Bantam, $22.95.) A call for people to make civility part of their lives.
13
1
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $17.95.) Life in a tiny Georgia town; by a first-grade teacher and radio commentator.
14
1
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Morrow, $20.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
15
13
37
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Taoism explained through an A. A. Milne character.
16 *
1
OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS, by Anne Lamott. (Pantheon, $21.) A novelist recalls her first year as a single parent.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, how-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
6
A WOMAN'S WORTH, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $17.) Advice for women.
2
3
47
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf.
3
2
12
BEATING THE STREET, by Peter Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Investing.
4
1
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 22, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
BALKAN GHOSTS: A Journey Through History, by Robert D. Kaplan. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) A reporter's gallery of heroes and villains, past and present, who made Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Romania and the former Yugoslavia the sweethearts they are.
THE BUTCHER BOY, by Patrick McCabe. (Fromm International, $19.95.) A grueling and all too believable novel that enters the deranged mind of a love-starved Irish schoolboy who endures horrors and perpetrates them.
CHIMNEY ROCK, by Charlie Smith. (Holt, $22.50.) Mr.
Smith's novel appropriates the language and vision of Southern Gothic to the dwellers in a nasty, dusty Hollywood through a narrator completely lacking in ethical consciousness.
COMPULSORY HAPPINESS, by Norman Manea. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) Four cranky, brilliant novellas about the soul's deterioration in a totalitarian state by a Romanian who came to America in 1986.
G.
M.
TREVELYAN: A Life in History, by David Cannadine. (Norton, $32.95.) Trevelyan (1876-1962), a Cambridge historian and Whig aristocrat, hoped to see decent liberal values established in Europe in the 20th century, but lived to see them disappear everywhere.
THE INVENTION OF TRUTH, by Marta Morazzoni. (Knopf, $18.) An absorbing novella about artists and lookers at art; it concerns John Ruskin and 300 women working on the Bayeux Tapestry.
ISLAM AND THE WEST, by Bernard Lewis. (Oxford University, $25.) Learned essays on political culture, encounters and confrontations, including the author's responses to the critics of the "Orientalism" they say he practices.
JUDGE ON TRIAL, by Ivan Klima. (Knopf, $25.) Mr.
Klima's novel describes the crisis of conscience of a jurist in Czechoslovakia.
LENIN'S TOMB: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire, by David Remnick. (Random House, $25.) Decline and fall, observed by a wise, industrious Washington Post reporter in the disappearing Soviet Union, 1988-91.
LIFE'S DOMINION: An Argument About Abortion, Euthanasia, and Individual Freedom, by Ronald Dworkin. (Knopf, $23.) Mr.
Dworkin contends that the relevant choices proceed from the idea that life is sacred, and that therefore the state must not interfere.
THE MAN WHO WASN'T MAIGRET: A Portrait of Georges Simenon, by Patrick Marnham. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) A thoughtful account of a man whose diligence -- 76 Maigret books, more than 300 others -- makes his claim to have made love to 10,000 women plausible.
After his mother died, he stopped writing.
Odd.
SWORDFISH: A True Story of Ambition, Savagery, and Betrayal, by David McClintick. (Pantheon, $25.) A grimly fascinating and sometimes funny account of a successful sting operation by an entertaining lot of Federal drug agents against a Colombian cocaine ring.


Debra Abrams, Jonathan Gamza
Debra Gail Abrams, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Abrams of Marlboro, N.J., was married last evening to Jonathan Ross Gamza, the son of Peggy Gamza of Marlboro and Leon Gamza of Cliffside Park, N.J.
Rabbi Donald Weber performed the ceremony at the Livingston (N.J.) Country Club.
Mrs.
Gamza, 24, is an account executive at Warwick, Baker &amp; Fiore, an advertising agency in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Syracuse University, she cum laude and he magna cum laude.
The bride's parents own Junior Tours Inc., a student travel company in Old Bridge, N.J.


SIHANOUK WORKING ON NEW COALITION
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, deepening a royal family feud that has threatened to undermine his efforts to create a coalition government, said today that he would try again to forge a coalition despite the objections of his 49-year-old son, the leader of the party that won the election.
In a speech carried on state-run television and radio, addressed in Prince Sihanouk's usual fashion to "my children and grandchildren," he said he had been forced to abandon his first attempt at creating a government because of protests from the son, Prince Norodom Ranariddh.


E. D. Nickerson, J. H. Seltzer
Elizabeth Dey Nickerson, the daughter of Mrs.
William M. Riegel of Memphis, and William H. Nickerson 3d of Plymouth, Mass., was married yesterday to Dr.
Jonathan Howard Seltzer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Seltzer of Philadelphia.
Steven Boyan, a leader of the Ethical Culture Society, officiated in Mount Vernon Park in Baltimore.
Ms.
Nickerson, who is 30, is keeping her name.
She is a manager of health communications programs at the Center for Communications Programs at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, which promotes family planning in developing countries through the news media.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received a master's degree in international development from Tufts University.


World Markets; A Flurry of Bad News From Fiat
EMBROILED in the country's vast corruption scandal, Fiat S.p.A., Italy's largest private company, posted sharply lower 1992 profits last week, slashed its dividend for the second year running and announced a huge increase in its debt.
While the results pushed down share prices, the principal medium-term preoccupation among investors was whether the Turin auto giant, gambling that the introduction of new model lines in the mid-1990's will reverse its fortunes, would reap a substantial payoff in productivity and sales from the massive, $27 billion investment program it has underway.


Land of the Raj
To the Editor: Many happy memories were brought back by Julie Sahni's article about India.
Most people are unaware of this "hill station" resort in southern India.
Darjeeling and Simla are two names that people are much more familiar with; however, these are in the northern part of the country.
I was sorry that Ms.
Sahni did not include Coonoor, a nearby town, the other major community in the Nilgiri Hills.
Coonoor compares very favorably with Ootacamund as a resort area and should not be overlooked..


John Carney Jr. and Tracey Quillen
Tracey Tatem Quillen, a special assistant in Washington to Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, was married yesterday to John Charles Carney Jr., the deputy chief administrative officer for New Castle County, Del.
The Rev.
John Hopkins officiated at Holy Rosary Roman Catholic Church in Claymont, Del.
The Rev.
Ralph R. Johnson Jr., a Presbyterian minister, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Quillen, 30, is keeping her name.
She is a summa cum laude graduate of the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Tatem Quillen of New Castle, Del.


Photography That Is Immune From the 'Romance' of Labor
IT seems to be getting closer, the utopian heaven in which machines do all the work, leaving people free, as it were, to produce art or go sport fishing.
Yet, to judge from Sebastiao Salgado's photographs at the Philadelphia Museum of Art, hard labor is still the lot of the majority.
At the port of Chittagong, in Bangladesh, for instance, there are beached ships to be demolished manually by blowtorch and sledgehammer.
In Java, livings are made harvesting sulfur from the lake boiling in the crater of a volcano.
But with the seven-hour climb up to the crater and the return trip loaded down with 155 pounds of the mineral, not to mention the fumes encountered on the way, each gleaner has to rest two days for every one worked.


Car Aromas Fit for a King
WHAT: A 5-inch-high, 3 1/2-inch wide, gold-painted plastic air freshener in the shape of an eight-pointed crown topped with a cross.
Its dome comes in six colors: blue, black, red, green, white and a regal purple.
On the smog-hazed streets of inner-urban America, where they are wildly popular, the Crown Freshner (the manufacturer's spelling), which weighs about seven ounces, is called simply the King.


Where There's Smoke There May Be Legislation
A small but committed band of state legislators in Hartford has waged war for years to try to ban smoking at the State Capitol and other public buildings.
And every year, tobacco lobbyists and politicians who still recall Connecticut's days as a major tobacco-growing state shoot the bill down in flames.
But this week, even as the smoke in the Capitol corridors appeared to thicken, so did the plot.
The bill, which died weeks ago in committee, was resurrected as an amendment on the floor of the House of Representatives and sent to the Senate, where it remains in line on a jammed calendar with only a few days remaining before session's adjournment at midnight on Wednesday.


Tracy Anbinder And Robert Baron
Tracy Jennifer Anbinder, the daughter of Stephen and Madeline Anbinder of New York, was married last evening to Robert Andrew Baron, a son of Alvin and Gloria Baron of North Woodmere, L.I.
Rabbi Joel Y. Zion officiated at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park.
Ms.
Anbinder, 28, is keeping her name.
She is a law student at the University of Pennsylvania.
She graduated magna cum laude from Duke University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


A Noteworthy Collection
This selection of paperbacks is from the New &amp; Noteworthy column since the 1992 Christmas issue.
ALIEN INK: The F.B.I.'s War on Freedom of Expression By Natalie Robins.
Rutgers University, $14.95.
J.
Edgar Hoover's investigation of American writers.


Telling Difference
To the Sports Editor:
Two incidents in the 1993 N.B.A. playoffs have shown me the difference between the Knicks and the Bulls.


Editorial Notebook; New Age Filibusters
Poor James Madison seems to be bearing much of the blame these days for President Clinton's faltering start.
One writer, Mickey Kaus in The New Republic, says that Madison's inspired handiwork -- the Constitution's checks and balances -- created a "gridlock machine." But it wasn't Madison who put the wrench in the machine.
He didn't invent Senate Rule XXII.
That's the rule permitting unlimited debate, and as presently construed, the measure makes it all too easy for a Senate minority to paralyze action, as Republicans did with Mr.
Clinton's stimulus package.
There was a time, however, when senators who wished to block something really had to sweat.
Today's filibusters are a paltry knockoff of the real thing.


The Forbidden Books of Youth
What was the first "forbidden" book you read and what were the circumstances under which you read it?
The editors of the Book Review asked 14 men and women to share their secrets of fantasies inspired, expectations dashed, wisdom gained and the lonely knowledge that only comes in the dead of night with a flashlight in hand and a head under the covers.
Here are the responses.
Elmore Leonard
In the seventh or eighth grade a friend of mine who also read books told me that "Anthony Adverse," by Hervey Allen, had dirty parts in it; and I remember looking but don't recall if I found any.
It's not that I was forbidden to read the novel -- it was on the shelf at home, I think a Book-of-the-Month-Club selection -- but I did probably look through it on the sly, making the act feel forbidden.


Thayer Collins, Joseph O'Brien 3d
Thayer Pomeroy Collins, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward C. Collins 2d of Concord, Mass., was married yesterday to Joseph Denis O'Brien 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
O'Brien Jr. of Ridgefield, Conn.
Mrs.
O'Brien, 29, is the assistant to the training and development consultants in the Office of Human Resources at Harvard University.
She graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father is the principal of E. C. Collins II Associates, an architectural and design firm in Concord, where her mother, Susan Prichard Collins, has an interior-design concern.


Current Crop of College Graduates Finds Job Market Painfully Tight
As the nation's 1.3 million college seniors graduate this year, they face what economists and demographers call one of the harshest job climates in a quarter-century.
The recession's lingering effects are chilling new job creation, while corporate cutbacks are altering the type of jobs available.
"Clearly, the recession has been tough," said Richard J. Murnane, a Harvard economist who has studied the job market.
"Companies are using overtime instead of hiring, and line workers are increasingly college graduates."


Wine From Young Vines in Southern Ontario
NOT far from Niagara Falls in southern Ontario, venturesome wine-minded travelers will discover a region rich with young wineries.
Like the Napa Valley of the early 1970's, the peninsula between Lake Ontario and Lake Erie is fertile territory for new, ambitious estates with big ideas.
They are coaxing good wine from young grapevines and impatiently awaiting the nuances that come with older vines and more cellar experience.
Some 25 wineries -- 21 of them established since 1979 -- are cultivating grapes on 15,000 acres luxuriant with European vinifera vines.
Entrepreneurs are so optimistic that applications for licenses to start 12 more wineries are pending before the provincial Liquor Control Board.
Land values and planted acreage have risen.
New buildings, German wine presses and sleek Italian bottling machines are appearing.
And rising reputations are nudging revenues upward: Since 1990, sales of the peninsula's premium wines have increased 100 percent.


Interpreting Squiggles 'As Written'
An eminent pianist playing at Merkin Concert Hall late last year did exactly what Beethoven asked him to do and may have ended up doing what Beethoven did not want.
Another eminent pianist playing at Carnegie Hall last month may have violated Beethoven's wishes but fulfilled his intentions.
With Toscanini's sharp imperative -- "come scritto" ("as written") -- ringing in our ears, what can it all mean?
Pianist No. 1 was Robert Taub, pianist No. 2 Alfred Brendel; the object of their attentions, the "Waldstein" Sonata.
Like his contemporaries, Beethoven often turned pedaling over to the performer's good sense, but there are places in which the manuscripts give strict guidance to feet as well as to hands.
One is the last movement of the "Waldstein," where for eight measures at a time Beethoven asks that the foot push down the right-hand pedal, free the strings to vibrate unencumbered and so allow sounds to gather in a heap.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Roy Gillian; Lessons in Running an Amusement Park
Roy Gillian followed his father into the amusement park business, and he has, in turn, brought his three sons, Jim, Steve and Jay, into the operation of Gillian's Wonderland Pier.
It is something of a landmark in this seaside resort, which was founded as a summer colony for vacationing Methodists at the turn of the century.
And Mr.
Gillian himself, at 63 years of age, has achieved considerable stature -- in Ocean City, where he was once the Mayor; in Trenton, where he has often appeared before the Legislature as a member and former president of the 200-member New Jersey Amusement Association, and in the councils of the International Association of Amusement Parks and Attractions, an organization with more than 3,000 members in 54 countries, which he now serves as president.


Fascism and the Jews
To the Editor:
Reviewing "Il Duce's Other Woman," by Philip V. Cannistraro and Brian R. Sullivan (May 2), Raleigh Trevelyan writes that Margherita Sarfatti, Mussolini's longtime mistress, was "a feminist and Jewish, both anathemas to Fascist dogma."


Susan Webb, Jean Dreyfus
Susan Patterson Webb, a managing principal at Paribas Capital Markets, was married yesterday to Jean Francoise Dreyfus, a vice president at Credit Suisse Financial Products Inc., both in New York.
The Rev.
David T. Lowman, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Covenant Presbyterian Church in Petersburg, Va.
Cantor Fernand Peres took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Webb-Dreyfus is the group head of the equity derivatives department of the New York securities branch of Banque Paribas of Paris.
She graduated from the University of Virginia, from which she also received an M.B.A.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert B. Webb of Petersburg.


Words And Deeds; The Guinier Affair Aggravates Clinton's Credibility Problem
IN a city where the rules of engagement demand that politicians tell convincing stories in public and reporters publicly pretend to believe them, the Vice President's Thursday night appearance on "Nightline" came as something of a shock.
Several hours earlier, President Clinton had announced that he was withdrawing the nomination of his longtime friend Lani Guinier for assistant attorney general for civil rights because he had decided that her theories for empowering black Americans were, after all, too radical.
He had said his decision was motivated not by any political concerns but solely by a reading of Ms.
Guinier's writings -- which Mr.
Clinton said he had only read and understood that day for the first time.


Night Bloomers and Venus Flytraps
ALL the garden books I am reading this year are colored by Sara Stein's "Noah's Garden: Restoring the Ecology of Our Own Back Yards," which tells the story of how one gardener began to realize that her neat and tidy lawn, her perennial beds full of exotic shrubs and flowers had left no place for wildlife.
"Noah's Garden" has affected the way I read other books and also the way I look at plants.
Now, when I am enraptured by a viburnum or a butterfly bush at the local nursery, I ask, is this one the birds and butterflies could use?


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASEBALL Texas, the Hard Way Brooks Kieschnick of Texas just did finish the job he started last night in the College World Series at Omaha.
Suffering through an off night, the all-American pitcher allowed 12 hits and 5 runs and threw 172 pitches before the Longhorns edged Oklahoma State, 6-5, in a first-round game.
Kieschnick (16-3), a first-round draft pick of the Chicago Cubs, gave up singles to Sean Hugo and Peter Prodanov in the ninth before making Thad Chaddrick his 11th strikeout victim to end the game.
In an afternoon game, Darren Dreifort, Wichita State's relief ace, hit the game-winning home run in the 11th inning and then got the save as Wichita State defeated Arizona State, 4-3.
Dreifort was within a strike of collecting his fifth save of the season in the ninth when A.S.U.'s Sean Tyler hit a homer to tie the score at 3-3.
But Dreifort (11-1), a second-round choice of the Dodgers in the draft, hit his 21st homer to lead off the 11th and then survived a two-on rally in the bottom of the inning.
Dreifort was chosen second by the Dodgers in the major league draft. (AP) TENNIS Navratilova Is Winner Top-seeded Martina Navratilova took advantage of the service errors and inexperience of Dutch teen-ager Kristie Boogert yesterday to post a 6-3, 6-3 victory at the Beckenham grass-court event in England.
Navratilova then made a plea to Wimbledon's seeding committee to put her in the half of the draw that doesn't contain defending champion Steffi Graf.
"I think I should be seeded joint No. 2 with Arantxa Sanchez Vicario behind Steffi," said the nine-time Wimbledon champion.
Navratilova does not want to be seeded third and face the possibility of meeting Graf in the Wimbledon semifinals.
The fifth-seeded Boogert, 19 years old, broke Navratilova's serve early in the second set but then was broken three times by the 36-year-old left-hander.
In the men's semifinals of the exhibition tournament, second-seeded David Wheaton defeated fellow American Ken Flach, 6-7 (7-9), 6-3, 6-2.
Wheaton, a Wimbledon semifinalist in 1991, will face Chris Bailey of Britain in today's final.
Bailey also needed three sets to defeat 13th-seeded Grant Stafford of South Africa, 6-3, 6-7 (7-9), 6-3. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD Near-Miss for Bubka Sergei Bubka cleared 19 feet 2 1/4 inches, then barely missed a world pole vault record of 20-1 3/4 last night at the Prefontaine Classic in Eugene, Ore.
The Ukrainian, who has set world records 34 times, got off to a rocky start by missing at 18-8 1/4.
But he sailed easily over the bar on his second try at that height and on his first attempt at 19-2 1/4 before asking that the bar be set just above his world-record mark of 20-1 1/4.
Last week, Bubka cleared 19-8 1/4 at the Bruce Jenner Classic last week for the highest vault ever on United States soil, but he did not attempt a world record then, waiting instead for the Prefontaine meet.
Both the Prefontaine meet and Bubka are sponsored by Nike.
Bubka missed badly on his first world-record try but nearly cleared it on his second, knocking the bar off with his torso on the way down.
His third attempt was even closer.
He made it all the way over the bar but brushed it with his arms.
The bar stayed in place for an instant, then fell.
Bubka tied the meet and Hayward Field record set by Kory Tarpenning in 1988.
Tarpenning was second yesterday at 18-8 1/4. (AP) Hometown Heroes: Luann Williams, former Clara Barton High School of Brooklyn star now at Odessa (Tex.) Junior College, took both women's sprints yesterday in the Coors/Metropolitan Athletics Congress outdoor track and field championships at St.
John's.
Williams, the national junior college champion in the 100 and 200 meters, won the 100 in 12 seconds and the 200 in 24.43 seconds yesterday, running for the Caribbean Connection Track Club.
She almost lost the 100 when her starting blocks slipped, and she got off poorly.
However, Williams made up ground quickly and caught Marissa Maggio of Anderson International at the tape as both were clocked in the same time.
Charlene Neptune, Williams's teammate at Clara Barton, Odessa and the Caribbean Connection, finished first in the 1,500 meters in 4 minutes 32.47 seconds.
She was second in the 800 meters at 2:10.34 behind Adina Valdez of the Westchester Track Club, who won in 2:06.52.
In men's events, Ric Liddie of the Pioneer Club, former Andrew Jackson runner, upset Larry Gardner of Nike Atlantic in the 400 meters with a time of 47.77 seconds.
GOLF  Baker's Lead Is Cut Peter Baker, after shooting an even-par 72, had his three-stroke lead trimmed to one yesterday in the Dunhill British Masters in Woburn, England.
Baker, a 25-year-old Briton who vaulted into the lead with a course record-tying 64 on Friday, managed a lone birdie on his third trip over the 6,940-yard Duke's course and was at 13-under 203.
That left him just one shot ahead of countryman Carl Mason, Ronan Rafferty of Northern Ireland and Joakim Haeggman of Sweden.
Mason and Haeggman shot 69's, and Rafferty, who birdied the last two holes, had a 70 and was at 204.
Sandy Lyle, a former Masters titleholder at Augusta, followed his second-round 65 with a 70 and was another stroke off the pace at 205.
Bernhard Langer, winner of this year's Masters at Augusta, fell five shots off the lead with a 71. (AP) Title for Florida: Florida won the team championship and Arizona State's Todd Demsey won the individual title at the N.C.A.A. men's tournament in Lexington, Ky., when Georgia Tech's David Duval couldn't par the final hole.
Florida, which relinquished the lead to Georgia Tech after the third round and trailed by three strokes heading into the final 18 holes, shot a five-under-par 283 to finish at seven-under 1,145 on the par-72 Champions course.
Georgia Tech was one stroke back while North Carolina finished third in the 15-team tournament with a five-under 1,147.
Demsey, who had three birdies yesterday in recording a three-under 69, finished with a 10-under 278, while Duval's 70 put him a stroke back in second.
The Gators, who also won the tournament in 1968 and 1973, clinched the title when Chris Couch sank a four-foot putt for par on No. 18.
The Gators also won the tournament in 1968 and 1973. (AP) SOCCER Bundesliga Decided Bernd Hobsch scored two second-half goals and Werder Bremen shut out VfB Stuttgart, 3-0, yesterday in Berlin to capture the Bundesliga title.
Bremen entered the game with the same 18-10-5 record as Bayern Munich, but Munich saw its hopes for a record 13th crown end in a 3-3 draw against Schalke.
Bremen, the champion in 1965 and 1988, broke a 0-0 tie when Hobsch fired his first goal in the 46th minute.
Thomas Wolter scored four minutes later to make the score 2-0, and Hobsch scored again in the 74th minute.
Munich had been in first place since opening day before Bremen took over first last Saturday.
Bayer Leverkusen secured a UEFA Cup berth for next season with its 4-0 victory over Monchengladbach. (AP)


Speaker Design Goes Modern
Being an erratic art rather than an exact science, loudspeaker design is in constant flux.
Because a discernible gap persists between the true sound of music and what is heard from even the best loudspeakers, perfectionists remain restless.
One such perfectionist is Graham Banks, research director of Celestion, Britain's largest loudspeaker company.
Like most of his colleagues, Mr.
Banks has been struggling with a stubborn flaw afflicting all speakers -- their tendency to partially mask the true timbres of voices and instruments by superimposing their own tonal character.


Sarah Huffman, John H. Griffin
Sarah Elizabeth Huffman, the daughter of Sue B. Huffman-Robison of Englewood, N.J., and Dr.
William H. Huffman of Charlotte, N.C., was married yesterday to John Henry Griffin, a son of Antonia Allegra of St.
Helena, Calif., and Dr.
John H. Griffin of Del Mar, Calif.
The Rev.
Jon Huber, a Universal Life minister, performed the ceremony at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
William Jaeger in St.
Helena.
Mrs.
Griffin, 26, is an assistant director of Learning Strategies, an educational concern in Pacifica, Calif.
She graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in English from Mills College.


Another Case Of Double Vision
To the Editor:
Consider this scenario: A carefully selected double fills in for a leader at a public ceremony.
When the leader has a stroke, the impersonation is extended.
A subordinate and the double clash and the subordinate leaves, only to accuse the double of crimes at a press conference.
A simulated stroke is planned for the switch back to "reality." The woman who loved the leader ends up in love with the double.


Perspectives: Renewing the Branches; Carnegie's Library Parade Marches On
A GRATIFYING sight awaits Andrew Carnegie should he decide to materialize on Amboy Road in the Tottenville section of Staten Island.
A library built with his money in 1904 has been overhauled at a cost of $1.9 million by the Department of General Services.
It reopened in March -- repaired, restored and braced for the brave new audio-visual world of the 90's.
The branch is one of at least 65 libraries built in New York City with the 19th-century industrialist's money, a fraction of more than 2,000 he paid for around the world.
In New York, 52 of these buildings survive as libraries.
None so far has received so extensive a restorative treatment as the one operating in an old-Americana setting at 7430 Amboy Road, at the southernmost tip of Staten Island.


The Use of Psychics In Seeking the Missing
The recent article "Psychics on Trail of Missing Persons" is an interesting and disturbing display of tabloid-style reporting.


Lucretia Adymy, Robert Risoleo
Lucretia Marie Adymy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Adymy of Orchard Park, N.Y., was married yesterday to Robert Samuel Risoleo, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Risoleo of Pittsburgh.
Msgr.
George Brennan performed the ceremony at the Church of the Holy Family in Buffalo.


Israel Is Seeking to Ease Law On Divorce in Rabbis' Courts
The details get obscure, but to cut through the thicket:
Miri Nahadar entered marriage in Iran when she was only 15, and had two children, who are now 22 and 17.
She emigrated to Israel with other Iranian Jews after the ayatollahs took power in 1979, found her husband unwilling to hang around for more than 5 minutes at a time and finally decided, 10 years ago, that she wanted nothing more from life than a divorce.


Minorities on the Move, Often Unpredictably
THE magnets that move people are many.
In the old outlaw country of southwestern Kansas, meat packing plants are bringing Vietnamese to Dodge City.
In Massachusetts, the lure of a less crowded life pulls Puerto Ricans northward from New York.
In central Oklahoma and southern Illinois, black neighborhoods burgeon near universities.
In central Tennessee, a Nissan plant brings Japanese managers to the land of the Grand Old Opry.


Survival Courses: How to plan a sit-down wedding dinner for 65.
Entertaining 70 for a sit-down dinner or 100 for a buffet does not adequately prepare you for a wedding ceremony followed by a sit-down dinner for 65.
I know because my daughter, Ann Burros, was married to Gary Silverstein in a candlelight ceremony on Sept. 12, 1992, in my living room in Bethesda, Md.
What I didn't know was that preparing for this event was going to take up every waking -- and a few sleeping -- moments of my life for most of last summer.
But I wouldn't have had it any other way.
Despite all the work, nothing can match a home wedding -- the intimacy, the warmth, the beauty, the memories -- not to mention the money saved by doing most of the work yourself.
And it isn't necessary to own or rent everything: you can borrow from your friends.
There are other advantages as well: You don't have to select a date a year in advance to be certain the place is available, and you don't have to spend a fortune on flowers to make it look nice.
But careful planning is a must.


Books for Vacation Reading
Art, Music &amp; Popular Culture
THE ART OF CELEBRATION: Twentieth-Century Painting, Literature, Sculpture, Photography, and Jazz.
By Alfred Appel Jr. (Knopf, $35.) Modern times aren't all Eliot and Kafka, the author cheerfully argues; there's also Matisse, Astaire, Chaplin, Teddy Wilson and a whole raft of dedicated life affirmers.


Lugano
The Italian spoken by Lugano's residents, the pasta and pizza on the outdoor cafe tables and the campaniles of the churches evoke the Mediterranean.
At the same time, Lugano, the cultural and business center of Switzerland's Ticino Canton, offers Swiss tidiness and calm, rather than the exuberance and bustle of Italy itself, which is just 15 miles away.
Two pyramid-shaped hills frame Lugano Bay on five-pronged Lake Lugano, which Switzerland shares with Italy; on jasmine-scented summer evenings, lights twinkle from the many villas, restaurants and cafes on the slopes.
The vegetation is subtropical -- palms, cypresses and oleanders, along with hundreds of rose varieties from May through October -- in the Civic Gardens and along the sweeping lakefront.


'On the Town' in Revival At Goodspeed Opera
WHY fight it?
The Goodspeed Opera House restoration of "On the Town" is captivating.
What Leonard Bernstein meant when he wrote of "the joy of music" is fully transmitted into the joy of a musical comedy.
This -- pure, simple, sweet, sentimental and funny -- is how it used to be.
Bathed in a very real nostalgia, here is the "New York, New York" of old: Lindy's, Luchow's, the Roxy (the movie palace, not the disco or the deli).
But not that old: The Hippodrome (the 5,000-seat showplace, not the garage) was razed.
"Tobacco Road" was already closed.


Biking Along Michigan's Hilly Shores
ON the beach in Frankfort, Mich., where the western sky glows until 10 o'clock on July nights, a young woman in baggy white shorts was lashing a couple of mountain bikes to a signpost.
She and some friends had just clambered off their boat from Chicago, she explained.
Chicagoans have been coming to the upper reaches of their lake since the days before air-conditioning.
These days, many of them bring their bikes.
My own was down the street, in the parking lot behind the Hotel Frankfort, on Main Street, about three blocks from the beach.
This was the eve of my four-day, 225-mile solo, haphazard cycling tour and this town of about 1,600 was my starting point -- about 300 miles from Chicago, roughly at the base of the Leelanau Peninsula, which cuts 30-some miles north into Lake Michigan.


Wall Street; The Rush Into Funds -- Less Than Meets the Eye
EVERY month brings new reports of record cash flows into mutual funds.
But those figures are just the numerators.
James A. Bianco, director of research at Arbor Trading Group, a Barrington, Ill., brokerage, looks at the denominator as well.
He compares the monthly flow not just to the previous month's, but to the total value of all stocks and bonds.
By this standard, stock and bond funds are still taking in less than they were before sentiment abruptly changed in 1987.


Louise Whitton, Clifton G. York
Louise Whitton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Whitton Jr. of Chappaqua, N.Y., was married yesterday to Clifton Gaston York, the son of Janet Brewster of New York and the late Dr.
Albert T. York Jr.
The Rev.
John M. Whallon performed the ceremony at the Rye (N.Y.) Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
York is an actress in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
Mr.
York is studying for an M.B.A. at New York University.
He graduated from the University of Virginia.


MAY 30-JUNE 5: People Power; In Guatemalan Politics, Epaulets Go Out of Fashion
In 10 days of upheaval, Guatemalans turned three times to the military that ran the country through decades of political murder and international opprobrium.
With the army command behind him, President Jorge Serrano Elias shut down Congress and the Supreme Court and suspended the Constitution on May 25.
Last week, with international repercussions mounting, the military reversed the move, under pressure from business, political and other groups, and forced out Mr.
Serrano.
Then, in a turn that outraged many Guatemalans, Mr.
Serrano's Vice President, Gustavo Espina Salguero, gained the military's support to take the presidency.


Inge S. Zelling, Thomas E. Regan
Dr.
Inge Sophia Zelling, the daughter of Dr.
Louisa J. Fritz of Lawton, Pa., and Dr.
Daniel A. Zelling of Akron, Ohio, was married yesterday to Thomas Edward Regan, a son of Maree Regan of Berwyn, Pa., and the late Owen Regan.
The Rev.
Lewis Mills performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
David's Church in Wayne, Pa.


On a Night Gone Wrong, Rivers Is What's Right
It was thrilling to see Doc Rivers hound Michael Jordan in the dying moments of the Knicks season here Friday night.
And it was sad.
Rivers wanted to give so much to win a championship for the Knicks, for himself.
But by the end he just didn't have nearly enough to give.
On the night the Knicks expired, Rivers was everything that was ever right about the 1992-93, 60-victory Knicks.
And wrong.


End of Victory Drought Now in Sight for Stewart
Looking for his first victory since the 1991 United States Open, Payne Stewart had a late explosion of birdies and an eagle today to take a commanding lead into the final round of the Memorial Tournament.
The 36-year-old Stewart shot a four-under-par 67 for a 54-hole total of 14-under 203, which put him three strokes ahead of Paul Azinger, who had a 68 this afternoon.
Bill Glasson is alone in third at 204.


Engaging the Employee Is the Key
To the Editor:
"Managing Emotions in the Workplace" (The Executive Life, May 16), discussed only part of the new paradigm in today's work environment.
It is easy to overstate the effect of the decline of job security as a factor in the work force.
Too often people assume that loyalty to an organization is gone since there is a risk that their positions will not be permanent.
But consider the realities of professional sports.
If anything, job security is the exception.


Susan B. Titman, Peter S. Hedges
Susan Bruce Titman, a daughter of John and Narcissa Titman of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Peter Simpson Hedges, a son of the Rev.
Robert B. Hedges of San Angelo, Tex., and Carole Hedges of New York.
The bridegroom's father, a retired Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at St.
James Church in Woodstock, Vt.
The bride, an actress with the Circle Repertory Company in New York, performs as Susan Bruce.
She graduated from the University of Michigan and received a master's degree in fine arts from New York University.
Her father is a vice president in New York at Home Box Office, the cable television network.
Her mother, now retired, lectured in New York on the theater.
The bride's maternal grandfather, the late Rev.
Dr.
V.
Carney Hargroves, was president of the Baptist World Alliance.


Casinos Fear Competition in Backyard
WITH a mixture of pride and trepidation, the leaders of the casino industry in Atlantic City last weekend marked the 15th anniversary of the date when New Jersey made casino gambling legal.
Since 1978, the casinos have generated more than $30 billion in gross revenue, created more than 50,000 jobs, pumped $2.4 billion into the state treasury, paid hundreds of millions of dollars in property taxes to Atlantic City and added uncounted millions to the checking accounts of the businesses that service the industry.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Holstein on Wheels
SITTING at a traffic light in a car that looks like a cow, one learns an important fact about New York drivers.
Nothing, not even pink udders on a Honda Prelude, will distract them.
Until the light turns green, the eyes stay straight ahead.
Which means that quite a few Long Island drivers missed quite a sight on Main Street in Smithtown.


Geraniums With That Continental Flair
FEW summer flowers do the yeomen work of geraniums.
These sturdy plants combine well with other summertime flowers for bright displays in window boxes.
Geraniums decorate tubs on the patio, and they provide bright accent color in borders where needed.
Geranium plants are rugged, too, and will survive the first blasts of cool weather.
They keep on flowering until truly deep freezes finish them off.
Each year sees brighter flower colors, stronger foliage and stems and unusual variety in geranium forms.


Top Graduates in Science Also Put Dreams on Hold
These are unsettling job-hunting times, even for the certifiably brilliant progeny of the nation's top schools in science and engineering.
Seniors who had their hearts set on creating the technologies of the next century are having trouble just lining up job interviews, and fresh new Ph.D.'s are settling for temporary teaching jobs offering little prospect of the security of tenure.


Pale Ale
To the Editor:
With all the deserved congratulations being tossed to "Cheers"  [ "It's Closing Time at 'Cheers,' " May 9 ] , I nevertheless have one nagging, negative thought: How come Cheers, the saloon, never had any customers of color, i.e., Hispanics, African-Americans, et al?
On rare occasions, one might have seen a dark-skinned face in the background but no more than that.


Half and Half Means Well Rounded
To the Editor:
For the past 13 years, I've referred to my children as "half-black, half-Jewish." Miriam Bieder (Letters, May 16) observes that I've been incorrect when describing my children in that way since black refers to race and Jewish refers to religion.


Large Step for Knicks But It's Small Solace
For so many reasons, it was painful for the Knicks to wake up yesterday and accept that their season was over.
Painful because after a 60-victory regular season, the Knicks and many others believed they were good enough to win a National Basketball Association championship.
Painful because mistakes like missed free throws and turnovers cost them dearly.
Painful because veterans like Patrick Ewing, Charles Oakley, Doc Rivers, Rolando Blackman and Herb Williams must endure another year without a title.


Visiting 'Jurassic Park' For Real
They're probably as close to the real thing as movie dinosaurs will get, moving as naturally as animals in a National Geographic special.
The vegetarian dinosaurs nuzzle cute chicks, drool, snooze in the sun, roam savannas in picturesque herds and display distinctive personalities.
The carnivores bare serrated teeth, fix baleful eyes on their human prey and splash their way across lush Hawaiian landscapes.
All in all, the creatures in Steven Spielberg's big-budget science-fiction thriller "Jurassic Park," which opens on Friday, should, at the very least, amuse dinosaur lovers.
People watchers will have to make do with the performances by Sam Neill and Laura Dern as two young scientists in love, Jeff Goldblum as an eccentric mathematician, Sir Richard Attenborough as a billionaire -- "We saw him as a cross between Walt Disney and Ross Perot," Mr.
Spielberg said -- and two small children.


Oven-Stuffer Diamond
Synthetic diamond has been around for a half century, but a new method for making this precious stuff by roasting a plastic-like compound has caused a flurry of scientific excitement.
The latest advance in diamond synthesis, reported last week by scientists at Pennsylvania State University, was a tour de force of chemistry.
A team led by Dr.
Patricia Bianconi first synthesized a new polymer (or plastic), in which carbon atoms are bonded to each other in a lattice arrangement like that of diamond.
By roasting this substance in an ordinary oven, the extraneous material was driven off, and most of what remained was diamond.


Danielle Sproul, Kevin Sullivan
Danielle A. Sproul, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Archibald A. Sproul 4th of Evanston, Ill., was married yesterday to Kevin M. Sullivan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael P. Sullivan of Charlotte, N.C.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard performed the Unitarian ceremony at the Lotos Club in New York.
Mrs.
Sullivan, 31, is a vice president and management supervisor at Lowe &amp; Partners, an advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from the University of Illinois and received an M.B.A. from the University of Chicago.


Corrections
The crossword puzzle in The Times Magazine last Sunday included an incorrect definition for 114 Down.
It should have read, "Got second money," not "Got third money." (The answer was "placed.")


M. W. Blair, A. E. Beermann Jr.
Marie Watson Blair, a daughter of Marie W. Blair of Wilson, N.C., and William J. Blair Jr. of Wilmington, N.C., was married yesterday to Arnold Edward Beermann Jr., a son of Mrs.
Beermann of Douglaston, Queens, and the late Mr.
Beermann.
The Rev.
Philip Byrum performed the ceremony at St.
Timothy's Episcopal Church in Wilson.
Mrs.
Beermann is the head of client relations at Christie's East, the New York auction house.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Her father is the owner and the chief executive of the Nordic Group Inc., a refrigerated warehouse and distribution company in Wilmington.
Her mother is a poet.


Slow Fade to Black
When it comes to selling off chunks of Italy's cinematographic history, or at least the sets and props and costumes that marked its course, Antonio De Crescenzo is the person to call.
In 1981, he auctioned some 10,000 Roman tunics, several fiercely driven chariots and a number of passion-pummeled beds from 1950's and 60's blockbusters like "Quo Vadis" and "Cleopatra" at the renowned Cinecitta studio.


Salt Lake City Skiing Uphill on Bid
Salt Lake City, snubbed once before by the International Olympic Committee, has not lost a step.
This quiet metropolis, nestled within the Wasatch and Oquir Mountains, is pressing ahead at a bustling pace with its bid for the 2002 Winter Games -- despite possible derailment again by the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta.
At the United States Olympic Committee meetings here today, bid organizers unveiled a Utah Sports Development plan that would complete all facilities and bolster coaching staffs at the Winter Sports Park in time for the I.O.C. vote on June 16, 1995, in Budapest.
The bid by Salt Lake City already has the endorsement of the U.S.O.C., and Salt Lake City organizers took many of the directors on a tour of facilities that are sprouting 15 miles east of downtown.


Up and Out


Harlem Protest of Rap Lyrics Draws Debate and Steamroller
The steamroller was fueled and ready, but the Rev.
Calvin O. Butts 3d decided at the last moment yesterday not to conduct a symbolic protest against explicit rap lyrics by crushing boxes of rap recordings.
Confronted by demonstrators who accused him of censorship, he said that he would instead meet with the rappers who are angered by his campaign against their music.
Mr.
Butts, pastor at the influential Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem, gave a fiery speech from the pulpit against some rap music, which he called vulgar and offensive to women, before climbing onto the steamroller outside the church at Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard near 137th Street.


West by West Puts His Feet in the Handicap Picture
In the hours before the festive air of Belmont Day was shattered, some of the best-known horses in racing competed in three major stakes leading to the main event of a day marked by extreme swings of fortune.
In the most important race on the undercard to the Belmont Stakes, eight senior stars of racing competed in the $400,000 Nassau County Handicap, the fifth event in the American Championship Racing Series.
And a new winner joined the seniors' tour: West by West, storming through the stretch to win by three-quarters of a length over Valley Crossing, who had a length on the hometown hero Strike the Gold.
And three and a half lengths farther back came the favored Devil His Due, who had already won twice in the series.


Gardeners Hope to Keep a Piece of Southern Black Culture Alive
More then 100 people gathered in a sunny field here today to pay homage to a spikey, hay-like plant -- sweetgrass -- that has long been essential to the black culture along the coast but is now endangered by development.
The volunteers, trowels in hand, planted more than 2,000 small clumps of sweetgrass on a one-acre inland plot on James Island, far from the sandy dunes where the grass once thrived.
The effort is part of an experiment to determine whether the plant can flourish under cultivation, and again supply the basket-making craft that has been part of black culture here for 300 years.


San Juan
To the Editor: The "What's Doing in San Juan" column (April 4) was filled with useful information on activities for prospective visitors to Puerto Rico.


Challenge of Replacing Old Foundation Sills
OWNERS of older, neglected or poorly built houses and outbuildings, especially in rural or wet locations, often face the problem of replacing decayed foundation sills, the horizontal beams separating the framing of the building from the foundation walls.
Replacing the sills is seldom a job for amateurs, but doing so on a detached garage, shed or small barn makes a challenging, if strenuous, project.
Two helpful books before before starting the job are "Renovating Old Houses" by George Nash (Taunton Press, 1992) and "Renovation: A Complete Guide" by Michael W. Litchfield (Prentice Hall, 1991).
A useful article on sills was in The Journal of Light Construction in October.
The magazine may be available in libraries, or readers can call (802) 434-4747.


Time Bomb in the White House
President Clinton learned a valuable lesson when he appointed Bob Hattoy to work in the White House: Never hire a dying man; he has nothing to lose.
That was all too clear the morning that Dee Dee Myers, the White House press secretary, called Hattoy at home to scold him for his latest transgression.
He hung up and ran to the bathroom.
"I went to my boyfriend while he was still taking a shower -- he had shampoo in his hair -- and I said, 'Bobby, will you still love me if I'm a waiter at the end of the day?' " Hattoy recalls.
"He said, 'Yes.' "


GUATEMALA IS NEAR CHOICE FOR LEADER
In a move to end the most serious political crisis in Guatemala's seven years of civilian rule, Congress was close tonight to choosing the Government's human rights ombudsman as the country's new President.
The ombudsman, Ramiro de Leon Carpio, 51, would finish out the term of Jorge Serrano Elias, who was overthrown by the military last Tuesday, one week after he dissolved Congress and the Supreme Court and suspended the Constitution.
Mr.
Serrano was to leave office in January 1996.


Riots and Mourning Follow a Firebombing


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
April consumer credit, change, billions
$3.4
$2.7
Tuesday
1st-qtr. nonfarm productivity, pct. change
-0.1
-0.1
April wholesale sales, percent change
-0.2
0.4
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
344
340
Friday
May producer prices, percent change
0.6
0.2
May retail sales, percent change
1.2
0.7
Monday: Lloyd Bentsen gives speech in Stockholm  Tuesday: European Community foreign ministers meet  Wednesday: Central bankers meet in Stockholm Royal wedding in Japan


Dick Gregory Is Back
NAME: Dick Gregory
IDENTITY: Trailblazing comedian, civil rights advocate and one-time Presidential candidate.
Heads Dick Gregory Health Enterprises, which makes diet products.
Father of 10.


Robert Klein, 66, a Money Magazine Senior Editor
Robert J. Klein, a founding editor of Money magazine and a consumer advocate, died on Thursday at the Cabrini Hospice in Manhattan.
He was 66 and had homes in Manhattan and Scarsdale, N.Y.
Mr. Klein died of cancer, a news release from the magazine said.


Ms. Friedman, Mr. Kushner
Stephanie Paige Friedman, the daughter of Dr.
Melvin M. Friedman and Joyce Ezrine, both of Baltimore, was married there yesterday to Thomas Nicholas Kushner, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Robert G. Kushner.
The Rev.
John S. Witulich, a Roman Catholic priest, and Cantor Harold Levy officiated at the Woodholme Country Club.


Tammy Koehler, George Dorfman
Tammy Fay Koehler, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dale Koehler of Canton, Ohio, was married yesterday to George J. Dorfman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert L. Dorfman of Gloversville, N.Y.
Arthur Marchesi, a town justice in Freeville, N.Y., officiated at the Rose Inn in Lansing, N.Y.
Mrs.
Dorfman, 26, is the assistant director of the Wellness Program, an exercise and nutrition program for the faculty and students at Cornell University.
She graduated from the University of Toledo, from which she received a master's degree in education.


New Inlet is West Of Westhampton Beach
A description of the photographs of Little Pike's Inlet on the front page should be clarified.
Little Pike's Inlet is located in Westhampton, Town of Southampton.
The westerly portion of the village line ends at 529 Dune Road, and the inlet is approxiamtely a mile plus from the Village of Westhampton Beach line.
MAYOR ARMA E. ANDON Village of Westhampton Beach


CLINTON FAULTED ON HAITI SANCTIONS
Even as the Clinton Administration adopts new sanctions to punish the military-backed Government of Haiti, officials of other nations and American analysts of Haitian affairs say Washington has failed to apply the type of pressure needed to restore the elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, to power.
On Friday, with senior Administration officials' saying that they were imposing "a very high price" for the continued defiance by the military leaders of Haiti against international demands for a return to democracy, President Clinton signed an executive order freezing the assets of and barring travel to the United States by backers of the coup in September 1991 that overthrew Father Aristide.


Janos Scholz, 89, Cellist, Scholar And Morgan Library Benefactor
Janos Scholz, a cellist, art collector and benefactor of the Pierpont Morgan Library, died Thursday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 89 and lived on the upper East Side.
The cause of death was heart failure after a stroke, said his wife, the former Helen Marshall Schelling.


UP AND COMING: Valeria Golino; She Made Her Name Popping an Olive
Valeria Golino was 55 minutes late for lunch, but who's counting?
That's the thing about these charmingly accented Italian actresses.
They can be an hour late, and you're just glad they came at all.
"I'm so sorry," Ms.
Golino said, sweeping into an Upper East Side bistro in a green pin-striped suit.
Her entrance was not quiet.


Ted Turner's Time of Discontent
IN an upcoming movie for his TNT channel, based on the Battle of Gettysburg, Ted Turner makes a cameo appearance as a Confederate officer who unsheathes his sword and makes a noble charge up a hill into the heart of Union cannon fire.
Call it typecasting.
Ted Turner's battle instinct has always been to charge.
The results in life, if not on screen, have more than justified that inclination: a cable programming empire with a global reach unmatched by any other TV entity.


The Models in Underwear Were Almost Overdressed
There was a lot to see at Calvin Klein's blowout benefit fashion show at the Hollywood Bowl on Thursday, which raised more than $1 million for AIDS Project Los Angeles.
Of the nearly 300 models who walked down the runway, 30 wore silver bathing or body suits.
Eighteen women went down the catwalk in black stockings and lacy underwear.
They were followed by a cavalcade of shirtless men with hardly a chest hair among them.


U.S. Gives Up on a Chip-Making Tool, but Does It Matter?
A strenuous effort by the United States Government and the American semiconductor industry to save American manufacturers of a vital type of machinery used in making computer chips is ending in failure.
One of the last two major American manufacturers of that equipment, the GCA Corporation, went out of business last month.
The other, the Silicon Valley Group Inc., has concluded that it cannot continue on its own and is negotiating an agreement to license what is considered highly promising technology to an important Japanese competitor, Canon Inc., in exchange for financial assistance.


Corrections
A brief article yesterday about the commencement at Williams College was published prematurely.
The ceremony is scheduled for today.


Business Diary/May 30 - June 4
THE ECONOMY Go Ahead, Cheer: People Are Going Back to Work


Shouting Obscures Arts Agency's Good Work
To the Editor:
"Waiting for the Appointment: Who Will Be the Arts Chief?" (The Week in Review, May 23) only perpetuates the false impressions of the National Endowment for the Arts thrust upon the public during the Reagan and Bush Administrations and only raises the same contentious issues that stifle dialogue and discredit the institution as a whole.
Always at the top of the dispute list is "obscene art." The work funded by the endowment that has stirred an outcry constitutes less than 1 percent of the agency's $175 million budget.
Robert Mapplethorpe, for example, spent much of his artistic energy on innovative photographs of flowers -- the black and white depictions of homoeroticism constituted a small, but nonetheless vital, part of his lifetime body of work.
The imposition of standards of decency can only turn funded works into formulaic colors on canvas, a contradiction of what artistic expression really is.
What should be kept in mind, though, is that a good deal of arts endowment dollars bring exhibitions and performance to rural areas of the United States where residents would not otherwise be exposed to or engaged in the artistic discourse of America today.
The endowment also aids in the genesis and production of ballet and operatic performance in cities, long suffering from both Federal and state cutbacks in funds.
The first job of the new head should be to enlighten citizens about the functions and benefits of the National Endowment for the Arts, and to dispel the misconceptions introduced during the last 12 years.
Only then can the agency engage the public in the multifaceted and forever evolving conversation we know as American art.
ELISE H. SANTANIELLO Woodcliff Lake, N.J., May 25, 1993


Putting on Walking Shoes for Clean Water


Bicyclists Pedal On, Despite Urban Perils
Although Devon Ruiz hung up his saddlebag a few years ago when he stopped being a bicycle messenger, he said the scrappy lessons he learned criscrossing avenues abuzz with the blurred cavalcade of traffic and pedestrians remain with him.
But there comes a point, in his mind at least, where luck overtakes road smarts.
"You can't be too cautious," he said Friday afternoon, pausing from his lazy glide along West 90th Street in Manhattan.
"You just have to ride and hope for the best." 2 Cyclists Dead and 1 Injured
The city's cyclists were hard pressed for hope last week.
Beyond the usual streetside hazards of chaotic traffic, foul-mouthed motorists and determined bike thieves, there came the dispiriting news: drivers without proper licenses struck two Manhattan men, killing one, while a drama teacher out for a sun-dappled spin in Brooklyn's Prospect Park was shot and killed during a bicycle theft gone awry.
The police arrested four teen-agers in the shooting.


Sailing to the Icy Top of the World
THE last time my husband and I swam from the bow of a ship it was in Bora Bora.
When we decided to take a cruise last summer to the Norwegian Arctic I packed my swimsuit but didn't really anticipated swimming in 35-degree water 567 miles south of the North Pole.
But plummet into frigid seas we did, along with 10 other hearty and slightly crazy souls who delighted in a quick dip in waters hospitable to polar bears, walruses and icebergs.
Our plunge took place near Spitsbergen, in the Svalbard archipelago, a group of islands covering 23,000 square miles (half of which is perpetually covered with ice) that is so far north -- 1,000 miles above the Arctic Circle -- that it is seldom visited by tourists.
We chose this destination because of its remoteness and the chance to see polar bears and pelagic birds in their natural habitats.
To our delight we got an unparalleled view of a polar bear and her cub and saw teems of nesting seabirds -- and because of melting ice and a skillful captain, our ship sailed farther north than it had ever gone before.


THE TELEPHONE TRANSFORMED
How badly do most people need pagers, video phones, wristwatches that give stock prices and other high-tech marvels described in your article?


Heidi A. Lomax, Gordon Kramon
Heidi Ann Lomax, a daughter of John Y. Lomax of Crystal Lake, Ill., and Rita Isbey of Asheville, N.C., was married yesterday evening in Asheville to Gordon Paul Kramon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roy A. Kramon of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Milton Schlager and the Rev.
Thomas Hagan officiated at the Biltmore Forest Country Club.


Peter Pucci and Ellen Sirot
Ellen Sirot, a hand model and a modern dancer with Peter Pucci Plus Dancers in New York, was married yesterday to Mr.
Pucci, the company's artistic director.
Dr.
Robert Berson, the leader of the Ethical Culture Society of Northern Westchester, officiated at the home of the bride's mother in Greenwich, Conn.
Ms.
Sirot, who is keeping her name, graduated from Barnard College.
She is a daughter of Margaret Sirot and the late Marvin Sirot.
Her father was the founder and president of the Round Hill Group, a pension investment concern in Greenwich.


Andrea Solomon, Calvin L. Parker
Andrea Remi Solomon, the daughter of Drs.
Theo X. Solomon and Ines A. D. Solomon of Teaneck, N.J., was married on Friday to Calvin Lane Parker, a son of Dr.
M.
Jack Parker and Elaine H. Parker of Aurora, Ill.
Wilbur Levin, the clerk for Kings County, officiated at the Botanical Gardens of the Snug Harbor Cultural Center in Livingston, S.I.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Dix Hills  $370,000
5 Sugar Lane  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old colonial; dining room, den, finished basement, pool, 1 acre; taxes $7,300.
East Islip  $137,000
278 Overlook Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 32-year-old colonial; dining room, fireplace, basement, 1-car attached garage; taxes $5,200.
Levittown  $120,000
140 Meridian Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 44-year-old ranch; dining room, 1-car attached garage, 60- by 120-foot lot; taxes $3,400.
Sea Cliff  $340,000
320 Littleworth Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 37-year-old center hall colonial; dining room, family room, 2 fireplaces, finished basement; taxes $7,300.
Wantagh  $157,000  2912 Lawrence Drive  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 38-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, basement, 1-car detached garage; taxes $3,700.
Westbury  $236,700
54 Bright Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old split level; dining room, den, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 2-car garage; taxes $5,000.
OTHER AREAS Torrington, Conn.  $82,000
280 Clearview Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 44-year-old ranch; deck, breakfast bar, 0.25 acre; taxes $1,758.
Mount Kisco, N.Y.  $200,000
98 St.
Mark's Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2 bath, 7-year-old raised ranch; entry hall, eat-in kitchen, unfinished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,383.
New Milford, N.J.  $185,000
515 Ryeside Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; full basement, underground sprinkler system, 1-car garage; taxes $3,901.


School Bill Is Viewed Many Ways
The State Senate gave final approval on Friday to legislation that requires every community in Connecticut to discuss the desegregation of public schools across town lines, but even in the last hours of debate, the expectations of what might result from those talks varied wildly.
Through the distorted glass of race politics, the opponents of the bill expect -- or fear -- the most from it, while many of the legislators who voted for it did so because they expect very little.


THE TELEPHONE TRANSFORMED
I read with great interest James Gleick's article on the near future of communications and information technology ("The Telephone Transformed -- Into Almost Everything," May 16).
As a researcher in computer science, I can say that for the most part he's right on the mark.
Still, there's an assumption, implicit in the article, that paper is "bad" and must inevitably be replaced by something better.
Consider Gleick's incredulity that Arno Penzias would maintain his phone directory, using such a low-tech medium as paper.
But what's wrong with this?
Paper is cheap, lightweight, fully interoperable with existing technologies (e.g. fax, copiers, filing systems, postal mail) and nonthreatening.
There are studies showing that people can read faster and with less fatigue from paper than from computer screens.


Regina Godvin, Stephen de Gersdorff
Regina Marie Godvin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David L. Godvin of Rumson, N.J., was married there yesterday to Stephen Ogden de Gersdorff, a son of Carl de Gersdorff of New York and Susan Gilbertson of Rumson.
The Rev.
Francis G. Hilton performed the ceremony at the Holy Cross Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs. de Gersdorff is the marketing communications specialist at Philip Morris International Inc., in Rye Brook, N.Y.
She graduated from Boston College.
Her father is an investment banker in Rumson.


E. C. Castleman, Kevin T. Halpin
Elizabeth Cross Castleman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald B. Castleman of Little Silver, N.J., was married yesterday to Kevin Thomas Halpin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas K. Halpin of Port Monmouth, N.J.
The Rev.
Mark Van Sant performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
George's by-the-River in Rumson, N.J.
Mrs.
Halpin, 30, is the director of the New Horizon Preschool in Port Monmouth.
She graduated from Monmouth College.
Her father is a managing director of the Bankers Trust Company in New York.


Orr Says He Will Remain at Iowa State
JOHNNY ORR, who talked of quitting as the men's coach at Iowa State earlier this year, says he'll honor his contract with the Big Eight Conference school.
Orr signed a contract extension last year that calls for him to coach the Cyclones through the 1994-95 season.
But when Iowa State recently shunned his application to become athletic director, Orr said he would quit if he could not agree with the school's choice of a successor for MAX URICK.


Kindergarten's 111th Story Ends Happily
Arms waving and feet kicking, the costumed kindergartners at Public School 95 danced merrily onto a small wooden stage and crooned "Razzle Dazzle" and "Ease On Down the Road" -- songs that echoed eerily last week through their Brooklyn elementary school auditorium and the memories of onlookers.
Three months ago the children began rehearsing those songs as they stood shivering on the observation deck of the World Trade Center, awaiting rescue after a bomb exploded 110 floors below.


Back East, a California-Born Master of the Deadpan
IN "Art of the San Francisco Bay Area" Thomas Albright notes that Joan Brown enrolled at the California School of Fine Arts not because she was interested in the subject but because she wanted to avoid the Roman Catholic women's school selected by her parents.
It was 1956, the year of her first marriage and two years before her first solo show in San Francisco.
So when she hit Manhattan in 1960 with the first of several shows at Staempfli Gallery, the artist, then 22 years old, was still something of a prodigy.
The canvases from this phase are loaded with pigment, much of it red; later on, when Ms.
Brown switched to enamel, the turbulence subsided but the ingenuousness remained for the rest of her life, which ended in an accident in 1990.
To judge from the 1970's works on view in the Joseloff Gallery at the University of Hartford, the artist was selectively naive, producing an improbable painting of revelers one moment and sophisticated drawings of nudes the next.
A clue to her outlook may be found in six self-portraits in which the headgear changes while the face, with its large pale green eyes, remains consistently bland.
In these Ms.
Brown was as much a master of deadpan as is Ed Ruscha in his images with words.


MAY 30-JUNE 5: What's With Qaddafi?; Libyans Go to Jerusalem, or Pilgrims' Lack of Progress
After decades of conflict with the Arab world, Israel craves recognition from its neighbors.
So when a group of nearly 200 Libyan Muslims arrived last week on a pilgrimage to Jerusalem, there were those who hailed them as harbingers of peace.
They were given an official welcome, and some Government ministers and trip organizers speculated on possible ties with Libya and even a visit by its leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi.
Suddenly, things went awry.
The pilgrims' leader called for the "liberation" of Jerusalem from Israel, which he said was not a state, only the name of a prophet in the Koran.
Israeli officials announced that they would boycott the group, which in turn packed up and left.


Hillary Windolf and Kelly Koonce
Hillary Jane Windolf, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John A. Windolf of Montclair, N.J., was married yesterday to Kelly Montgomery Koonce, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
K.
Terry Koonce of Mendham, N.J.
Canon Leonard Freeman performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church in Short Hills, N.J.
Mrs.
Koonce, 22, and her husband, 23, graduated from Drew University; she magna cum laude, he summa cum laude.
She is to begin graduate studies in communication sciences and disorders at the University of Texas at Austin in the fall.
Her father is the president of Bollinger Insurance, an insurance agency in Montclair.
Her mother, Muriel Windolf, is an interior designer in Montclair.


Quentin Crisp on Playing the Queen
For the movie "Orlando," the director Sally Potter asked the author Quentin Crisp, then 83, to play Queen Elizabeth I at age 67. (In her 1928 novel "Orlando," Virginia Woolf describes Queen Elizabeth I as "growing old and worn and bent before her time.")
Here are Mr. Crisp's recollections of the experience.


Brown Is Late at Start But Early at the Finish
The Brown crew, the men's varsity eight that had hardly been tested this season, was a little casual and a little tardy in reaching the starting line today for the championship race of the Intercollegiate Rowing Association regatta on the Cooper River course.
And when the 2,000-meter race began, the boat from the University of Pennsylvania, Brown's foremost rival this spring, jumped into the lead and by 500 meters was almost a boat length ahead.
But then the Bears bore down, with 20 strokes of extra power.


The Party In the Garden
A gala celebration of the exhibition 'Latin American Artists of the 20th Century,' June 2 at the Museum of Modern Art.


Streetscapes: The Thalia Theater; A Restoration for a Threatened Parabolic Curiosity
NO, no -- this is all backwards.
Small movie revival houses on development sites are supposed to be demolished, not survive, and certainly not be restored.
But that's what's happening to the 1931 Thalia Theater, at 95th Street and Broadway, which is scheduled to reopen June 18 after six dark years.
New and old patrons will see the unusual Art Moderne design, the ticket counter, lounge and tile work brushed up, and be able to judge whether the radically different tilted floor is a gimmick or an innovation.


12th Season for Early Music Festival
THE Connecticut Early Music Festival celebrates its 12th season with a dozen concerts in eight locations, and an expansion of the term early music to encompass songs of Stephen Foster, even works for period instruments by seven contemporary composers.
The artistic directors, the flutist John Solum and the harpsichordist Igor Kipnis, help start the first recital -- recitals, actually, since the 6:15 P.M.
Friday program in Lyman Allyn Art Museum in New London will be repeated there at 8:30 that evening -- with music of Telemann, Handel, Quantz, Boismortier and Hotteterre.


French Foursome Has Bermuda Bowl Hopes
BASED on past performance, there is a strong possibility that the final of the 1993 World Championship, which will be contested for the Bermuda Bowl in Santiago, Chile, in September, will be between the United States and France.
That would repeat the 1992 final in Salsomaggiore, Italy, when the French were victorious.
The Americans and the French have met on 19 official or semi-official occasions.
There have been six French victories, four of them en route to world titles, and 12 American victories.
A 1932 match was abandoned as a draw after a dispute.


Wall Street; New Curves in the Currency Game
FOREIGN markets provide at least 40 percent of the profits for the nation's 500 largest companies, so those companies are always desperate to find shelter from currency trading tempests.
The more so now that the world's mightiest currencies are getting bumped around like a bunch of biotech stocks.
Several leading manufacturers are feuding with securities and accounting authorities over proposed rules that, they say, would compound the risks of competing abroad, discouraging investment.
To the authorities, the issue is whether accounting standards can be twisted to disguise currency risks from investors.
"How well do we serve investors in those situations by working up some accounting conventions so things look nice and stable?" said Halsey G. Bullen, a manager at the Financial Accounting Standards Board.
"How well does that reflect economic reality? Life is volatile sometimes."


John F. Yang And Joyce Yang
Joyce Chuan-Chu Yang, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Steve S. Yang of Pleasantville, N.Y., was married yesterday to John Francis Yang, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George C. Yang of Hyattsville, Md.
The Rev.
Dr.
Mark S. Anschutz, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at St.
James's Church in New York.
Mrs.
Yang, 31, is a senior analyst in the structured finance group at Moody's Investors Service in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Cornell University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


Democratic Deja Vu
To the Editor:
The film "Dave"  [ "Of Hems and Haws: The Insiders' Guide to 'Dave,' " May 16 ]  parallels another film that opened at the dawn of another Democrat's Presidency.
"Gabriel Over the White House" (1933), directed by Gregory La Cava, tells a similar story of a country under an out-of-touch President facing seemingly insurmountable problems.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
STUDIO OPEN HOUSE
The studio of William Chadwick, a member of Old Lyme's colony of 20th-century American Impressionist painters, will open today for public viewing, surrounded by gardens on the grounds of the Florence Griswold Museum.
The studio was donated to the museum by the artist's daughter-in-law, Elizabeth Chadwick O'Connell, and moved from its original site off Shore Road to the museum's property.
It has been restored to its appearance when Mr.
Chadwick painted there from 1920 to 1962.
Many of the original furnishings and accessories, and the artist's painting equipment were preserved and have been installed.


Eastham, Cape Cod's Little Secret
HALFWAY between the elbow and knuckles of Cape Cod, Massachusetts' long arm flexing into the Atlantic, lies a little town that most vacationers hardly notice.
"You can pass through the village centers of Eastham and North Eastham and never know you've been there," notes one guidebook.
And it's almost true.
Bisected by Route 6, Cape Cod's main artery, Eastham appears at first glance to have little of even passing interest, besides a glimpse of water and a vaguely hat-shaped visitor center.
To most hurried visitors, "the gateway" to the National Seashore, as Eastham is known, remains a stop for gas on the way to the beach; for those who pause a moment longer on their way to Wellfleet or Provincetown, it's a straggle of efficiency cottages, a few motels and a handful of slightly faded roadside attractions.
No blown glass, no band concerts, no yacht club.
But for those who linger, Eastham provides its own quiet blandishments.
The sun rises over the ocean on one edge of town, and sets a few miles away over Cape Cod Bay.
In between sunrise and sunset, you can swim across a couple of freshwater ponds, or brood by a salt marsh.
A watery, drifting place, Eastham loses a bit of itself every year to the tides, shored up only by beach grass and scrub pine.
Where the ground isn't spongy, it's sandy.
Long ago, I decided that this tentative quality must be why Eastham has stayed so unassuming, blessedly free of choked harbors, of restaurants that treat lobster as haute cuisine, of golf courses larger than half an acre.
Instead it's a mom-and-pop kind of town; the same family has always owned the general store, and a rented bicycle comes with a desultory chat about back roads, and a reminder to wear a helmet.
When you spot someone wearing Spandex on the bike path, you know he's ridden in from somewhere else.


At Work; Unions Call Out Their Troops
THE last time labor law reform was a serious possibility, Jimmy Carter was President, the Raiders were still in Oakland and Evelyn "Champagne" King was the reigning diva.
In 1978, labor law reform legislation died by the slimmest of margins.
The very notion of reform was laughable during the 80's, a period during which most unionists came to regard not losing too much ground as a victory.
The Republican banishment from the White House, if not entirely from power, has freed trade unionists from 12 years of chronic pain and allowed them to start dusting off some unused limbs.
Since January, a coalition of unions has been calling out troops to protest what some unions view as the lack of enforcement of current labor laws and to help raise the visibility of a campaign to make it easier for unions to organize.


Back in the Swim With Fresh Air Fund
While staying with a Massachusetts family last summer, Keenen Jackson, 11, of Staten Island, learned how to fish but not how to tell a fish story.
"I've caught fish in the pond," he announced proudly at a pizza party recently for Fresh Air Fund children from Staten Island.
But, holding his index fingers a few inches apart, he admitted, "They were really little fish."


Conversations/Herbert Jose de Souza; A Hard Look at Brazil's Surfeits: Food, Hunger and Inequality
BOOSTERS of Brazil like to point out that during the 1980's this enormous nation became the world's third largest food exporter, outranked only by the United States and France.
Herbert Jose de Souza likes to point out that during the 1980's, the legions of Brazilians who live with hunger expanded from 25 million people to 35 million people.


When Recipes Are Not Recipes, but Ideas
OVER the years, among the many major culinary trends, two polar-opposite positions have evolved in the recipe-writing business.
One sort of food writer assumes that the cook wants and needs to be told what to do in a prescriptive fashion -- make it work, make it beautiful.
But from the opposite camp come recipes aimed at some presumably smaller number of cooks who are confident enough and experienced enough to search out the cooking tutors who will simply show them the way and set them free.
Elizabeth David, the British food writer, was renowned for being a cookbook author in the latter camp (the American chef Anne Rosenzweig once said of David's writing: "Recipes were not recipes; they were ideas").
More recently, there have been many other strong examples of the approach.
Among contemporary books, Shirley King's "Fish: The Basics" comes to mind for its willingness to give direction and then trust the cook to do something with it.


Six in Sixth Deep-Six the Drowning Mets
The six stayed up on the scoreboard, fat and forever.
The six -- the number of runs the Astros scored in the sixth inning to win, 7-5 -- was the latest product of Mets disaster, the most recent evidence that there is not much more to their 1993 season but the most joyless or ludicrous sorts of calculations.
Can the Mets lose 100 games?
Can the club be mathematically eliminated by the All-Star Game break?
When exactly will the parade of promotions from the minors begin?
How many hours are left before Manager Dallas Green resigns and goes to join his wife in Tibet?
Weakening in the Sixth
The Mets have specialized in provoking such fatalism.
Tonight's sixth inning was the heart of the latest darkness.
Bret Saberhagen, starting despite residual weakness after a bout with bronchitis, was nonetheless vulnerable in the sixth.
Steve Finley tripled to lead off and scored on a groundout.
The bases, momentarily cleared, were soon overpopulated and cleared again, a great migration of Astros that would transform a 5-2 lead to a 7-5 deficit.


Main Yeltsin Rival Bolts Constitution Conference
As a constitutional conference intended to chart Russia's political future opened today, the chairman of Russia's Parliament stormed out, accusing President Boris N. Yeltsin of pushing ahead with a new constitution that would move the country toward a dictatorship.
The departure of the chairman, Ruslan I. Khasbulatov, who was followed by about 50 other delegates, cast a pall over prospects for the smooth adoption of the country's first post-Communist constitution, an effort that Mr.
Yelstin described as "a most important watershed in the life in the Russian state."


Serbians Veer Closer to Their Extreme Edge
FOR Vojislav Seselj, it was a restrained performance.
Barely two days before, this Serbian extremist had the pleasure of watching two detested political rivals being ground into the dust.
One was the President of Yugoslavia, Dobrica Cosic, summarily dismissed by parliamentary intrigue that ended in a vote of no confidence.
The other was Vuk Draskovic, the wild-eyed opposition leader whose long hair and beard summoned up for many Yugoslavs the image of Jesus Christ, now prostrate in prison with injuries from police beatings and facing charges for having led a protest that turned violent.
So Mr.
Seselj (pronounced SHESH-el) was holding a press conference, his heavy frame squeezed behind a table in the headquarters of his Serbian Radical Party.
On the walls around him were the icons of the cause -- the Serbian tricolor, portraits of saints, a mystical canvas of a bedraggled Serbian soldier and, at center, a likeness stamped in brass of the World War II Chetnik leader, Draza Mihailovic.
Though the crowded room was as cramped as a coffin, he shouted replies in full voice: Serbia was under siege.
Her people were being demonized by the media.
No, he would never accept a peace plan with Lord Owen's signature.


Catered Affair
HIRING A CATERER IS more like finding a hairdresser than locating a plumber.
It means entering into a relationship with someone whose taste will reflect yours.
And when the occasion is as personal as a wedding, the choice of a caterer and the orchestration of the event become even more important.
Today, there are more caterers than ever, providing everything from a small dinner to a cocktail reception to an at-home wedding.
A caterer can merely provide the food, leaving the responsibility for equipment, serving and cleaning to the host, or arrange for bartenders and waiters.
For a fee, caterers will take charge of every detail -- the rental of tableware, tables, chairs, linens, tents and a dance floor.


Dinkins and Council Face Fiscal Maw's 300 Million Sharp Teeth
The sky was dark and menacing over Lower Manhattan yesterday, but it was no match for the gloom inside City Hall, where New York's political leaders worked behind closed doors to scale back the size of the municipal government by a hefty $300 million.
Cutting funds for valued services like day-care, summer school and homeless drop-in centers is never appealing to elected officials.
But Mayor David N. Dinkins, Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone and the 50 other members of the Council no doubt feel particularly vulnerable doing it now, just months before they will ask voters to re-elect them.


A Packager's View of Recycling
To the Editor:
We commend the article "Who Foots the Bill for Recycling?" (April 25).
As long-time packaging consultants, however, we see somewhat different problems and note that all the interviewees are members of the waste management and environmental faction, rather than of the packaging community.


Miss Eberstadt, Mr. Bruton
Fernanda Eberstadt, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick Eberstadt of New York, was married yesterday to Alastair Meddon Oswald Bruton, a son of Mrs.
D.
C.
Bruton of Hockworthy, Devon, England, and the late Mr.
Bruton.
The Rev.
W.
Clarke Prescott performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Paul's Chapel in New York.
Mrs.
Bruton graduated from Magdalen College, Oxford University.
She is an author whose novels, "Low Tide" and "Isaac and His Devils," were published by Knopf.


The Forbidden Books of Youth
What was the first "forbidden" book you read and what were the circumstances under which you read it?
The editors of the Book Review asked 14 men and women to share their secrets of fantasies inspired, expectations dashed, wisdom gained and the lonely knowledge that only comes in the dead of night with a flashlight in hand and a head under the covers.
Here are the responses.
Elmore Leonard
In the seventh or eighth grade a friend of mine who also read books told me that "Anthony Adverse," by Hervey Allen, had dirty parts in it; and I remember looking but don't recall if I found any.
It's not that I was forbidden to read the novel -- it was on the shelf at home, I think a Book-of-the-Month-Club selection -- but I did probably look through it on the sly, making the act feel forbidden.


Tribute to a 'Populist of the Highest Order'
WITH poetry, original dance compositions and emotional tributes, members of the world of modern dance recently honored the long and still active career of Bessie Schonberg, one of its revered leaders.
Gathered in a dance studio at Sarah Lawrence College here, the crowd of about 60 sometimes tearful alumni, dance professionals and academics watched as the studio -- in which Miss Schonberg often taught as the director of the college's dance department from 1938 to 1973 -- was officially named the Bessie Schonberg Dance Theater.


Bosnia Serbs Renew Attack on U.N. 'Safe Area' Town
Bosnian Serbs renewed shelling and infantry attacks on the United Nations-declared safe area of Gorazde today and aimed fierce artillery barrages against Gradacac, Gracanica and Brcko, the Sarajevo radio reported.
The towns lie along a corridor that links Serbia to Serb-held territory in Croatia and Bosnia.
United Nations officials here said the Bosnian Serbs continued to refuse to allow United Nations military monitors into Gorazde, where 60,000 people have been under Serbian attack for more than a week.


Rifka Milder, Robert Sherman
Rifka Jayne Milder, a daughter of Sheila Milder and Jay Milder, both of New York, was married on Monday to Robert Peter Sherman, a son of the late Gordon and Corinne Sherman.
Rabbi Shira Milgrom performed the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.
Mrs.
Sherman, 30, is a painter and the president of the Rifka Tie Company, a necktie designer in New York.
She graduated from the California Institute of the Arts.
Her father, a painter, retired as a professor of art at the City University of New York.
Her mother is a painter and an art teacher at Junior High School 104 in Manhattan.


Abigail Parsons and Robert Pakter
Abigail Paine Parsons, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Theodore D. Parsons Jr. of Rumson, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Robert Louis Pakter, a son of Selma Mednikov Pakter of New York and the late Paul D. Pakter.
Judge Alexander D. Lehrer, a Superior Court judge in Freehold, N.J., officiated at the Sea Bright (N.J.) Beach Club.
Mrs.
Pakter, 23, is a saleswoman at Staccato, a women's clothing boutique in Mill Valley, Calif.
She graduated from the University of Colorado at Boulder.
Her father is a partner in Parsons &amp; Cappiello, a law firm in Fair Haven, N.J.
Her mother, JoAnn Parsons, is a designer of interior gardens, in Rumson.
Her paternal grandfather, the late Theodore D. Parsons, was a New Jersey Attorney General.


BENEFITS
For Gay Rights
TODAY -- A performance of the Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company will raise money for the civil rights efforts of the National Gay and Lesbian Task Force.
The event will begin with cocktails at 7 P.M., followed by dinner and at 10:30 P.M., dancing, at the Industria Superstudio, 775 Washington Street (12th Street).
Black tie optional.
Tickets, $500, or $10 for the dance alone, from (212) 242-1900.
For Women in Entertainment
MONDAY -- Phyllis Diller will be honored and Joy Behar, Kevin Meaney, Mo Gaffney, Anne Meara and others will perform at Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, in a benefit for New York Women in Film and Television, which sponsors a seminar series for women in the entertainment industry.
The 7:30 P.M. performance will be followed by a buffet supper at Laura Belle, 120 West 43d Street.
Tickets, $125, or $30 for the performance alone, from (212) 838-6033.
For AIDS Patients' Housing
MONDAY -- The AIDS Resource Center, which provides housing for homeless New Yorkers with the disease, will benefit from a cocktail party and awards ceremony honoring four people active in AIDS education and fund-raising activities.
Nancy LaMott, a cabaret singer, will perform.
The event will begin at 6 P.M. at One If by Land, Two If by Sea, a restaurant at 17 Barrow Street (Seventh Avenue).
Tickets, $125, from (212) 633-2500, ext. 235.
A Dance Auction
MONDAY -- Rebecca Kelly Dance will benefit from a 6:30 P.M. champagne reception and auction, at the Arsenal in Central Park, at 64th Street and Fifth Avenue.
The silent and live auctions will feature theater tickets and restaurant meals.
Tickets, $20, from (212) 431-8489.
Alvin Ailey Spring Benefit
TUESDAY -- The repertory and student dance ensembles of the Alvin Ailey American Dance Center will perform at a benefit for the dance school's scholarship fund.
The 7 P.M. performance, at the Marymount Manhattan Theater, 221 East 71st Street, will be followed by a cocktail party.
Tickets, $55, or $20 for the performance alone, from (212) 767-0590, ext. 321.
For Leukemia Research
TUESDAY -- Judy Collins, Robert Merrill, Maureen McGovern, Marvin Hamlisch and others will perform at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
The concert will benefit the Lauri Strauss Leukemia Foundation, which finances research, education and treatment efforts.
The concert will be preceded by a 6 P.M. cocktail buffet at the Russian Tea Room, and it will be followed by a cocktail and dessert reception in the East Room and Cafe at Carnegie Hall.
Tickets, $5,000 for a group of eight, or $150 for the performance and the postconcert reception, or $50 for the concert alone, from (212) 696-1033.
For Pediatric AIDS
TUESDAY -- A dinner-dance honoring Ira and Diane Millstein will raise money for the development of a new center for pediatric AIDS research at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.
The event will begin with a 6 P.M. cocktail reception at the Pierre.
Dr.
Margaret A. Hamburg, New York City's Health Commissioner, will speak.
Tickets, $1,000, from (718) 430-3650.
For Children's Art
TUESDAY -- Rosanne Cash, Gregory Hines and others will be honored at a benefit cocktail party for Learning Through Art, the children's art program of the Guggenheim Museum SoHo.
The Jareese Jazz Quartet will perform at the 6 P.M. event at the museum, 575 Broadway (Prince Street).
There will be a raffle of tap shoes made for Mr.
Hines, as well as theater tickets and restaurant meals.
Tickets, $65, from (212) 831-7044.
Ice Theater Benefit
TUESDAY -- Dick Button, the figure-skating commentator for ABC Sports, will be the host for a 6:30 P.M. cocktail buffet in his New York apartment for the Ice Theater of New York.
JoJo Starbuck and Ken Shelley, the figure skaters, will speak, as will the skating team of Oleg and Ludmilla Protopopov.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 239-4320.
A Boathouse Fashion Show
TUESDAY -- Isaac Mizrahi and other designers will display their clothes at the Loeb Boathouse in Central Park at a benefit for the Design Industries Foundation for AIDS and for the AIDS Memorial Forest established by the Jewish National Fund in Lahav, Israel.
A 7 P.M. cocktail buffet will precede the 9:15 show.
A dessert reception will follow.
Tickets, $250, or $150 for the show and dessert alone, from (212) 727-3100.
Stagecraft Anniversary
TUESDAY -- A 6:30 P.M. wine reception and buffet will celebrate the 10th anniversary of the New Stagecraft Company, a nonprofit theater troupe.
It will perform scenes from its repertory at the Supreme Macaroni Company, a restaurant at 511 Ninth Avenue (38th Street).
Ruth W. Messinger, the Manhattan Borough President, will speak, and there will be a raffle of theater tickets and restaurant meals.
Tickets, $45, from (212) 675-0644.
For Cystic Fibrosis
WEDNESDAY -- The junior committee of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation of Greater New York is sponsoring a dinner-dance at Light, Wisdom and Sound, a nightclub at 229 West 28th Street.
The event, which raises money for medical research, will begin with a cocktail buffet at 7:30 P.M.
Earth and Sound, a reggae band, will perform, and there will be a raffle of weekend trips and restaurant meals.
Black tie optional.
Tickets, $60, from (212) 986-8783, or $75 at the door.
Kidney Foundation Benefit
THURSDAY -- A dinner-dance for the National Kidney Foundation of New York and New Jersey will feature performances by Wendy Moten and by Riff, a rhythm-and-blues group.
The event at the New York Hilton will begin with cocktails at 7:30 P.M.
Terri Santisi, the executive vice president of the EMI Records Group North America, will be honored for her efforts on behalf of the kidney research organization.
Tickets, $300, from (212) 629-9770.
A Texas-Style Ball
THURSDAY -- A Texas Two-Step Ball will raise money for the New York Eye and Ear Infirmary.
The dinner-dance and carnival at the Waldorf-Astoria will begin with cocktails at 7 P.M.
Western attire.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 979-4442.
Amid the Dinosaurs
THURSDAY -- A preview at the American Museum of Natural History of a new exhibit that features dinosaurs used in the movie "Jurassic Park" will benefit the Dinosaur Society, an organization that finances field research.
The event will begin with a cocktail reception at 6 P.M.
Guests will enter at Central Park West at 79th Street.
Tickets, $150, from (516) 277-7855.
Alan Menken Honored
THURSDAY -- The composer Alan Menken will be honored at the Plaza at a dinner-dance celebrating the 40th anniversary of the Elaine Kaufman Cultural Center.
Ms.
Kaufman and Jeffrey Katzenberg, the chairman of Walt Disney Studios, will present the award.
The singer Jody Benson will perform with Mr.
Menkin.
The event, which will benefit the Kaufman Center, will begin with a 7 P.M. cocktail reception.
The actor Jerry Orbach will be the master of ceremonies.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, or $50 for the cocktail party alone, from (212) 735-0750.  'Take Home A Nude'
THURSDAY -- A silent auction of drawings, paintings, sculptures and prints of nudes donated by the artists Larry Rivers, Eric Fischl and others will benefit the scholarship fund of the New York Academy of Art.
Cocktails and hors d'oeuvres will be served during the 7 P.M. auction preview at the art school's new location, 107 Franklin Street (West Broadway).
Tickets, $75, from (212) 505-5300, or $100 at the door.  'Silverlake Life' Screenings
THURSDAY -- Preview screenings of "Silverlake Life: The View From Here," a documentary about two gay men with AIDS, will raise money for two AIDS-education organizations in New York, Fear of Disclosure and the Seeing Through AIDS project.
A 6 P.M. cocktail reception at Nell's, 246 West 14th Street (Eighth Avenue), will precede the screenings.
The film will be shown at 8 P.M. and 10:15 P.M. at the Cinema Village, 22 East 12th Street (University Place).
Tickets, $75, or $35 for the late screening alone, from (212) 929-2663.
A Botanical Garden Party
THURSDAY -- A spring dinner-dance at the New York Botanical Garden will raise money for the horticultural institution.
The event will begin at 7:30 P.M. with cocktails in the Jane Watson Irwin Perennial Garden, 200th Street at Southern Boulevard in the Bronx.
The Bob Hardwick dance band will perform.
Black tie.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 289-2021.
For Hale House
FRIDAY -- Several comic book writers, including Neil Gaiman, who writes "Sandman," and Don McGregor, the writer of "Black Panther," will read from their works at the 313 Gallery, 313 Bowery (First Avenue).
The event will benefit the pediatric AIDS programs of Hale House.
Paulette Powell, a cabaret singer who organized the evening, will perform.
A reception will follow at the Four-Color Images Gallery, 524 Broadway (Spring Street).
Tickets, $5, from (212) 460-8480.
A Gardener's Fair
FRIDAY -- Silent and live auctions of horticultural items, vacations and jewelry will benefit the programs of Old Westbury Gardens, a historic estate in Old Westbury, L.I.
The 6 P.M. silent auction will precede a picnic-style buffet.
The live auction will begin at 9 P.M.
The estate is at 71 Old Westbury Road near Jericho Turnpike.
Tickets, $85, from (516) 333-0048.
Philipsburg Manor's 300th
SATURDAY -- A dinner-dance under a tent at Philipsburg Manor in North Tarrytown, N.Y., will celebrate the 300th anniversary of the establishment of the historic estate.
The evening, which will benefit Historic Hudson Valley, the preservation organization that operates the manor, will begin at 6:30 P.M. with a cocktail reception and a tour of the grounds.
A meal based on 17th-century recipes will follow.
Illinois Jacquet and his Big Band will perform and there will be a fireworks display.
Tickets, $500, or $250 for those 40 years old and under, from (914) 631-8200.
For Symphony Saintpaulia
SATURDAY -- The soprano Esther Hinds will deliver a solo performance at the Salem United Methodist Church, 2190 Adam Clayton Powell Jr.
Boulevard (129th Street).
The 7 P.M. concert will benefit Symphony Saintpaulia, of which Ms.
Hinds is the president.
The nonprofit organization provides concert opportunities for black classical artists.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 234-4622.
Acting Company Benefit
June 14 -- Kevin Kline and other members of the Acting Company will perform selections from the musical "The Robber Bridegroom" at the University Club, 1 West 54th Street.
The event, which also features a performance by the cabaret singer Billy Stritch, will raise money for the 21-year-old theater group.
The evening begins with cocktails at 6:30 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing.
Black tie.
Tickets, $350, or $125 for those 35 years old and under, from (212) 838-2660.
City Ballet Dinner-Dance
June 14 -- The junior committee of the New York City Ballet is sponsoring a dinner-dance at the New York State Theater in Lincoln Center that will raise money for the ballet company.
The 8 P.M. event will begin with cocktails and a buffet.
Students of the School of American Ballet will perform.
Black tie optional.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 870-5585.
Scenes From Jewish Life
June 14 -- Theodore Bikel, Philip Bosco, Mike Burstyn and others will perform songs and scenes from Jewish life at the Circle in the Square Theater.
The evening will benefit the theater, along with two research organizations devoted to European-Jewish culture and language: the YIVO Institute for Jewish Research and the Leo Baeck Institute.
A champagne and dessert reception will follow the 7:45 P.M. performance.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 535-6700, ext. 40.


Groom Patrol
Weed, weed, weed, and thin, thin, thin.
These two chores are unfortunately the key to growing hefty plants that have enough nutrients and space to grow.
As you're weeding, keep an eye out for annuals that have self-seeded that you may want to save.
Last week, I found lots of dill and cleome, which I moved to other parts of the garden.
Some hardy annuals likely to seed themselves are calendula, bachelor's button, cosmos, nicotiana, larkspur and forget-me-nots.
So if you have them in the garden, don't cut off all their spent blossoms this summer.
Let some go to seed.
Then mulch the area before the ground freezes, and in the spring, see what comes up.


Katherine Kamhi, Tony Coghlan
TONY COGHLAN and Katherine Kamhi met two years ago in one of the most hard-core aerobics classes in New York City: Fernanda's class, as it's known, at the Jeff Martin Studio on West 76th Street.
"It's the class from hell," Mr.
Coghlan said.
"The instructor's name is Fernanda Chandoha. She is like a Marine drill sergeant. She does not let you take it easy. She knows everyone by name, so that saves you asking people's names because you hear them shouted out during the class."


'Experiment in Autobiography'
To the Editor:
Jill Johnston's provocative case for the emergence of autobiography as a literary genre "as persuasive as fiction" ("Fictions of the Self in the Making," April 25) brought to mind a prediction made 60 years ago by H. G. Wells -- a forecast for which the 20th-century prophet, so far as I know, has been given no credit.


On Sunday; What's Humor To One Brings Pain to Another
NORA Weinerth is an advocate for the mentally ill, a co-founder of the New York-based National Stigma Clearinghouse.
Last fall she received complaints about Doug Marlette's Kudzu comic strip, and soon after issued a Stigma Busters Alert, accusing Mr.
Marlette of "flippant treatment of depression, euthanasia and suicide in over a dozen strips."
She has scored many stigma-busting coups.
She persuaded the John Deere company to stop ads on "the world's first schizophrenic lawn mower." She wrote, "Why is it that schizophrenia is fair game for comedians in a way that cancer, AIDS and drug addiction are not?" Clarion Car Audio killed its "A Lot of Good an Airbag Will Do You If You Go Insane" campaign.
Others capitulating include Nike sneakers, Wordstar software, Planters foods.


Swimming Pools and the Environment
HARDLY anything is more sybaritic than floating in a swimming pool 20 or 30 or even 40 yards from Long Island Sound, but since March 10 that pleasure has been sharply curtailed for waterfront residents of the village of Larchmont, the town and village of Mamaroneck and the city of Rye.
Under the State Department of Environmental Conservation's regulation of Coastal Erosion Hazard Areas, the construction of swimming pools on the grounds of houses in the Coastal Erosion Hazard Area of the four communities will no longer be possible.
"It is because pools, more than any other structures, will increase the erosion action, because pools are so heavy," said Patrick L. Ferracane, water-program specialist with the State Department of Environmental Conservation for Region 3 in Tarrytown, which includes Westchester.


Trustees Back Shift of Deans At Columbia
Columbia University's Board of Trustees yesterday approved an administrative shake-up that the university's incoming president said was his first step to eliminate the university's $15 million operating deficit and to establish stronger control over its sprawling arts and sciences faculty.
The new president, George E. Rupp, presented the changes, which include the replacement of three deans and a vice president, to the Columbia trustees at their quarterly meeting.
Mr.
Rupp, who is now the president of Rice University in Houston, made clear in an interview before the meeting that he was planning further restructuring after he succeeded Michael I. Sovern on July 1.


In Zaire, Leaders Still Prey on the Led
To the Editor:
Having lived in Kinshasa, Zaire, from 1989 through 1991, I follow your all-to-rare reporting from there with intense interest.
"In Zaire, Starvation Is Growing in a Wealthy Land" (news article, May 16) struck a nerve.
The observation that "acute food problems facing Zaire appear self-inflicted" risks pointing the finger in the wrong direction; self-inflicted and Government-inflicted are not the same, especially in a country where those in power are accountable to no one.
The overwhelming majority of Zairians have had virtually nothing to do with causing the problems they face daily.
The practice of blaming the victim is in this case, as in any case, inappropriate and destructive.


The Empty Embassies
Let's stipulate that President Clinton has a lot on his mind these days besides naming ambassadors.
Granted, too, that his choosing of ambassadors is complicated by a laudable desire to give more scope to women and minorities.
Add to this the cumbersome F.B.I. clearances that now include the Nannygate hurdle of possible prior employment of illegal domestics.
Even so, none of those factors can excuse the surfeit of empty embassies still sitting in many countries, some of vital importance to American foreign policy.
These vacancies attest to the indecision that afflicts a wobbling Presidency.


A Victorian Jewel That's Also a Mine for Musical Theater
WHEN the announcement was made to preserve rather than demolish the Goodspeed Opera House in East Haddam in 1959, Gov.
Abraham A. Ribicoff declared: "This to me is very important for the country's soul."
A whirl of musicales, soirees and benefits of all sorts, even plaster ripping parties, followed for the purpose of raising the $500,000 required to restore the many splendored showplace, then being used by the State Highway Department as a storage depot.
And for the four years it took to complete, the restoration of the four-story Opry House -- a frequent spelling at the time it was built in 1876 -- on the banks of the Connecticut River was the talk of eastern Connecticut.
Sightseers paid 50 cents for a tour of the work in progress on Saturdays between 2 and 4 P.M.
By varying accounts, about twice the amount needed for the restoration came in, and the reopening of Goodspeed, a victory for esthetics and for civilization, took place on June 18, 1963.
And the show that marked its rebirth in Victorian splendor was "Oh Lady! Lady!" by Jerome Kern.


Alexandra D. Alger, Daniel C. Chung
Alexandra Dewey Alger, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick M. Alger 3d of New York, was married there yesterday to Daniel Cayley Chung, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kai Lai Chung of Stanford, Calif.
The Rev.
Charles A. Amstein performed the ceremony at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church.
Ms.
Alger, 31, is keeping her name.
She is an associate editor at Venture Capital Journal, a magazine in New York.
She graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in journalism from Northwestern University.
Her father heads Fred Alger Management Inc., an investment advisory company in New York.


NEW PLANS READY FOR SPACE STATION
The nine-year, $9 billion space-station program enters a crucial phase this week as the Clinton Administration ends a four-month bid to slim down the proposed outpost for orbiting astronauts while weighing full participation by the Russians.
The process of redesign, as full of zigs and zags as the beleaguered station program itself, has produced three alternatives, each progressively cheaper than the $31 billion, 350-foot design that the Clinton White House inherited from the Bush Administration.


Advertising's Marathon Auditions
Enter a woman in a white bathrobe.
Smiling at the men and women watching her, she turns so that her back is to them, then drops the robe to the floor.
She wears nothing but body paint -- a living representation of a bottle of vodka.
Performance art in SoHo? A rehearsal for an avant-garde drama Off Off Broadway?


1 Standard for All
To the Sports Editor:
If The Times's reports about Michael Jordan's gambling activities are correct, then the National Basketball Association should suspend Jordan for one year.
Bulls forward Horace Grant is right: We should not have one standard for Michael Jordan and a wholly different standard for everybody else.
A double standard communicates the message that, as long as you are a great player, you can do anything you want and get away with it.
By suspending Michael Jordan for gambling activities, the N.B.A. will safeguard the integrity and credibility of professional basketball and also send an important and much needed message about character.
HAVEN BRADFORD GOW Arlington Heights, Ill.


Cold Feet in the Senate
The weather outside the Capitol is warming up with the approach of summer.
But inside some Senate Democrats are getting cold feet about serious political reform.
The sticking point is public financing of elections.
Unless President Clinton and Senate Democrats who understand the public's disgust at the present system now stand firm, a critical component of reform could be lost.
The issue will be joined in earnest this week when the Senate resumes debate on Mr.
Clinton's proposed campaign finance reform.
It's a promising bill that would curb reliance on special interests and foster greater competition by establishing a system of spending limits and partial public financing for House and Senate campaigns.


Tara A. Scully, M. S. Rockefeller
Tara Anne Scully, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis P. Scully Jr. of Marblehead, Mass., was married there yesterday to Michael Sorum Rockefeller, a son of Rodman C. Rockefeller of New York and the late Barbara O. Rockefeller.
The Rev.
Dennis Burns performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady, Star of the Sea Church.
Mrs.
Rockefeller was until recently a senior merchandise manager with the Manhattan Menswear Group of the Salant Corporation, a clothing manufacturer in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
Her father is the president of Scully International, a real-estate marketing company in Marblehead.


Montreal Surges, Falters, Endures
In the City of Angels, early in overtime, "all hell seemed to break loose," according to Marty McSorley.
The Kings' defenseman was discussing how the Montreal Canadiens stormed the goal crease and scored to win the game, 4-3, on a goal by John LeClair and take a two-games-to-one lead in the Stanley Cup finals.
LeClair's first shot got by Kelly Hrudey, the Los Angeles goalie, but slithered wide of the post.
McSorley and his teammates went for the rebound.
So did LeClair and friends.
Brian Bellows of Montreal set a pick at the post while Hrudey scrambled across the crease, unable to rise to his skates.
McSorley collided with a teammate, Tony Grantao.
LeClair kept whacking at the loose puck as a shriek rose from the throats of 16,005 Forum fans.


Valerie Gordon, Doug Johnson
Valerie Gordon, a theatrical producer, was married yesterday to Doug Johnson, a partner in Dodger Productions, a theatrical producer, both in New York.
The Rev.
Thomas D. Bowers performed the ceremony at St.
Bartholomew's Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Gordon-Johnson, an associate producer of the Broadway musical "Crazy for You," graduated from Sweet Briar College and the Art Center College of Design.
She is the daughter of Crawford and Catherine A. Gordon of Kaycee, Wyo.


Let Jordan Be
To the Sports Editor:
I am alarmed that you allow Dave Anderson to publish such utter trash as "Jordan's Atlantic City Caper" (The Times, May 27).
Anderson gets one thing right: Jordan is free to gamble in a legal casino.
Anderson is dead wrong on everything else including his question on Jordan's timing.


Adventures in Russia'a Far East
The loosening of travel restrictions to the Russian Far East has spawned a number of new adventure tours to places formerly closed to foreigners.
The destinations include the Kamchatka Peninsula, the strategic military area over which Korean Airlines Flight 007 flew before it was shot down by the Russians in 1983.
"Crossroads of Continents -- Remote Alaska and the Russian Far East Above the Arctic Circle," is an 11-day voyage aboard Clipper Adventure Cruises' 138-passenger World Discoverer, a ship built especially for navigation through ice-strewn waters.
The ship, which will follow 18th- and 19th-century exploration routes, departs Nome July 11, 21 and 31 and Aug. 10.
Stops in Russia include the whaling village of Novoye Chaplino, the town of Provideniya and Uelen, an isolated Chukchi village, the easternmost outpost of the Russian continent.
Guides will be on hand to identify wildlife, such as Pacific walruses, whales and polar bears, and to lecture on Russian, Aleut, Chukchi and Yuit culture and history.
Cost per person, double occupancy, is $3,500 to $5,200 and does not include air fare.
Information: Clipper Adventure Cruises, 7711 Bonhomme Avenue, St.
Louis, Mo. 63105; (800) 325-0010.


Sound Bytes; The American Dream: Interactive and Mobile
Roger McNamee, principal of Integral Capital Partners of Menlo Park, Calif., is an investor in high-technology companies, from early startup ventures to such established giants as A.T.&amp;T.
Mr.
McNamee founded Integral Partners in December 1991 after nine years at T. Rowe Price Associates, where he managed the top-ranked Science &amp; Technology Fund and co-managed the New Horizons Fund.  ("The mutual fund business was great, but it's just not ideal for being a technology investor in the 90's.")


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
46
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
2
2
THE MAGIC OF YOU, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A 19th-century British minx sets her cap for an American sea captain.
3
3
DARKEST HOUR, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The concluding volume in a series about the Cutlers, a plantation-owning family.
4
16
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
5
71
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
6
5
SHADOWFIRES, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A woman is stalked by her supposedly deceased husband.
7
60
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/ Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
8
6
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Pocket, $5.99.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
9
2
THE CAT WHO WASN'T THERE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) Jim Qwilleran contends with crimes in Scotland.
10
1
SHADOWS, by John Saul. (Bantam, $5.99.) An evil influence brings horrors to a school for gifted children.
11
4
FATHERLAND, by Robert Harris. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A thriller set in the Third Reich 20 years after Hitler wins World War II.
12
7
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Kinsey Millhone investigates a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
13
23
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The investigation of a woman's death involves the American-Japanese rivalry.
14
6
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The life of a woman who becomes rich by dealing in precious stones.
15
7
THE WITCHING HOUR, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A woman descended from witches brings a drowned man back to life.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
6
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
2
3
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/ S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President.
3
5
NOT FOR SALE AT ANY PRICE, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $5.95.) The Texas billionaire on America's economic and political problems.
4
500
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
5
86
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
6
16
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
7
107
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
8
13
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Examples of waste, with suggestions for curbing it.
9 *
4
WHERE THE BLUEBIRD SINGS TO THE LEMONADE SPRINGS, by Wallace Stegner. (Penguin, $11.) Essays on the American West.
10
17
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of rustic France.
11 *
13
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) The memoirs of the former head of a counterterrorist unit.
12 *
21
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on self-esteem.
13 *
16
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) The changes in social life that have affected the sexual fantasies of women.
14 *
31
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist describes a war against women's rights.
15
20
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) The Vice President discusses factors affecting the environment.
16 *
131
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
9
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK: Volume 2, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) More tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2 *
95
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) A collection of some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
120
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
4
137
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 22, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


New Life for An Old Rivalry?
AFTER 60 years of vying for dominance in 35-millimeter photography, Leica and Contax, the German camera makers, may be poised to enter another round.
The stage has been set with the introduction of the newest Contax single-lens-reflex camera, the ST.
The ST has some features that just may stir the competitive spirit at Leica.
One is a ceramic pressure plate, which the company says keeps the film flatter than the plate in any other camera and does not react to temperature or humidity.
And all the analogue dials on top of the camera can be lighted at night with the push of a button; the light goes off after 16 seconds, avoiding battery drain.


Miss Graebner, Mr. Hertz
Cameron Clark Graebner, the daughter of Carole Caldwell Graebner of New York and Clark E. Graebner of Southport, Conn., was married yesterday to Brian Seth Hertz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Hertz of Merrick, L.I.
Chief Judge Thomas Poole Griesa of Federal District Court in Manhattan, officiated at the Harvard Club in New York.
Mrs.
Hertz, 26, was until recently the personal assistant in New York to the president of Martha Inc., the fashion-boutique company.
Her father is the senior vice president of sales for the Corporate Printing Company in New York.
Her mother is the vice president and national advertising director for Tennis Week magazine, also in New York.
The bride's parents are former professional tennis players.


Leslie Wunderlich and James Simpson
Leslie Alexander Wunderlich, a daughter of Nancy Keiter of San Luis Obispo, Calif., and Herbert E. Wunderlich of Orange, Calif., was married yesterday to William James Simpson, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William C. Simpson of Oyster Bay, L.I.
The Rev.
Dr.
Richard Reifsnyder performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the home of the bride's mother and her stepfather, Steven E. Keiter.


Youth Movement Puts Golic in Miami
Philadelphia Eagles defensive tackle MIKE GOLIC said he was the most recent victim of the club owner NORMAN BRAMAN's new strategy of building the team around younger players.
On Friday, Golic, who is 30 years old, announced he will play for the Miami Dolphins next season.


Alfresco Dining, Mediterranean Style
WHEN Ed Brown, who is the executive chef at Tropica, the Manhattan seafood restaurant, catered the wedding last year of Pierre Franey's son Jacques to Trish Cancalosi on the beach in East Hampton, he prepared a spectacular outdoor meal for 200 guests.
But instead of making stews and casseroles to be reheated, everything was either cooked on the spot or served at room temperature.
To do this, he brought along a convoy of chefs from Manhattan who had worked through the night to prepare the meal.
"I went for the Provencal style," he said.
"I chose the sort of things you see on the Cote d'Azur, in Tuscany or Tunisia: roast vegetables, grains, herbs, olives, oil, garlic -- boldly, highly seasoned food." While an army of chefs may have been needed to put together the food for the wedding, the individual dishes are simple enough for the home cook to prepare with ease.
They are great for a summer picnic or outdoor meal on a warm day.


'Orlando,' Like Its Hero(ine), Is One for the Ages
"Do not fade, do not wither, do not grow old," the aged Queen Elizabeth I tells the young nobleman Orlando, making this fantastic request the condition on which she gives him a magnificent estate.
So the writer and director Sally Potter sets her androgynous hero off through 400 years of history and sexual politics, barely pausing to change Orlando from man to woman along the way.
As a 17th-century man, a lovelorn Orlando condemns "the treachery of women"; in the 18th century he is so appalled by the macho code of war that he goes to sleep as one sex and wakes up another; and as a 19th-century woman, Orlando learns that she will lose the estate unless she has a son.
Like the 1928 Virginia Woolf novel on which it is based, the screen version of "Orlando" is a delicious fantasy rooted in a rigorous sense of social history.


Q and A
A Noisy Restaurant Question: A newly opened brasserie-style restaurant is located directly below my rent-stabilized apartment.
The owners have installed a bare concrete floor, which causes the shrill sound of moving tables and chairs by customers or cleaning crews to travel through the cement columns into my apartment day and night.
Three months of correspondence with our common landlord has produced no results.
Is there anything I can do? . . .
Paul W. Lowry, Manhattan Answer: Yes.
Call the city's Department of Environmental Protection hot line (718) 699-9811.
The telephone number is answered 24 hours a day and is designed to receive complaints about noise, odors, water, asbestos or hazardous materials.


CAPITAL GHOSTS
As a longtime (but not native) resident of the Washington area, I was greatly moved by Maureen Dowd's Endpaper "Capital Ghosts" (Life and Times, May 9).
The rest of this country seems to believe that Washington is composed of transient Government officials who come and go with the passage of each administration.
The news media tend to further exacerbate that image by constant references to the thinking "inside the Beltway," as if those of us who reside within that ring are somehow different from the rest of the country.
Maureen Dowd's thoughtful essay reminds us that Washington, along with its Maryland and Virginia suburbs, is filled with communities of ordinary and extraordinary people.
It is where my children are growing up and putting down roots.
I only hope that their memories will be as dear to them as Dowd's are to her.


Mary LaTulip, John L. Troost
Mary Lauren LaTulip, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kevin LaTulip of West Chester, Pa., was married yesterday to John Laurens Troost, the son of Joan Troost of Seekonk, Mass., and the late John Troost.
The Rev.
Thomas E. Moye, an American Baptist minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
LaTulip, who is keeping her name, is a systems manager for Advantage Inc., a temporary-employment agency in New York.
She graduated from Columbia University, as did her husband.
Her father is the branch manager, in Columbia, Md., of the Reliance Insurance Company.
Her mother, Carolyn LaTulip, is an elementary-school teacher at East Ward School in Downingtown, Pa.


If the Polo Is Free, Are Rates Headed Up?
ARE banks starting to get more friendly?
Do they actually want to lend more money, and to attract the deposits needed to make those loans?
If the answer to those questions is yes, it represents a big change from the situation that prevailed over the past couple of years.
In the wake of loan debacles, banks decided to get smaller.
Would-be borrowers found credit standards were tougher, and the interest rates offered to depositors tumbled.


Furniture With Grit, a la Hamptons
WITH Bottleworks Marketplace, a new store in Sag Harbor, L.I., that sells furniture made of antique barn wood, the carpenters Stephen and William Spooner may have hit the marketing nail right on the head.
The two brothers, who specialize in relocating 18th- and 19th-century post-and-beam barns and houses on Long Island and in Connecticut, recycle leftover barn wood into unpretentiously rustic furnishings, including cupboards, tables, armoires and chests.
There is also an unerring eye at work in the selection of accessories and other antiques, like birdhouses ($40 to $65), wrought-iron candlesticks ($20 to 40 each) and wicker furniture ($1,200 for a graceful sofa and two matching chairs).


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Closter  $210,000
12 Pine Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 54-year-old colonial; fireplace, brick patio, 1-car garage, finished basement; taxes $2,801.
Edison  $143,100
26 Delancy Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; new c/a and hot water heater, fenced yard, full basement; taxes $2,768.
Madison  $320,000
21 West Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 42-year-old ranch; new expanded kitchen, full basement, move-in condition; taxes $4,096.
New Milford  $185,000
515 Ryeside Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; full basement, underground sprinkler system, 1-car garage; taxes $3,901.
Piscataway  $225,000
2 Dewey Court  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 25-year-old bi-level mother-daughter; 2-car garage, separate entrances, 2 kitchens; taxes $3,314.
South Plainfield  $122,500
1211 South Ninth Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old remodeled Cape Cod; 1-car garage, enclosed front porch, 2-zone heat; taxes $1,890.
OTHER AREAS Torrington, Conn.  $82,000
280 Clearview Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 44-year-old ranch; deck, breakfast bar, 0.25 acre; taxes $1,758.
Mount Kisco, N.Y.  $200,000
98 St.
Mark's Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2 bath, 7-year-old raised ranch; entry hall, eat-in kitchen, unfinished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,383.
East Islip, L.I.  $137,000
278 Overlook Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 32-year-old colonial; dining room, fireplace, basement, 1-car attached garage; taxes $5,200.


Clinton Myth of Nonideological Politics Stumbles
The wreck of Lani Guinier may mark the end of a central myth of the Clinton Administration.
The myth was that President Clinton would painlessly lead America into a post-cold-war age of New Politics, in which the old divisive "false choices" of left versus right would merge into a new middle ground of happy consensus.


The Quest to Conserve Electrical Power
It is unfortunate that "Lilco Ends a Homeowners' Rebate Program"  [ May 16 ]  further confuses a complicated issue.
There are two central issues facing those of us active in the fields of energy analysis, conservation and demand-side management.
The first concerns are the quality, cost-effectiveness and long-term viability of utility demand-side management programs.
The second is the methodology that the New York State Public Service Commission uses to allow Lilco and other New York State utilities to recover energy-conservation costs through the rate base.
And while these two issues affect each other, it is important to make distinctions between the two.


Kate L. Heller, Dermot O'Reilly
Mr. and Mrs.
Peter S. Heller of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter, Kate Lawrence Heller, to Dermot Joseph O'Reilly, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Sean O'Reilly.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Heller teaches mathematics at the Brearley School in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Harvard College and received a master's degree in English from New York University.
Her father, a composer, retired as the managing partner of Webster &amp; Sheffield, a New York law firm.
Her mother is a photographer in New York.


Beware Neatness; It Can Be Terminal
When Sara and Marty Stein built their house here 12 years ago, they carved out a spot in the midst of red cedars, cat brier, multiflora roses, poison ivy and bittersweet.
They kind of liked it that way.
"We thought our garden would end right here at the edge of the patio," said Ms.
Stein, the author of the recently published "Noah's Garden" (Houghton Mifflin, $21.95).
"We thought we'd just get somebody to mow."


The Pro Arena Isn't for Training
To the Sports Editor:
Although William C. Rhoden is probably well-intentioned in trying to correct a perceived wrong by observing a "striking contrast between the black faces on the court and the mostly white faces in the media area," he continues to tow the sinking line of liberals who still do not get it.


No Need to Celebrate A 'Record High' Dow
To the Editor:
"Stocks and Bonds Surge; Dow Hits 3,500" (Business Day, May 20) reports a "record high." I suspect that many readers not familiar with finance or economics would, quite sensibly, take this to mean that the dollar value of the Dow on May 19 had greater buying power than at any previous closing.
Such readers would be justified in feeling confusion when record highs coincide with decreasing buying power (as they often do, because inflation increases the price of both stocks and groceries).
In other words, a Dow of 3,000 when an automobile costs $12,000 is not in any meaningful sense as high as a Dow of 1,000 when an automobile costs $3,000.


MORE PEOPLE VIEW CLINTON AS LIBERAL AS HE SEEKS CENTER
As President Clinton struggles to return to the centrist policies that won the election, an increased number of Americans view him as a liberal, and many say his economic plan relies too heavily on raising taxes and would do little to help the economy, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
Most Americans do not appear convinced by Mr.
Clinton's repeated efforts to show that his economic remedies will place a heavier burden on rich people than on the middle class.
And they have grown increasingly skeptical about the fairness and effectiveness of the plan.


Beijing Bans Trade in Rhino and Tiger Parts
China has published a ban on the trade of rhinoceros horns and tiger bones, coveted substances that have been essential to an enormously lucrative business in traditional Chinese medicines.
Tiger bones and rhinoceros horns have a special cachet among many Chinese, who believe that these exotic ingredients function as tonics that can heal and invigorate the body.
The ban, if enforced, will be deeply resented by many but will help preserve the animals from poachers.


Laurie Gordon, Kenneth Johnson
Laurie Cecile Gordon, an associate with the law firm of White &amp; Case in New York, was married yesterday to Kenneth Alan Johnson, an associate at the law firm of Wiggin &amp; Dana in New Haven.
The Rev.
Charles M. Cary performed the ceremony at the Westhampton (L.I.) Presbyterian Church.
Ms.
Gordon, 30, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the University of Delaware and received a law degree from Georgetown University.
She is a daughter of Marlin Brown-Gordon of Tybee Island, Ga., and Gerald B. Gordon of Raleigh, N.C.


Jeanne M. Arney, Douglas A. Muller
Jeanne Marie Arney, an assistant treasurer at the Bank of New York, was married yesterday to Douglas Andrew Muller, a vice president in the corporate finance division of the Chase Manhattan Bank, in Hasbrouck Heights, N.J.
The Rev.
Thomas Sheffield performed the ceremony at the Presbyterian Church in Morristown, N.J.
Mrs.
Muller graduated from Skidmore College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Terry O. Arney of Waterford, Va.
Her father is a technical director at the Science Applications International Corporation, a technicalconsulting company in McLean, Va.


Fire Islanders Try To Fill the Breach
Fire Islanders have undertaken the responsibility to do as much as possible to conserve and protect the Fire Island barrier island.
Year after year we have invested hundreds of thousands of homeowner private dollars and thousands of person-hours to build and rebuild dunes.
We have an enlightened self-interest to protect our own homes as well as the thousands of homes on the northern side of Great South Bay, which would suffer constant storm flooding should a new inlet be riven through Fire Island.


U.N. Starts Plans for Bosnia Force Tomorrow
Senior peacekeeping officials, in a special meeting on Monday, will ask the five co-sponsors of a new Security Council resolution on Bosnia what troops, weapons and money they will provide to protect the designated safe havens for Muslims.
The resolution, passed on Friday, would require as many as 25,000 troops backed by artillery and attack helicopters, senior United Nations officials said.
That preliminary estimate is far higher than the force of 5,000 to 10,000 that some diplomats had said might be sufficient.


Signs of Blast Fading, but Tremors Remain
The spacious elevators, stuffed with executives and camera-toting tourists, are once again gliding like zippers up and down the towers of the World Trade Center.
New windows have replaced shattered ones.
Fresh paint covers smoke-stained walls.
Except for a few posters referring to "repairs" and a phalanx of guards checking new identification cards, there are few signs that just three months ago, a huge explosion ripped through the trade center's underground garage, killing six people and sending tens of thousands scrambling down smoke-filled stairwells to safety.


Restaurateur on a Frogmobile
There's a new, youthful presence at La Grenouille, and it's not a result of plastic surgery.
In January, the 30-year-old French restaurant on East 52d Street lost its longtime manager, Charles Masson, 38, who was responsible for La Grenouille's inspired flower arrangements, among other things.
Mr.
Masson, whose father founded the restaurant, now works with Robert Isabell, the floral designer.


Faye Fisher, Alan Zwiebel
Rabbi and Mrs.
David Fisher have announced the engagement of their daughter Faye Fisher to Alan H. Zwiebel, a son of Mrs.
Harry Garber of Lawrence, L.I., and the late Louis J. Zwiebel.
A spring 1994 wedding is planned.
Ms.
Fisher is a restaurant advertising consultant in New York with Transmedia Network Inc., a financial services company for restaurants.
She and her fiance graduated from Brooklyn College, from which she also received a master's degree in drama.


BEST SELLERS: June 6, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
43
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTy, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
12
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
3
3
5
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences when she covers a story.
4
1
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $23.95.) A former naval officer tracks down a terrorist conspiracy headed by a vengeful woman.
5
1
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $24.) A lawyer in pursuit of his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
6
6
8
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
7
4
129
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
8
5
5
GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Delacorte, $27.50.) Cordial relationships and terrorism between the Japanese and foreigners in Yokohama in 1862.
9
7
7
THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/ Bantam, $21.95.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
10
8
6
A SEASON IN PURGATORY, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $22.) The political and social machinations of a wealthy Irish Catholic family.
11
9
5
ANGEL, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $23.) The reunion of four people is transformed by the appearance of two celebrated men.
12
10
8
"J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $21.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man who apparently committed suicide.
13
11
6
PERFECT, by Judith McNaught. (Pocket, $22.) A model young woman is abducted by a onetime award-winning film maker.
14
13
6
CHARMS FOR THE EASY LIFE, by Kaye Gibbons. (Putnam, $19.95.) The fortunes of three indomitable North Carolina women.
15
1
THE CAT WHO WENT INTO THE CLOSET, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Putnam, $19.95.) A collection of junk helps Jim Qwilleran solve a mystery from the past.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
43
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
2
2
38
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
3
5
4
THE REAL ANITA HILL, by David Brock. (Free Press, $24.95.) A journalist's account of the relationship between the law professor and Clarence Thomas.
4
3
16
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) The relationship between sickness and emotions.
5
4
25
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Spirituality and everyday life.
6
6
7
THINKING OUT LOUD, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) Essays on current topics.
7
7
4
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
8
10
29
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under Government debt.
9
9
3
TURMOIL AND TRIUMPH, by George P. Shultz. (Stewart/Scribners, $30.) The memoirs of Ronald Reagan's Secretary of State.
10
8
4
CULTURE OF COMPLAINT, by Robert Hughes. (New York Public Library/Oxford University, $19.95.) Essays critical of current cultural trends.
11
11
5
CONDUCT UNBECOMING, by Randy Shilts. (St. Martin's, $27.95.) The roles that gay men and lesbians have played in our armed forces.
12*
12
8
A WORLD WAITING TO BE BORN, by M. Scott Peck. (Bantam, $22.95.) A call for people to make civility part of their lives.
13
1
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $17.95.) Life in a tiny Georgia town; by a first-grade teacher and radio commentator.
14
1
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Morrow, $20.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
15
13
37
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Taoism explained through an A. A. Milne character.
16*
1
OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS, by Anne Lamott. (Pantheon, $21.) A novelist recalls her first year as a single parent.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, how-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
6
A WOMAN'S WORTH, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $17.) Advice for women.
2
3
47
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf.
3
2
12
BEATING THE STREET, by Peter Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Investing.
4
1
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 22, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
BALKAN GHOSTS: A Journey Through History, by Robert D. Kaplan. (St. Martin's,$22.95.) A reporter's gallery of heroes and villains, past and present, who madeAlbania, Bulgaria, Greece, Romania and the former Yugoslavia the sweetheartsthey are.
THE BUTCHER BOY, by Patrick McCabe. (Fromm International, $19.95.) A gruelingand all too believable novel that enters the deranged mind of a love-starvedIrish schoolboy who endures horrors and perpetrates them.
CHIMNEY ROCK, by Charlie Smith. (Holt, $22.50.) Mr.
Smith's novel appropriatesthe language and vision of Southern Gothic to the dwellers in a nasty, dustyHollywood through a narrator completely lacking in ethical consciousness.
COMPULSORY HAPPINESS, by Norman Manea. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) Fourcranky, brilliant novellas about the soul's deterioration in a totalitarianstate by a Romanian who came to America in 1986.
G.
M.
TREVELYAN: A Life in History, by David Cannadine. (Norton, $32.95.)Trevelyan (1876-1962), a Cambridge historian and Whig aristocrat, hoped to seedecent liberal values established in Europe in the 20th century, but lived tosee them disappear everywhere.
THE INVENTION OF TRUTH, by Marta Morazzoni. (Knopf, $18.) An absorbing novellaabout artists and lookers at art; it concerns John Ruskin and 300 women working on the Bayeux Tapestry.
ISLAM AND THE WEST, by Bernard Lewis. (Oxford University, $25.) Learned essayson political culture, encounters and confrontations, including the author'sresponses to the critics of the "Orientalism" they say he practices.
JUDGE ON TRIAL, by Ivan Klima. (Knopf, $25.) Mr.
Klima's novel describes thecrisis of conscience of a jurist in Czechoslovakia.
LENIN'S TOMB: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire, by David Remnick. (RandomHouse, $25.) Decline and fall, observed by a wise, industrious Washington Postreporter in the disappearing Soviet Union, 1988-91.
LIFE'S DOMINION: An Argument About Abortion, Euthanasia, and Individual Freedom,by Ronald Dworkin. (Knopf, $23.) Mr.
Dworkin contends that the relevant choices proceed from the idea that life is sacred, and that therefore the state must notinterfere.
THE MAN WHO WASN'T MAIGRET: A Portrait of Georges Simenon, by Patrick Marnham.(Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) A thoughtful account of a man whose diligence --76 Maigret books, more than 300 others -- makes his claim to have made love to10,000 women plausible.
After his mother died, he stopped writing.
Odd.
SWORDFISH: A True Story of Ambition, Savagery, and Betrayal, by DavidMcClintick. (Pantheon, $25.) A grimly fascinating and sometimes funny account ofa successful sting operation by an entertaining lot of Federal drug agentsagainst a Colombian cocaine ring.


Krone Winds Up First In More Ways Than 1
Julie Krone was eavesdropping yesterday and didn't like what she heard.
She drew herself to her 4 feet 10 1/2 inches and, in that squeaky voice that makes 1,200-pound horses run so fast, admonished Scotty Shulhofer.
"What year is this?" she said.
"Sixty-something or '93?"
She was kidding, more or less.
For Schulhofer had just admitted that he had once been against women jockeys.


BOLIVIA TO VOTE FOR ITS PRESIDENT
Bolivians vote for a new President on Sunday, no small feat for a country that has a history of more military coups and dictatorships than any other in Latin America.
If, as predicted, the election goes off without violence and significant fraud, it will usher in the fourth consecutive civilian government since 1982, a remarkable period of stability for this nation.
From 1964 to 1982, it had 16 governments, 14 of them military.


Whale Watching
To the Editor: The Q &amp; A column on May 16 contained a request for information on whale watching, which was followed by a long list of ports, including the Okeanos Foundation sailings from Hampton Bays, L.I.
Two years ago my boyfriend and I went on a whale-watching trip with this organization after having read about it in The Times.
We took Dramamine before boarding, anticipating that there might be some queasiness, but we were never so sick in our lives.
More than 75 percent of the passengers were just as sick.
Old people, young people and kids were vomiting profusely almost the entire time.


An Appreciation Of 'Mothers' on Stage
To read Alvin Klein's recent review of "Mothers," at the Crossroads Theater, made me believe that the play was a dull, outlandish and obvious vehicle -- a play that not only could but should be overlooked.
How far from the truth (both dramatic and emotional) can you get?
With trepidation, I went to see the production.
Not only did I see it, I felt it as well.
My own emotions as a human being were stirred.
As a theater person, I may be a bit more critical than others, but the performances, the play, the interplay of past and present, of ritual and reality, of customs both East and West, thoroughly overtook me.


Currency: The Real Problem Abroad
To the Editor:
I was startled to read "What Hasn't Worked Abroad . . ." (Viewpoints, May 2), in which it was claimed that high taxes and social programs were responsible for European budget deficits running 5.4 percent to our 4.3 percent of gross domestic product.


Across the Computer Divide, The Nerds Face the Dummies
"DOS for Dummies," a how-to guide for using the software that runs most personal computers, seems to violate a time-honored tenet of business: never insult the customer.
Several publishers rejected the book, and once it was published leading bookstore chains initially declined to stock it.
The first printing was a cautious 7,500 copies, and expectations were modest.


The 'Busters' Are Bored
To the Editor:
I have noted with bemusement that rare is the Styles section that does not contain an article about grunge or raves.
The boomer fascination with this supposed trend of the baby-bust generation far exceeds any interest which most of us "busters" have in it, and as a result, it has received attention far out of proportion to its actual popularity.


Rockies' Pitchers Serve Up Feasts for Batters
It had to appear as simple to the architects of expansion as it did to the architects of the Clinton campaign.
The pitching, stupid.
Concentrate on that and that alone and you have a chance to be a representative major league club.
Fail to put some semblance of a foundation together, fail to build from the mound out, and you have the Colorado Rockies.


'Pippen Flamboyant' Sends Bulls Into Finals
Perhaps now the word soft, that four-letter word in Scottie Pippen's business, will be set aside forever.
A year removed from his ankle miseries and Xavier McDaniel's wild-eyed pursuit that limited Pippen in the playoff series against the Knicks and raised persistent doubts about his game, he has lifted the Bulls to the championship series in a way that only an elite player can.


The Quixotic Days and Nights of Jay Tarses
In conversation, Jay Tarses is a perfectly affable fellow.
He is delighted to talk about the last television series he created, "The Days and Nights of Molly Dodd," which enjoyed a long and happy run on cable.
He speaks of how he yearns to direct a feature film, and the enjoyment of writing and rewriting his first play.
But eventually the subject gets around to the networks -- specifically NBC, which has just put his latest comedy series on the air after warehousing it for six months.
"I don't like these people," he said.
"They don't treat people right. They don't treat their suppliers with any kind of camaraderie or respect. It's an adversarial relationship -- at least it is with me."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Placed Keith Miller, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Craig Wilson, infielder, from Omaha of the American Association.


Update; Cleanup of Abandoned Tires Beginning in New York City
New York is beginning a $200,000 program to collect and dispose of thousands of abandoned tires as mounds of them continue to grow in some of the city's neglected neighborhoods.
Called the Waste Tire Management Program, the plan calls for the city's Departments of Transportation and Sanitation to collect junk tires from some 300 illegal dump sites in the five boroughs.
Beginning in mid-July, about 150,000 tires are expected to be collected and placed on four city-owned lots for disposal by an outside vendor, city officials said.


No Headline
They're the kind of people who were in chess club in high school -- real bright but wound up in their self-centered little technical world, and they can't communicate with other people.
DAN GOOKIN, author of "DOS for Dummies," on computer experts.  [ 32:3. ]


Russia Sets Out on a Pitted Road to a New Constitution
RUSSIA'S attempts to write a new constitution offer a humbling lesson on the limitations of history as guide.
Many a nation has traveled this road on the way to democracy; even Russia itself tried once before, albeit unsuccessfully.
Yet in the unending struggles between legislators and president, between Moscow and the provinces, Russia seems doomed to retrace the full route, from the very start and over every obstacle, stumbling every step of the way.


A Fugitive's Tale Sheds Light On China Today
One of the astonishing facts of the Tiananmen Square protest in Beijing four years ago was that 8 of the 21 students on the security police's most-wanted list managed to evade arrest and eventually to escape to the West.
It happens, moreover, that China, at least until recently, has had a security apparatus so ruthlessly efficient that escape was hardly thought of, much less attempted.
And so, the question is: How did the students do it?
At least a partial answer is provided by "Escape From China," a 57-minute documentary by Iris F. Kung, the pseudonym of a Chinese television reporter now living in the United States.
The film, which will be shown Friday and Saturday at the Anthology Film Archives, tells the story of 25-year-old Zhang Boli, one of the most prominent of the student leaders and the person who hid in China longer than any other of the hunted dissidents.


Wish Lists
AH, THE BRIDAL REGISTRY!
THE handsome Royal Doulton, the delicate Baccarat, the gleaming Buccellati.
Not to mention the ride-on lawn mower, the composting toilet, the boxed set of compact disks and the down payment on a house.
Move over, Tiffany &amp; Company.
Make room for the Home Depot.
Social changes are playing havoc not only with the wedding ceremony and the institution of marriage itself but with the traditional bridal registry.
Once used as a way for guests to discreetly ascertain the bride's chosen china and silver patterns, the bridal registry now serves as a wish list encompassing everything from garbage cans to fine wines.


POSTINGS: Regional Planning Conference; Workshops on Making the Area Work
Anyone who believes that "united we stand" is as applicable to states as to people might enjoy the Regional Plan Association's day-long conference this Tuesday.
The association, which is dedicated to getting New York, New Jersey and Connecticut to set joint policies that can improve the quality of life in all three states, says that by day's end a blueprint will have emerged for turning this area into "The Region That Works."
The meeting will offer a series of workshops dealing with such subjects as rebuilding and expanding the region's infrastructure, protecting its environmental resources, training its labor, and ways of wooing companies -- and jobs -- to the area.


A Rustic Place To Hang a Hat
You can search for original furniture till the cows come home.
Here it is in the form of what its maker, Stephen Spooner, calls a gentleman's cupboard.
The piece has the chipped-paint door of a rural outhouse, dimensions like those of a phone booth and a peaked shingle roof suggestive of a fractured fairy tale.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended May 22  MANHATTAN  Gracie Mansion Area  $3.3 million
10 Gracie Square (83d St.)  5-bedroom, 7-bath, 5,500-sq.-ft. prewar duplex co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, 5 maid's rooms, dining room, fireplace, East River view; maintenance $5,536, 35% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Gramercy Park Area  $205,000
222 Park Avenue South (18th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,350-sq.-ft. loft co-op; dining area, 13-ft. ceilings, roof deck; maintenance $896, 67% tax-deductible (Brokers: Wells &amp; Gay/Stribling &amp; Associates)  Greenwich Village  $380,000
1 Fifth Avenue (8th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,350-sq.-ft. prewar co-op in a landmark building; 24-hr. doorman, beamed ceilings, Washington Square Park view; maintenance $1,262, 52% tax-deductible (Brokers: Ann Weintraub Realty-Corcoran Group)  Greenwich Village  $315,000
77 Seventh Avenue (14th St.)  (Vermeer)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 950-sq.-ft. penthouse co-op in a postwar building; renovated bath, wrapped-terrace; maintenance $1,040, includes gas and electricity. 65% tax-deducible (Broker: Debra Kameros Co.)  Upper East Side  $750,000
21 East 66th Street  2-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,700-sq.-ft. prewar condo; 24-hr. doorman, maid's room, dining room, fireplace, 2 exposures; common charge $1,541, taxes $6,024 (Brokers: Walter &amp; Samuels-Domus Realty)  Upper West Side  $305,000
320 Riverside Drive (104th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,400-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, renovated kitchen, new windows, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,014, 55% tax-deductible (Broker: Halstead Property Co.)  BRONX  Wakefield  $125,000
4215 Boyd Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 bath, one-family detached frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $925 (Broker: Cancro Realty)  Woodlawn  $185,500
27 East 235th Street  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family detached brick house; dining room, fireplace, sun room, finished basement, 1-car garage, 33- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,566 (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  BROOKLYN  Midwood  $210,000
1480 East 27th Street  3-bedroom, 3-bath, one-family detached stucco-frame house; dining room, den, rear porch, new roof and windows, finished basement, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Jacob Gold Real Estate)  Park Slope  $625,000
56 Eighth Avenue  7-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family, 5-story brownstone; dining room, remodeled kitchen, triple parlor, 2-story rear extention, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,994 (Broker: F.J. Kazeroid Realty Group)  QUEENS  Astoria  $205,000
21-32 37th Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family attached brick house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,224 (Broker: Century 21/Tri-Boro Terrace Realty)  College Point  $155,000
9-23 128th Street  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, one-family semi-attached brick house; dining room, finished basement, 16- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Century 21/Weber &amp; Rose)  STATEN ISLAND  Sunset Hills  $190,000
879 Bard Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached wood-frame and brick ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage, 70- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,900 (Brokers: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)  Tottenville  $195,000
83 Madsen Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family detached colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, full basement, 40- 137-ft. lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/Schlott Realtors)


Valley of the Doll
JUDY GARLAND The Secret Life of an American Legend.
By David Shipman.
Illustrated. 540 pp.
New York: Hyperion. $24.95.


MAY 30-JUNE 5: A.T.&amp;T., Phone Europe; For Long-Distance Giants, All the World's an Area Code
MCI Communications launched competition in the American long-distance telephone industry more than a decade ago when it took on the old Bell System.
This week, MCI ushered in a new round of competition in global telephone markets when it teamed up with British Telecommunications to provide one-stop-shopping for multinational corporations that link their far-flung offices over private networks that ring the world.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  U.N. TROOPS CLASH WITH SOMALIS


Bringing Dinos Back to Life
WHAT EXACTLY ARE YOU seeing when a triceratops or a velociraptor appears on screen in "Jurassic Park"?
For close-ups, the film makers often used full-size robots by the model-maker Stan Winston.
When the dinosaurs are in motion, however, viewers will probably be looking at computer animation.
The animation took place at Industrial Light and Magic, the California special-effects house.
The company, which has also handled special effects for "The Abyss" and "Terminator 2: Judgment Day," used the dinosaur robots designed by Mr.
Winston (such as the seven-foot velociraptors pictured here) as guides.
The animation alone took 18 months.
Meanwhile, other technicians blocked out the actions of the invisible dinosaurs on the movie set.


Sallie Saunders And John Colucci
Sallie Alyce Saunders, a manager in the human resources department at Time Inc. in New York, was married yesterday to John Anthony Colucci, a vice president of new business development in Pelham, N.Y., for Gulfstream Aerospace, a corporate jet manufacturer based in Savannah, Ga.
The Rev.
Jack Roche performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Perpetual Help Roman Catholic Church in Pelham Manor, N.Y.


Public &amp; Private; Political Illiteracy
There's a certain kind of conversation you have from time to time at parties in New York about a new book.
The word "banal" sometimes rears its by-now banal head; you say "underedited," I say "derivative." The conversation goes around and around various literary criticisms, and by the time it moves on one thing is clear: no one read the book, we just read the reviews.
A variation on those conversations has taken place in Washington over the last month about the past opinions of an accomplished and ill-treated woman named Lani Guinier.


Commercial Property: Bryant Park; Once Anathema, Now a Midtown Marketing Tool
CONVENTIONAL wisdom says nobody is getting higher rents for commercial space today than they did a few years ago.
But don't tell that to Tom Kelly.
Mr.
Kelly is a senior vice president of Mountain Development Corporation, which owns the Beaux Arts, the landmarked office building at the southeast corner of 40th Street and Avenue of the Americas.
Until a year or so ago, four of the building's 10 floors were empty and, at asking prices of about $19 a foot, tenants were barely nibbling.


Hikers Seek New Trails to Conquer
PEOPLE collect all kinds of things from Old Master paintings to barbed wire, from eggs to baseball cards.
In climbing and hiking circles mountains are collected as assiduously as are first editions by bibliophiles.
The sport is known as peak bagging.
There is nothing tangible to show for it, just the satisfaction of having reached the summit and possibly the opportunity to join an organization of climbers of similar achievement.


Aspin Meets Russian in Bid to Take Ukraine's A-Arms
Stepping up the American campaign to persuade the Ukrainians to give up their nuclear weapons, Defense Secretary Les Aspin came here today to discuss with Russia a new plan to dismantle Ukraine's nuclear missiles and place their warheads under international supervision.
Mr.
Aspin met with the Russian Defense Minister, Gen.
Pavel S. Grachev.
The plan is intended to resolve a Russian-Ukrainian dispute on how to deal with the warheads that would be removed from Ukraine's missiles if Ukraine gave up its nuclear arms.


In Sarajevo, War Also Means Battles of the Sexes
With her food store and home reduced to rubble, her city besieged and her nation uprooted, Jasna Delalic picked the darkest days of Bosnia's war to become a single mother.
Despite constant shelling, food and water queues and deep uncertainty about the future, Mrs.
Delalic has filed for divorce from her 33-year-old husband because he refused to fight the nationalist Serbs attacking Sarajevo.
"I hate cowards," said the jobless, 30-year-old Muslim woman, who now lugs her food-aid packages back to a one-room apartment she shares with her two grade-school-age daughters and another single woman.
"He was supposed to stay on the front line, but he wounded himself in the leg with an automatic."


Their Prince Is Back; Cambodians Are Baffled
AFTER two decades mostly removed from the gilded stage of Southeast Asian politics, one of its last great showmen, Prince Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia, is making ready his final performance.
Cambodians are praying that he triumphs.
Once a king.
Always a politician.
Deal maker.
Film maker.
Author.
Linguist.
Bon vivant.
His apparently imminent return to power in Cambodia is the best possible news for those who like their politics as theater.


G.O.P. IN VIRGINIA PICKS FALL SLATE
Virginia Republicans, always among the most conservative in the country, moved even further to the right today as they nominated candidates for Governor, Lieutenant Governor and Attorney General in this fall's election.
Meeting in a convention here, 13,000 party delegates chose former Representative George Allen for the top spot on the ticket, then picked Mike Farris, a northern Virginia lawyer, for the Lieutenant Governor's slot.


EX-MIAMI OFFICER WANTS JOB BACK
To the dismay of local civil rights groups, a Hispanic policeman convicted here of killing two young black men, but then acquitted on the same charges last week in a second trial in Orlando, is seeking to return to active duty.
In his only interview since his acquittal, the officer, William Lozano, told a Spanish-language television station here that he would request reinstatement to active duty, which, if successful, would enable him to recover lost wages.
The 33-year-old police officer, born in Colombia, was relieved of duty without pay after being convicted of manslaughter in Miami in 1989, but the verdict was overturned in 1991 when a panel of judges ruled that jurors may have feared an outbreak of racial violence if they acquitted Mr.
Lozano.
He was acquitted by a jury in Orlando on May 28 after a three-week trial.


Dollar Gains In Finland
American visitors to Finland this year will find many prices dramatically lower than two years ago, thanks to a sharp drop in the value of the Finnish currency and a recession in that country.
According to a study conducted at the end of 1992 by Suomen Gallup Oy, a Finnish polling organization, which compared the prices for such staples as hotel rooms and a McDonald's Big Mac in 12 Western European capitals, Helsinki fell below the median on all types of lodging and most restaurant purchases, as well as train travel and airline tickets.
Exceptions included taxi fares, car rental and food bought at a grocery.


Julie Miner, Stephen Ferzoco
Dr.
Julie Miner, the daughter of Jerry and Lydia Miner of Syracuse, was married yesterday to Dr.
Stephen Ferzoco, a son of Bruno and Maria Ferzoco of Dedham, Mass.
The Rev.
Dr.
Alan Mermann, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the ceremony in Hendricks Chapel at Syracuse University.
The Rev.
John Buehler, a Roman Catholic priest, was also in attendance.
Dr.
Miner, 27, is keeping her name.
She is to begin a residency this month in obstetrics and gynecology at the Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, where her husband is to begin a residency in surgery.
She graduated from Brown University, and she and her husband received their medical degrees from Yale University.


No Bail for 2 Charged in Teacher's Slaying
Two Brooklyn teen-agers charged in the fatal shooting of a drama teacher in Prospect Park last week were ordered held without bail at an arraignment yesterday in Brooklyn Criminal Court.
Judge Albert D. Koch set bail at $300,000 for two other Brooklyn youths who have been charged in the slaying of the teacher, Allyn Winslow.
Mr.
Winslow, 42, was shot four times on Tuesday when he fought off efforts to steal his mountain bike, the police said.


It's Science Against Nature's Cruel Imagination
COULD a new disease have arisen on Navajo land?
And, if so, is it going to spread as cholera has through South America, or will it be contained as the original outbreak of Legionnaire's disease was in a Philadelphia hotel?
Through the past week, a mysterious illness had befallen at least 19 people living on or near the Navajo Reservation, which sprawls across the northeastern corner of Arizona into New Mexico and Utah.
It begins with flu-like symptoms but rapidly progresses to respiratory distress.
The victims' lungs fill with fluid, they cannot get enough oxygen into their blood and they suffocate.
On Friday, health officials said that the illness may be caused by a virus linked to rodents and their droppings.


Orff: Two Second Thoughts
If ever a composer could be said to have fallen out of favor, it is Carl Orff.
His flamboyant scenic cantata "Carmina Burana" is occasionally performed on pops programs or by ballet companies.
His educational ideas, usually adulterated by the Kodaly method or another pedagogical approach, are still applied in schools.
But of the considerable breadth of his achievement, there is little representation.
So the budget reissue of the sole studio recording of Orff's quasi-opera "Antigonae" (Deutsche Grammophon 437 721-2; three CD's) is of particular interest.
Now available by import and set for American release later this year, it can be profitably compared with a newly released historical album of the 1949 world premiere at the Salzburg Festival (Stradivarius STR 10060; two CD's).


Conway Twitty, 59, Dies on Tour; Country Star Had 50 No. 1 Songs
Conway Twitty, the country and western singer who brought a rich, throaty tone to dozens of steamy ballads over four decades in the music business, died yesterday at the Cox Medical Center in Springfield, Mo.
He was 59.
The cause of death was a ruptured blood vessel in his stomach, hospital officials said.
Mr.
Twitty collapsed Friday night on his tour bus after a performance in nearby Branson, Mo.


The Bride Takes the Cake!
On the runways of fashion, the bride brings up the rear.
She is the frosting on the cake, the cherry on the sundae, the last word in whatever message a designer is trying to deliver.
From Paris and New York, then, some fitting conclusions.


Revealed as an Actress
For anyone who saw Richard Avedon's photographs of a nude Tilda Swinton that appeared in The New Yorker, there could be no question that the star of the new film "Orlando" is an actress.
But some confusion is understandable: in the film, directed by Sally Potter and adapted from the book by Virginia Woolf, the Scottish actress plays a young man who, in addition to being immortal, turns into a woman.


Average Americans, Given the Facts, Understand Tax Increases
To the Editor:
"The American people want reductions in spending before any increase in taxes," say Republicans and conservative Democrats in Congress.
Doubtless, most Americans, asked "Do you want your taxes raised?", will answer no.
But ask: "Do you want cuts in Social Security, Medicare and other entitlements? To have no money for police, for fixing roads, education and research? To have the United States sink to mediocrity, with the good life for only the wealthy?" The answer would also be no.
By all indications, it isn't possible to pay no more in taxes, or to reduce nonmilitary public expenditure, and still have a country with first-rate social institutions.
The last 12 years of conservative claims that these things can coexist by cutting the fat out of our Government have been refuted by a quadrupling of the national debt in that period.
After 12 years of trying, conservative fat cutters found little waste, but put a lot of worthwhile activities in a state of chronic malnourishment, which will cost us a lot more than what we save by starving our institutions.
The cost of the savings and loan bailout is the most spectacular result.


'Nunsense II' Stays Close to the Original
SEQUELS to films like "Rocky" or "Alien" are commonplace, and on occasion the subsequent I's, II's and III's are as good, even sometimes better, as the original.
In theater, however, the sequel syndrome has never caught on.
It is difficult to reassemble a creative team, and the costs involved in producing a new version of an old story are as prohibitive as staging an original.
Plus the specter of major flop sequels like "Annie II" and "Bring Back Birdie" hovers over the offices of wary angels.


Chinese Jade, Long Entombed, Comes To Vivid Life
Copper-colored jade? pink, brown, black and gray jade?
Jade in the usual colors of milky white or spinach green is virtually absent from the exhibition "Chinese Archaic Jades and Bronzes," at the Manhattan gallery of J. J. Lally and Company, through June.
And the works on display are so minimal in decoration and form that they seem carved of a different material than the elaborately chiseled jades of the Ming dynasty and beyond.


Delta Air Awards For Gay Partners
Delta Air Lines has changed the rules of its frequent flier program to make it easier for legally certified gay partners to transfer awards to each other.
Until now, Delta had allowed its frequent flier customers to transfer their awards -- typically tickets earned by flying a designated number of miles -- only to family members, which Delta defines as spouse, child, parent, siblings, grandparent, grandchild, in-laws, step children and step-siblings. .
Of the seven major domestic carriers, Delta, along with T.W.A., had the most restrictive policies regarding award transfers.
The other five -- USAir, United, American, Northwest and Continental -- allow frequent fliers to assign their awards to anyone they choose, regardless of relationship.


Chantal Deckey And Robert Simon
Chantal N. Deckey, an associate in the high-yield finance group at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, was married yesterday to Robert J. Simon, the senior managing director of Bradford Ventures Ltd., a private investment concern.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Joseph S. Haggar performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Manning Chapel at Brown University in Providence, R.I.
Mrs.
Simon, 28, graduated magna cum laude from Brown and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Deckey of Pawtucket, R.I.


Alfresco Dining, Mediterranean Style
WHEN Ed Brown, who is the executive chef at Tropica, the Manhattan seafood restaurant, catered the wedding last year of Pierre Franey's son Jacques to Trish Cancalosi on the beach in East Hampton, he prepared a spectacular outdoor meal for 200 guests.
But instead of making stews and casseroles to be reheated, everything was either cooked on the spot or served at room temperature.
To do this, he brought along a convoy of chefs from Manhattan who had worked through the night to prepare the meal.
"I went for the Provencal style," he said.
"I chose the sort of things you see on the Cote d'Azur, in Tuscany or Tunisia: roast vegetables, grains, herbs, olives, oil, garlic -- boldly, highly seasoned food." While an army of chefs may have been needed to put together the food for the wedding, the individual dishes are simple enough for the home cook to prepare with ease.
They are great for a summer picnic or outdoor meal on a warm day.


So Weak, So Powerfull
HERE is how Kate Moss looks in the picture: very young and very dead.
Skin waxen, eyes unfocused, she's an amalgam of Laura Palmer in "Twin Peaks" and the young woman's corpse found abandoned amid the scrub oaks and yucca trees in the movie "River's Edge."
The picture is one of eight such images in this month's British Vogue, all shot by Corinne Day, a former model who is Ms.
Moss's friend.
Ms.
Moss is pictured in her sparsely furnished apartment clad variously in T-shirts and underpants with the label showing, and panty hose that don't fit.
She gazes into space; she looks out a window, she waits moodily -- a passive little match girl for the 1990's enfolded in a pale mauve comforter, wearing gray socks and a navy La Perla bra available at Nightingales for $:87.


65 Vertical Feet South of the Border
Pursuing drug traffickers wanted in the killing of the Archbishop of Guadalajara, the Mexican police stumbled onto a startling discovery last week: a sophisticated tunnel that was being snaked under the border for smuggling cocaine into California.
The sandstone tunnel, a quarter-mile long, is 65 feet underground, air conditioned, well-lighted and reinforced with timbers and concrete.
It begins under the floor of a Tijuana warehouse and, probably 80 percent complete, runs to the outskirts of San Diego.


GET A LIFE!
With regard to William Safire's On Language column "Get a Life!" (May 16), the scene played out most often between my 13-year-old son and his widowed mother is as follows:
Get a life! says the boy.
Get off my back, thinks the boy, interpreted by his mother to mean: If you had a more sexually active social life, you wouldn't zoom in on my failing grades, laziness and general irresponsibility, and I would get away with a lot more stuff!


Party, Party; Benefit, Benefit
Hobnobbing from Central Park to Webster Hall, from the Rainbow Room to the Pierre, from the Bronx to Le Cirque.


Book Review/Section 7
In the Summer Reading issue, Thomas Pynchon kicks off a series of essays on the seven deadly sins with a reflection on his favorite -- sloth.
John Mortimer reviews Scott Turow's latest, "Pleading Guilty," and Camille Paglia examines a new biography of Judy Garland.
Elmore Leonard, Germaine Greer, Grace Paley, Matt Groening and Dr.
Ruth Westheimer talk of their first encounters with forbidden books.
Plus seasonal roundups for cooks, travelers and gardeners, and a list of vacation reading.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on May 23 about the British royal family referred incorrectly in some copies to the son of Queen Elizabeth, besides Prince Charles, who has had marital troubles.
He is Prince Andrew, not Prince Edward.


My Son, The Rocket
HOW do you solve a problem like David Leslie?
You can't really blame the downtown "stunt artist," who also refers to himself as an "impact addict," for not telling his parents about his performance pieces.
Whose parents, after all, would want to hear about how their son flew himself, in a homemade rocket, over a mountain of watermelons on Broome Street in 1985?
Whose parents would want to hear how their son "exploded himself" as a human firecracker on the streets of Chinatown in 1986, or about the fight he staged with Riddick Bowe, now the heavyweight champion, on the Staten Island Ferry in 1987?


Cards for Calls On the Road
THE telephone debit card is coming to the United States.
This card, which in France and Japan provides almost the only way to operate a pay phone, is creeping into, rather than exploding on, the United States market.
But with the continuing activity of shoulder surfers, thieves who learn your telephone charge card number while you are using a pay phone and run up big bills with it, debit cards for use in the United States have appeal for people on the road.
The obvious drawback is that you pay in advance, but if you lose the card, or its numbers are copied by a thief, all you lose is the value remaining on the card.
With the camp season upon us, the phone debit card may also look worthwhile to parents who want to give children a way to call from anyplace to anyplace, not just collect to home, but do not want their credit card numbers drifting around.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about fundamentalists at Bob Jones University who learn to dress for success without compromising their values misidentified a Washington research organization that is lobbying to alter the tax code to favor married couples with children.
It is Focus on Family, not the Family Research Council.


A Day Later, 2 More Tests
Act 2 coming up: The day after Belmont Day will crowd the racing stage with stars, too, notably the grass champion of last year, the colt Lure, and the prime filly Sky Beauty, both seeking 1993 championships.
Lure will face seven rivals in the $150,000 Manhattan Handicap, and will be after rewards beyond the purse: If he wins, he will sweep the Early Times Turf Series and win the $1 million bonus that goes with it.


Challenge of Replacing Old Foundation Sills
OWNERS of older, neglected or poorly built houses and outbuildings, especially in rural or wet locations, often face the problem of replacing decayed foundation sills, the horizontal beams separating the framing of the building from the foundation walls.
Replacing the sills is seldom a job for amateurs, but doing so on a detached garage, shed or small barn makes a challenging, if strenuous, project.
Two helpful books before before starting the job are "Renovating Old Houses" by George Nash (Taunton Press, 1992) and "Renovation: A Complete Guide" by Michael W. Litchfield (Prentice Hall, 1991).
A useful article on sills was in The Journal of Light Construction in October.
The magazine may be available in libraries, or readers can call (802) 434-4747.


MAY 30-JUNE 5: Not So Fail-Safe; How 2 Countries Renewed Worries Over the Bomb
Nuclear arms were instruments of the cold war, but last week brought reminders of how hard it remains to get countries to relinquish or forswear them.
A last-ditch American effort to induce North Korea to back down from a plan to quit the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty showed little sign of progress despite two days of talks in New York.
The pullout is due to take effect this coming Saturday.


Eric M. Dessen and Florence J. Kamil
Dr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Kamil of Bloomfield Hills, Mich., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Florence Jody Kamil, to Eric Michael Dessen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley B. Dessen of East Hills, L.I.
A fall wedding is planned.
Ms.
Kamil is the buyer for designer ladies shoes for Bloomingdale's, the department store, in New York.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father is an orthopedic surgeon in West Bloomfield, Mich.


Yanks Rescue Their Teflon Man
Bob Wickman simply does not lose.
He either finds a way to wiggle to a victory or, if he has a particularly poor outing, the Yankees almost always rescue him.
The Yankees made a remarkable rescue tonight.
After Wickman lost his magic touch, forfeited his charmed life for one night and saw his undefeated record cast into jeopardy when the Rangers rushed to a 6-2 lead in the third inning, the Yankees saved him by exploding for six runs in the seventh and forging on to a 9-6 victory at Arlington Stadium.


Who Dares Bash a Condom?
To the Editor:
I was nothing less than horrified to read Elizabeth Kaye's article on the Reality female condom.
Besides being cute, which was apparently her overriding goal, she succeeded at doing a tremendous disservice to women.
Undone by her own denial of the risks women face through sex, and her own obvious discomfort with women's touching their own genitals, she's become part of the "female-condom bashing chic." Why, she even bashes male condoms!


Kamsky at Dortmund: Right in the Middle
GATA KAMSKY ended up right in the middle of the field of the Dortmund (Germany) International Tournament, held over the Easter holidays.
The 19-year-old from Brooklyn scored 3 1/2-3 1/2 to tie for fourth place with Sergei Dolmatov of Russia in the eight-grandmaster round-robin event, which was won by Anatoly Karpov, the former world champion.
Still, Kamsky did brighten up an otherwise undistinguished result by executing a nice mating attack against 20-year-old Joel Lautier of France in Round 3.


K. M. Koeniges, S. V. DeSimone
Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas R. Koeniges of West Islip, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Katherine Mary Koeniges, to Stephen V. DeSimone, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Vincent J. DeSimone, also of West Islip.
An August wedding is planned.
Ms.
Koeniges, 26, is a hospital sales specialist with the Upjohn Company in New York.
She graduated from the College of New Rochelle.
Her father is a staff photographer for Newsday in Melville, L.I.
Her mother, Katherine Koeniges, is the assistant director and a teacher at St.
Joseph's Nursery School in Babylon, L.I.


Edward M. Matluck, Susan Mazonson
Susan Mazonson, the founder of Telecom Services, a technology consulting firm, and Edward M. Matluck, a senior vice president of Faneuil Research Inc., a market research firm, both in New York, plan to marry in the fall.
Ms.
Mazonson graduated from Brown University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Chicago.
She is a daughter of Gertrude Mazonson of Peabody, Mass., and the late Arthur Mazonson.
Her father was the vice president of the Bermas Plastics Company in Long Island City, Queens.


Brooklyn Father Arrested in Child's Death
A Brooklyn man was arrested and charged yesterday with the murder of his 2 1/2-year-old son, the police said.
The man, Christopher Willis, 28, was arrested at 8 A.M. near Atlantic Avenue in Crown Heights just hours after the baby died at St.
John's Hospital, said Capt.
William F. Plackenmeyer of the Brooklyn Detective Bureau.


Barter With Russia? Indeed
To the Editor:
Lawrence Lesser ("Barter Is Best With Cash-Poor Russia," Viewpoints, May 16) is correct when he says that America needs to be creative to finance foreign assistance and trade with Russia.
The "Barter for Freedom Bill" would permit President Clinton to negotiate agreements with Russia that trade short-term economic assistance for natural resources such as oil, gold, diamonds and manganese.
It would not tie the President's hands in any way, and would give Russia seven years in which to produce the goods for repayment.
As the President and Congress prepare a Russian aid package that approaches $3 billion, they would do well to heed the advice of Mr.
Lesser and consider the vast natural resources of Russia.
REPRESENTATIVE DAVID DREIER  Washington, May 17 The writer is a Republican from California.


As Thousands Cheer Him On, Perot Presses Familiar Themes
Taking aim at some of his favorite targets and repeating familiar themes from his Presidential campaign, Ross Perot touched down at a small airport here today to exhort thousands of his enthusiastic supporters to stay active in politics.
The rally, organized by the New Jersey branch of Mr.
Perot's grass-roots voter group, United We Stand America, was billed as a get-out-the-vote rally in anticipation of the gubernatorial and legislative primary elections in New Jersey on Tuesday.
But judging from the rousing reception that Mr.
Perot received when he appeared on the stage in the cavernous hangar at Allaire Airport here, about 40 miles south of New York City near the Jersey Shore, it seemed more like a get-out-and-see-Ross rally.


Professional Women's Group Turns 10
WOMEN in such fields as public relations, advertising and design, marketing and journalism will celebrate the 10th anniversary of the Westchester chapter of Women in Communications on Wednesday at 6 P.M. with an awards dinner at the Stouffer Westchester Hotel in Harrison.
Judy Matson, director of the county's Office of Cultural Affairs and a founder of the Westchester chapter of the support network, will receive the Matrix Award, the group's highest honor.
Denise C. Weizner, the chapter's outgoing president, said the award was made yearly on the basis of service to the community, professional excellence and service to the chapter.
An Identity of Its Own
Women in Communications was founded in 1909 as Theta Sigma Phi at the University of Washington and now has more than 10,000 members -- both women and men -- in professional and student chapters nationwide and abroad.
Although the organization was founded by journalists, the Westchester chapter, which is among the 10 largest chapters in the country, has taken on a distinct identity of its own.


Sign of Despair Evident At Dinner for Homeless
DESPITE the elegant setting and convivial atmosphere, there was a bittersweet quality to the May 27 Hope for the Homeless Dinner at the Rye Town Hilton.
For the 900 guests attired in cocktail dresses and business suits the pleasure in greeting friends and socializing with like-minded colleagues was offset by disappointment that the annual event was in its eighth year.
Unlike other fund-raising functions, where guests would expect to see floral or balloon centerpieces, there were instead decorated bricks, a visible reminder of the need for affordable housing in the county.
Westchester has the highest rate of homelessness in the state.
And in a poignant paradox, the success of the dinner -- which was dedicated to the county's homeless children and raised about $40,000 for programs that serve them countywide -- only underscored the failure of county and local governments to solve the problem.


If You're Thinking of Living in: New Canaan
IN much of the 19th century, New Canaan was a community of farmers, blacksmiths, carpenters, weavers and coopers.
One day in 1830 the owner of Hoyt's General Store on Main Street had an attack of temperance and smashed his stock of liquor on the roadway.
An astonished citizenry watched as all that good rum, gin and bourbon sank into the dust.
"The general store was where you bought liquor," said Mary Louise King, historian of what is now part of Connecticut's Gold Coast.
"The town would vote to be wet or dry, back and forth every few years. We used to have more liquor stores than groceries, and until 1915 we had more Democrats than Republicans."


Corrections
A review on May 16 about "A Life at the Center: Memoirs of a Radical Reformer," by Roy Jenkins, referred incorrectly to the British Labor Party politician Denis Healey.
He was Defense Secretary and Chancellor of the Exchequer; he was never Foreign Secretary.


Ellen Wasserman, David Cangialosi
Ellen Wasserman, a daughter of Maurice and Martha Wasserman of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married yesterday in White Plains to David Edward Cangialosi, a son of Lillian Cangialosi of Emerson, N.J., and the late Joseph D. Cangialosi.
Dr.
Matthew Ies Spetter, the leader of the Riverdale-Yonkers Society for Ethical Culture, officiated at the Women's Club of White Plains.


Technology; Behind the 'Clear' Trend
From drinks to deodorants to dishwashing liquid, not to mention gasoline and mouthwash, the hot color for new products is no color at all.
Marketers like to have something novel to sell, but the driving force in the trend is an effort to tap into consumers' associations of clarity with health, purity, freshness and no-frills functionality.
And if consumers see clear beer or transparent antiperspirant as more "natural" than colored competitors, so much the better.


LIFE IS SACRED. THAT'S THE EASY PART.
Ronald Dworkin undermines his argument when he acknowledges the "morally grave decision" to abort but not the resulting grief that may follow ("Life Is Sacred. That's The Easy Part," May 16).
By referring to "the fetus" and limiting his discussion to early abortions, he avoids the problem faced by so many who must end pregnancies beyond the first trimester, after prenatal tests reveal an impaired baby or pregnancy.
As a pregnancy-loss counselor, I know that these couples grieve as deeply as do parents who experience a spontaneous loss, and they suffer additionally because society refuses to recognize it.
Anti-choice factions offer no compassion because they believe the grief a couple feels is fitting retribution for a reprehensible act.
Pro-choice supporters offer no sympathy because they are reluctant to admit that what was lost might have been worthy of grief.


Educating Boaters Who Drink Afloat
A pilot program to discourage boaters from drinking while operating vessels has refashioned the term "designated driver" to mean "designated skipper."
The deaths last March of two Cleveland Indians players, Tim Crews and Steve Olin, gave impetus to the idea, which had been in the planning for two years in Newport, R.I.


In a One-Man Show, Joel Grey Is a Crowd
If Joel Grey rolls up his pants to the knees, opens his baby blues to their full circumference and puts a little red-and-white schoolboy's cap on his head, he can, at the age of 61, pass for 8.
By puffing up his cheeks, extending his arms out from his sides and lowering his body to a seated position -- although there is no chair nearby for him to sit on -- he is able to transform himself rather convincingly into a frog.
And when he lets his wrists melt, allows his hips to expand in a circular swivel and draws his mouth into the shape of a rosebud, he could be any floozy in the lobby of a third-rate hotel looking for a good time.
Mr. Grey can also sing and dance, by the way.


Michele Sherman, Barry L. Entner
Michele D. Sherman, the daughter of Myrna and Joel Sherman of Leonia, N.J., was married last evening in New York to Barry L. Entner, a son of Fritzie Entner of Sharon, Mass., and the late Sam Entner.
Rabbi Nat Benjamin performed the ceremony at the Hotel Macklowe.
Mrs.
Sherman-Entner, 27, graduated from Ithaca College.
She is the director of national accounts for the Nat Sherman Company, a tobacconist in New York.
Her father is the president of the company, which was founded by her paternal grandfather, the late Nat Sherman, in 1930.


Isn't Sex Disparity in Tests a National Scandal?
To the Editor:
I am surprised and dismayed by the statistics in "Boys Predominate in a Contest, Fueling Complaint of Test Bias" (Education page, May 26), on the Preliminary Scholastic Aptitude Test.
Close to two of three semifinalists in the National Merit Scholarships contest are boys.
The National Merit selection relies on P.S.A.T. exam scores for its semifinalists.
The statistics you detail and the process that produces them deserve the attention of Congress.
How such an egregious situation as you depict can exist for so many years approaches a national scandal.
I am the father of two daughters and think this situation is intolerable.
Can it be corrected in time to benefit my daughters?
Probably not.
I suspect that this is the reason many may feel it is futile to protest.


Barkley Leads Suns To Dreamers' Matchup
Charles Barkley has shoe commercials, a gold medal, golf clubs and a house with elevators -- everything Michael Jordan has.
Now, he wants Jordan's ring.
This afternoon, Barkley got a second wind, got in Shawn Kemp's way and got the Phoenix Suns into the National Basketball Association Championship series.
Because of a rousing 123-110 victory over the Seattle SuperSonics in Game 7 of the Western Conference finals, Barkley and Jordan will finally rub elbows and cleanshaven heads and play for the Chicago Bulls' league title, starting here Wednesday.


Correction
A listing on May 23 with an article about windjammer cruises in Maine misstated the telephone number for the Maine Windjammer Association.
It is (800) 624-6380.


Challenge of Replacing Old Foundation Sills
OWNERS of older, neglected or poorly built houses and outbuildings, especially in rural or wet locations, often face the problem of replacing decayed foundation sills, the horizontal beams separating the framing of the building from the foundation walls.
Replacing the sills is seldom a job for amateurs, but doing so on a detached garage, shed or small barn makes a challenging, if strenuous, project.
Two helpful books before before starting the job are "Renovating Old Houses" by George Nash (Taunton Press, 1992) and "Renovation: A Complete Guide" by Michael W. Litchfield (Prentice Hall, 1991).
A useful article on sills was in The Journal of Light Construction in October.
The magazine may be available in libraries, or readers can call (802) 434-4747.


Jewish Museum Reopens Sunday
The Jewish Museum, at Fifth Avenue and 92d Street, will reopen next Sunday after a two-and-a-half-year, $36 million renovation and expansion.
Founded in 1904, the museum has the largest collection of Jewish art and artifacts in the world outside of Israel.
The museum, which is housed in the 1908 Warburg Mansion, has doubled its exhibition space to 22,000 square feet, added a cafe and enlarged its gift shop.


Like Caesar, Clinton Gets No Praise
At the 20th Street Cafe, where biscuits and gravy costs $1.99 and political banter is dished out for free, customers this morning were grousing about Bill Clinton as if they had been given the wrong plate of breakfast.
"This wasn't the guy we voted for," said Gilbert Castellano, a 59-year-old postal worker, as he leaned over a steaming cup of coffee.
"What happened to the old Bill Clinton?"


Beached Whale Buried at Far Rockaway Beach


Geraniums With That Continental Flair
FEW summer flowers do the yeomen work of geraniums.
These sturdy plants combine well with other summertime flowers for bright displays in window boxes.
Geraniums decorate tubs on the patio, and they provide bright accent color in borders where needed.
Geranium plants are rugged, too, and will survive the first blasts of cool weather.
They keep on flowering until truly deep freezes finish them off.
Each year sees brighter flower colors, stronger foliage and stems and unusual variety in geranium forms.


Krone Is First Woman to Win a Triple Crown Race


A Mortgage Hurdle Blocks Some Co-ops Sales
FOR Dianne Landi, home is a bird, a one-bedroom bird with long, slender wings and a large, curved beak.
When she and her then-newlywed husband, Anthony Denza, bought it six years ago, the co-op in the Bay Ridge section of Brooklyn was the first leg of their flight plan for family and future.
But now the couple have a 4-year-old daughter, and Ms.
Landi is expecting twins in October.
They would like to sell their apartment and move to larger quarters; in fact they have been trying to sell it for two years.
But they cannot.


A Generational Question
To the Editor:
It is Elizabeth Kaye who is in desperate need of a reality check, as she is woefully unaware of her own implicit sexism ("The Sexes: Reality Dawns," May 9).
Being recognized as a "mature woman" is hardly a "price of independence." It is older-generational spokeswomen like Ms.
Kaye who continue to impair the women's movement with their infantile, nostalgic obsession with the quaintness of the sexual revolution.
As a 21-year-old safe-sex veteran, I relish the thought of having something dangle from my vagina that is esthetically revolting, and I'm confident that I will feel at once "sexy and free," knowing that I am protecting my life and the life of my lover.
ALISON MCDONALD New York


Weapons Measure Hits a Roadblock in Hartford
A bill to ban the sale of semiautomatic military-style assault rifles in Connecticut tumbled into parliamentary limbo late Friday night in the state Senate, clouding the proposal's chances with time running out before the General Assembly's adjournment on Wednesday.
Sportsmen's groups and lobbyists for the National Rifle Association, which has launched a major effort to kill the bill, were jubilant but still remained cautious today.
The bill's proponents were confused by the turn of events.


Tracy Callaghan, John Torrente Jr.
Tracy Lynn Callaghan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerry Callaghan of Ridgewood, N.J., was married yesterday to John Joseph Torrente Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Torrente Sr. of Ridgewood.
The Rev.
Arvin Ten Brink performed the Dutch Reformed ceremony at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Torrente, 25, is an administrative assistant in the institutional credit department at Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, the securities brokerage.
Her father is the president of SPG Group, the securities clearing division of Shearson Lehman Brothers in New York.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
46
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
2
2
THE MAGIC OF YOU, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A 19th-century British minx sets her cap for an American sea captain.
3
3
DARKEST HOUR, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The concluding volume in a series about the Cutlers, a plantation-owning family.
4
16
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
5
71
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
6
5
SHADOWFIRES, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A woman is stalked by her supposedly deceased husband.
7
60
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/ Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
8
6
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Pocket, $5.99.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
9
2
THE CAT WHO WASN'T THERE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) Jim Qwilleran contends with crimes in Scotland.
10
1
SHADOWS, by John Saul. (Bantam, $5.99.) An evil influence brings horrors to a school for gifted children.
11
4
FATHERLAND, by Robert Harris. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A thriller set in the Third Reich 20 years after Hitler wins World War II.
12
7
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Kinsey Millhone investigates a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
13
23
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The investigation of a woman's death involves the American-Japanese rivalry.
14
6
JEWELS, by Danielle Steel. (Dell, $6.99.) The life of a woman who becomes rich by dealing in precious stones.
15
7
THE WITCHING HOUR, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A woman descended from witches brings a drowned man back to life.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
6
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
2
3
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/ S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President.
3
5
NOT FOR SALE AT ANY PRICE, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $5.95.) The Texas billionaire on America's economic and political problems.
4
500
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
5
86
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
6
16
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
7
107
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
8
13
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Examples of waste, with suggestions for curbing it.
9 *
4
WHERE THE BLUEBIRD SINGS TO THE LEMONADE SPRINGS, by Wallace Stegner. (Penguin, $11.) Essays on the American West.
10
17
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of rustic France.
11 *
13
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) The memoirs of the former head of a counterterrorist unit.
12 *
21
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on self-esteem.
13 *
16
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) The changes in social life that have affected the sexual fantasies of women.
14 *
31
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/ Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist describes a war against women's rights.
15
20
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) The Vice President discusses factors affecting the environment.
16 *
131
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
9
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK: Volume 2, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) More tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2 *
95
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) A collection of some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
120
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
4
137
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 22, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Land of the Raj
To the Editor: Julie Sahni's impressions of Ooty, the Victorian summer retreat in the west of Tamil Nadu State created by the British Raj ("In India, Victorian Summer Retreat," April 18), were formed by her childhood memories of her grand father's estate, and then in a sentimental return visit, molded by her training as an architect and planner.
For my wife and me, errant Americans in January 1984, without itinerary, the experience consisted of our own fantasies of British India, a place on the map with two enticing melodic names (Ootacamund and Udagamandalam), the advice of the Lonely Planet Guide and our stamina in the heat, with 100 pounds of luggage on India's daunting ground transportation system.


HUT's, PUT's and Traction: TV-Programmer Talk
Every profession has its own jargon, but the catch phrases peculiar to the television business are peculiar indeed.
At this time of year, when the networks solder together their fall prime-time schedules, the buzzwords are flying like spring pollen.
A sampling:
AUSPICES: Writers or producers.
As in, "This show has outstanding auspices." Some shows, like "Homicide," have better auspices than ratings.


On the Hudson, Launching Minds Instead of Ships
Building on its fine tradition of training first-rate minds, New York City's Stuyvesant High School has begun to groom a crop of young architecture critics.
Stuyvesant has just ended its first year in its new building, an impressive $150 million complex in lower Manhattan, and some students give the place low marks.
They say the light switches don't work.
The pool is always closed.
The building smells too new.
Hang in there, kids. This is what a shakedown year is supposed to be like.


Gusto, Imported From Canada
The choreographer who can make performers look especially good is beloved by dancers and audiences alike.
Witness the huge success Les Grands Ballets Canadiens has recently enjoyed in New York with two box-office hits in just that category -- James Kudelka's "Desir" and Nacho Duato's "Na Floresta."
Both were choreographed to fit a company that has never been easy to define.
What is one to make of a troupe that achieved international pop celebrity in the early 1970's with "Tommy," the first ballet version of the rock opera by the Who, and also continued to perform Balanchine ballets and "Swan Lake"?
This is not your customary eclecticism: The range is exceptionally wide, and the frequent turnover of directors in the Grands Ballets has reflected a search for identity.


Grannies With Dash
The revived one-piece flower-print granny dress has zoomed to the top of the spring-summer fashion charts.
For a generation weaned on jeans and sportswear, wearing dresses is a new experience.
Mothers and grandmothers might wince at how their common housedress prints are now being worn: with Doc Martens, and sweaters tied around the waist, or with the button fronts left undone when worn over leggings or jeans.
The look is a movement by younger women to create their own signature look, while deconstructing designer concepts of ladylike dressing.


Sapristi! Is This Our Tintin?
TINTIN IN THE NEW WORLD A Romance.
By Frederic Tuten. 239 pp.
New York: William Morrow &amp; Company.


The View From: Hampton; How a Small Town Reveals Americans' Values
OCCASIONALLY Janet and James Robertson asked about the history of their village.
One day, Mrs.
Robertson recalled, "the past came to our door. Wendell Davis just came, with a great big box full of stuff." Added her husband: "It had clearly not been packed, just dumped. We pulled out a Yale catalogue from 1820." The couple would pull much more from the past.
The Robertsons live in Hampton, where two rows of sturdy houses line a little stretch of road through the hills of northeastern Connecticut.
In 1967 they bought an 18th-century house there from Mr.
Davis and his brothers, whose family had bought it in 1804.
They got to know Mr.
Davis, but they didn't know that for 150 years his ancestors -- Taintors and Davises -- had saved just about everything, including college catalogues, personal letters, business records, newspapers, pamphlets, pictures and an 1853 key to "Uncle Tom's Cabin." The family removed all of it before selling the house.


Vivien Hoexter, A. D. Seideman
Vivien Hoexter, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Rolf Hoexter of Englewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Anthony David Seideman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Seideman of Tarrytown, N.Y.
Rabbi Bonnie Cohen officiated aboard the tall ship Wavertree at the South Street Seaport in New York.


Your Home: Housing Trusts; Protecting The Equity In a Home
WHEN it comes to protecting the equity in your home for the benefit of the next generation, a trust has been traditionally viewed as the estate planning vehicle of choice.
Until recently it served primarily the well-to-do because its aim was to sidestep both state and Federal estate taxes.
And since the owner's total assets -- the home plus any other holdings, such as stocks, mutual funds or bonds -- had to exceed $600,000 before the more hefty Federal estate taxes were due, it became a meaningless exercise for people of more modest means.


Martha Verrill, Ivan Schlager
Martha Anne Verrill, an executive search consultant in Washington, was married there yesterday to Ivan Anthony Schlager, a senior trade counsel to the Senate Commerce Committee in Washington.
Msgr.
James McMurtrie officiated at the Holy Trinity Church.
Mrs.
Schlager is a senior associate with Korn/Ferry International, an executive search firm.
She graduated from Denison University.
She is a daughter of Charles O. Verrill Jr. of Washington and the late Mary Ann Verrill.


Joseph Sarachek, Heather Rosenstein
Heather Beth Rosenstein, a securities analyst at Prudential Securities in New York, was married last Monday to Joseph Evan Sarachek, an associate in New York for the Chicago law firm of McDermott, Will &amp; Emery.
Rabbi Alan Silverstein performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
The bride, 29, follows the retailing industry for Prudential.
She graduated from the University of Rochester and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Nancy and Harry Rosenstein of West Caldwell, N.J.


Colleagues Remember Slain Newark Detective as Fearless
Each day that he went out on his undercover narcotics investigations, Detective John Sczyrek carried a cloth laundry bag, all tie-dyed red, blue and purple, on his shoulder.
To colleagues, it was his trademark.
To Detective Sczyrek, it was his "trick bag," a depository of disguises he drew on to blend into the underworld of drug trafficking and fool his targets.
On Thursday morning he left the bag at his locker at the Newark Police Department's narcotics squad.
His assignment for the day was to take him worlds away from the dangerous streets and his regular chore of outwitting drug dealers.
His day's task was on the 11th floor of the Essex County Court Building, testifying at the trial of two men he arrested last August on drug and weapons charges after they sold him $20 worth of narcotics in a Newark apartment.


Differing Views on Human Rights Threaten Forum
Deep divisions between developing and industrialized nations threaten the success of a conference this month on strengthening human rights.
At issue is a contention by many third-world nations that Western standards of justice and fairness do not necessarily apply to other cultures.
Those countries are also seeking assurances that the West will not use their records on human rights to withhold aid or other economic benefits that the countries say would violate their right to development.


Frequent Fliers Saying Fresh Air Is Awfully Thin at 30,000 Feet
To save money, airlines in the United States are circulating less fresh air into the cabins of many airplanes.
As a result, flight attendants, as well as some passengers, have begun to complain that the practice is causing headaches, nausea and other health problems, especially after long flights.
The reduction of fresh air is done only on newer planes.
Older aircraft built before the mid-1980's provided cabins with 100 percent fresh air that was circulated every three minutes.
But the newer models provide half fresh air and half recirculated air that is freshened every six or seven minutes or longer.
The recirculation system enables the planes to use less fuel to cool the outside air, which is heated by the engines as it is drawn in.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
ONE HUNDRED HUNGRY ANTS By Elinor J. Pinczes.
Illustrated by Bonnie MacKain.
Unpaged.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $13.95. (Ages 5 to 9) FEAST FOR 10 Written and illustrated by Cathryn Falwell.
Unpaged.
New York: Clarion Books. $14.95. (Ages 3 to 7) THE TWELVE CIRCUS RINGS Written and illustrated by Seymour Chwast.
Unpaged.
San Diego: Gulliver Books/ Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $14.95. (Ages 4 to 8)


What It Simply Takes to Be Simply Chic
BASICS are the Tao of fashion.
Just when you think there's no further anyone can delve into their meaning -- no greater distance their versatility can be stretched -- someone finds a new way to mine their seemingly bottomless well of import.
It isn't just jean ads, where wearers wax poetic about the inner life of a swatch of denim, or that chameleon-like Gap T-shirt (gee, anyone can wear it -- and they can wear it with anything!).
Take the pensive "Chic Simple Clothes" -- published last month by Knopf ($25) -- the rag-sploitation tome of its time.
Its co-editors, Kim Johnson Gross and Jeff Stone, explain the book as an attempt to set out what quintessential style is today.


At AIDS Talks, Science Confronts Daunting Maze
After more than a decade of intensive research, scientists boast that they have learned more faster about H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, than about any other microbe.
Yet to H.I.V.-infected patients and the public, the scientists' wealth of knowledge contrasts sharply with the poverty of clinical benefits it has yielded.
The most impressive gains in fighting AIDS have been made in treating the opportunistic infections that develop as the immune system collapses.


Encore


Graf Battles Back to Win French Final
Steffi Graf, tense in the beginning but remorseless by the conclusion of her three-set final with Mary Joe Fernandez this simmering afternoon, captured her first French Open title since 1988, and the 12th Grand Slam tournament of her career.
She did it with a 4-6, 6-2, 6-4 comeback effort that underlined her recent recovery of the world's No. 1 ranking.
"I had a few close matches here in the last few years," said Graf, who was runner-up to three-time champion Monica Seles in 1990 and 1992, "and I was always the one who had to play against the better player at the end, so I was thankful that it was the other way around today."


State's Schools Mandate Joins Parents and Staffs
WHEN the chairman of the science department at Herricks High School, Leonard Giordano, explained his proposal to change the curriculum to the 30 teachers, parents, administrators and students gathered at the Herricks Community Center, they listened attentively to his reasoning.
"Science teachers can't possibly cover every optional subject in the curriculum," Mr.
Giordano said.
"If they do, they're doing their students a disservice. The proposal to allow teachers to select optional units for in-depth study while still preparing students for the Regents exam gives them greater flexibility and gives their students a well-rounded understanding of the core areas and methods of scientific investigation."


Manager's Profile; John J. Kaweske
Fund: Financial Industrial Income; $3.4 billion in assets; best five-year performance for an equity-income fund.
Manager since 1985. (Sponsor: Invesco Funds Group Inc., Denver)
Born: May 23, 1941; Sussex, N.J.


Black Is Voted Episcopal Bishop
Suffragan Bishop Clarence N. Coleridge was elected the 13th Bishop of the Episcopal diocese of Connecticut today, becoming the first black ever to lead Connecticut's 80,000 Episcopalians.
The election, held at Christ Church Cathedral, ended what had become a heated six-way race.


Corrections
A picture caption with the Out There column on May 23, about fashion shows in China, referred incorrectly to the model wearing a Valentino dress.
Her identity is unknown.


A la Carte; The Cafe Is New, but Its Name Rings a Familiar Bell
A NEW "5 &amp; 10" that has nothing to do with Woolworth's or nickels and dimes has opened in Port Washington.
The 5 &amp; 10 Cafe, at 14 Haven Avenue (883-0303), charges $5 for all appetizers, pizzas, burgers, pasta starters and desserts with coffee.
Main courses are $10.
This vast multilevel Italian cafe with an open kitchen, brick pizza oven and bare floors and tables was a busy, bustling, upbeat place on a recent visit.
It is whimsically decorated with toy airplanes, tricycles, baby carriages and rocking horses hanging overhead.
Signs from bygone days proclaiming the virtues of items like penny candy and Hershey's Kisses, circa 1930's, dot the walls.


COLONIALISM'S BACK
Paul Johnson's arrogant prescription of retreaded colonial rule for Africa does not help ("Colonialism's Back -- And Not a Moment Too Soon," April 18).
Some Africans, he says, "were meticulously prepared for their freedom." Can one learn to be free without being free?
How, for instance, do those who do the preparing (and who regard any model incorporating African grass-roots democratic traditions as irrelevant) instill the vaunted concept of responsible opposition when its prime requisite -- the ability to alternate in exercising power -- is not present?
This "meticulous" preparation was, even in Britain's West African colonies, scarcely more than a decade in the making; Nigeria's first nationwide election was held less than a year before independence.


Ms. Trautlein And Mr. Atwood
Katherine Trautlein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Trautlein of Bethlehem, Pa., was married there yesterday to Michael Jay Atwood, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Atwood of East Hampton, Conn.
The Very Rev.
Robert Schenkel performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Cathedral Church of the Nativity.
Mrs.
Atwood, 30, graduated from the Natural Gourmet Culinary School.
Her father, who is retired, was the chief executive of the Bethlehem Steel Corporation in Bethlehem.


Stressing Local Food and Know-How
SAY goodbye to spatzle and brandy-cream sauces and hello to Peconic Bay mussels and tuna carpaccio.
Berclaz, a traditional Swiss restaurant in Bridgehampton, is gone.
In its place is 95 School Street.
From a culinary and geographical perspective, the newcomer is half a world away from Switzerland and firmly anchored on the East End.
Ninety-Five School Street is the quintessential Hamptons spot, with light airiness, masses of fresh flowers, creamy walls and occasional whimsical art.
Its pressed-tin ceiling, antique mahogany-and-copper bar and old-fashioned lighting fixtures provide texture.
The tile floors add to the cool crisp look, but they also augment the high noise level on crowded evenings.


Ideal Liberalism
To the Editor:
John Gray has published splenetic dismissals of John Rawls's ideas with reliable frequency.
It is therefore surprising that his review of Mr.
Rawls's "Political Liberalism" (May 16) begins so respectfully, but not surprising that it ends so nastily.
Mr.
Gray says almost nothing about the content of the book and describes Mr.
Rawls's position only in the broadest terms, before going on to complain that it "has nothing to say to our contemporaries in Ankara, in Delhi, in St. Petersburg or in Shanghai."


The Problem Is Waste Itself
To the Editor:
While "Who Foots the Bill for Recycling?" (April 25) appropriately asks the question of "Where should cost be assigned?," the reality for local governments and municipalities today is that solid waste disposal costs are going through the roof.


Fonteyn: Her Eyes Danced Too
To the Editor:
In his essay "Demonic Choreographers, Angelic Ballerinas"  [ May 9 ] , Jack Anderson says that Margot Fonteyn "could wobble in Odile's virtuoso passages" in "Swan Lake." It is true that Fonteyn was no fouette whiz.
But I defy almost anyone out there today to convey the wicked seductiveness of Odile as Fonteyn could with her eyes alone.
Most dancers nowadays are content to be a vamp in the role, forgetting that Odile must convey some of the quality of Odette.


Germany's Young Turks Say 'Enough' to the Bias
A 22-year-old Berlin woman who is pursuing a degree in business administration reflects one of Germany's greatest resources and, at the same time, one of its most troubling challenges.
She is bright, articulate and opinionated, and looks forward to a productive career that will be both lucrative and socially responsible.
But although she was born and raised in Berlin and has never left her homeland except for vacations, she remains an outsider, viewed suspiciously by many Germans and with outright hostility by some.


Can We Really Read With Our Ears? The 'Wuthering' Truth About Novels on Tape
ONE Saturday in the early 1980's, in Chevy Chase, Md., I spied George F. Will trucking along the sidewalk, wearing a Walkman.
It was a minor thrill, catching the icon of conservatism in a secret weekend tryst with pop culture -- who knew, maybe even with rock-and-roll! -- but, alas, it proved short-lived.
A few weeks later, I read somewhere that the columnist wasn't using his Walkman for music at all, but for something I'd never heard of -- books on tape.
He went through a book a week, Mr.
Will noted, "using time otherwise wasted in taxis, shaving or walking."
Maybe it was the vision of George Will shaving his way through all 12 volumes of Anthony Powell's "Dance to the Music of Time" that scared me off.
In any case, 10 long years passed before I took the leap into aural literature.
One afternoon last summer, I found myself standing before a state-of-the-art taped bookshelf -- everything from Thomas Hardy to Thomas Harris -- in that bibliophile's paradise in Ann Arbor, Mich., Borders Book Shop.
A long drive was behind me and a longer one ahead, with the same two dozen cassettes playing the same music over and over.
Somewhat later I got into my car and, heading east for Lake Erie and Canada, ejected the Smiths from the tape deck and popped in Robert Stone's "Outer bridge Reach."


Brown, a Free Agent, Wants to Stay Put
Bengals wide receiver EDDIE BROWN, just granted free-agent status, says he'll consider remaining in Cincinnati.
"Cincinnati is still in my heart," Brown said Friday after an arbitrator made him a free agent, ruling that an injury to his neck was football-related.


Independent Advice for the Little Guy Going to Market
Do companies need someone to look over their shoulders to make sure they are being treated fairly by the Wall Street firms that sell their stocks and bonds?
A handful of small firms -- all founded by investment bankers who used to work for Wall Street's largest firms -- are saying yes.
By positioning themselves as "pure" advisers to smaller companies, untainted by any self-interest in the selling or trading of their clients' securities, these firms have been carving out a niche.


Private (!) Lives
To the Sports Editor:
I, along with thousands of sports fans, feel that "Jordan's Atlantic City Caper" (The Times, May 27) stinks to high heaven.
Michael Jordan scored 36 points in the second playoff game against the New York Knicks, but the Bulls lost.


Alexandra Golby, Jonathan Zeitlin
Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph W. Golby of Peapack, N.J., and New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Alexandra Jacqueline Golby, to Jonathan Henry Zeitlin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald Zeitlin of Waban, Mass.
A June 1994 wedding is planned.
Ms.
Golby, 25, is a third-year medical student at Stanford University.
She and her fiance, 28, graduated cum laude from Yale University.
Her father is president and chief executive of the International Center in New York Inc., which helps newly arrived foreigners adjust to life in New York.
Her mother, Monique Golby, is an art dealer in New York.


Visionary Design for Berlin's Workers
BERLIN is a city of fierce, often exact contradictions.
It lies on a climatic fault line where westerly winds blowing off the North Sea meet dry winds blowing, reputedly, out of the Russian steppes.
People look out their windows into claustrophobic courtyards and then spend their weekends walking through vast, forestlike parks.
Architecturally, it is a city of confounding ugliness -- of once pompous prewar buildings with their now charred, or missing, or jarringly restored facades; of banal, poured-concrete apartments and office blocks on both sides of the former wall; of contemporary architectural experiments that can look like recent wounds surrounded by so many scars.
It is also a city of exquisite, if infrequent, beauty.
Karl Friedrich Schinkel's cool classicism, for instance.
And the inspired, often utopian innovations of the 1920's -- many influenced by Schinkel -- are often, even in their postwar, reconstructed versions, still exciting and surprising.
Schinkel's buildings, many of which are in the center of the city, are almost unavoidable, but the best examples of Weimar-era architecture are -- to my mind -- the great housing developments known as public-housing estates, or Gross-Siedlung.
They are all in the outer districts of town, but easily reached by subway.
The first to be constructed -- and, at the time, the most famous -- was the "horseshoe," or Hufeisen, estate, one section of the Gross-Siedlung Britz, in the working-class borough of Neukolln, southeast of the city center.
The Horseshoe Estate, built between 1925 and 1927, is so called because the focal point of its thousand or so dwellings is a horseshoe-shaped three-story apartment building.
Three streets of one-family houses surround the horseshoe, and the boundaries of the estate are bordered, for the most part, by three-story apartment houses.
Bruno Taut, Weimar Berlin's most productive architect, designed much of the project, including the horseshoe itself, but credit is also given to Martin Wagner, who designed the apartments on the estate's northern boundary.
Wagner, as a member of the building society that financed the construction and, later, as Berlin's chief city planner, was the driving force behind the city's 1920's housing revolution.


Data Bank/June 6, 1993


In the Deep Heart's Core
We have to first create a language," said Hillary R. Clinton to Michael Kelly of The New York Times in one of those eye-popping, seminal magaziners, "that would better communicate what we are trying to say, and the policies would flow from that language."
Language first, policy second; there's a woman who has her priorities straight.
Language mavens across the land are prepared to take a crash course in Hillaryese, centered on what the writer Michael Lerner has named "the politics of meaning."


MAY 30-JUNE 5: Masson Over Malcolm; The Libel Case Longer Than A New Yorker Series Grows
In 1991, after two lower court dismissals, the Supreme Court told Jeffrey M. Masson that he was entitled to a jury trial on his claim that he had been libeled by five fabricated quotations in a profile by Janet Malcolm in The New Yorker.
The flamboyant West Coast analyst got his trial in Federal court in San Francisco over the last month.
Last week a jury of seven women and one man found that all the disputed quotations were fabricated and defamatory and that two met the standards for libel of a public figure.
The magazine, the jury found, had done no wrong.


Irene M. Koch, Ronald Adelman
Irene Marci Koch, an associate at the New York law firm of Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher, was married last evening to Ronald Wolf Adelman, an associate at the law firm of Patterson, Belknap, Webb &amp; Tyler.
Rabbi Richard Jacobs performed the ceremony at the Fenway Golf Club in Scarsdale, N.Y.
Ms.
Koch, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Cornell University.
She and her husband received law degrees from Fordham University.
Ms.
Koch is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome S. Koch of Scarsdale.
Her father is a first vice president, in Scarsdale, for Gruntal &amp; Company, the investment firm.
Her mother, Judith Koch, is a vice president at Dudley D. Doernberg Real Estate in Scarsdale.


Data Update
*4*VALUE OF CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTS
*4*(Residential in millions of dollars)
Apr. 93
Apr. 92
Change
New York
298.5
350.8
- 15%
New Jersey
160.2
149.4
+ 7%
Connecticut
134.2
98.9
+ 36%
*4*Source: F.W. Dodge Division, McGraw-Hill Information
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.68
7.68
8.84
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.69
4.73
6.00
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.56
7.55
8.69
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.61
4.61
5.78
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.56
7.52
8.74
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.36
4.38
5.78
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.81
7.87
8.92
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.26
5.35
6.43
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.55
3.40
4.27
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.06
7.17
8.14
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


DENTAL COVERAGE URGED BY EXPERTS
As the nation ponders what to do for 37 million Americans who lack medical insurance, many health experts say it is also time to extend basic dental benefits to the 150 million Americans who lack such coverage.
That would be a break with tradition.
The last time the country passed sweeping health programs, in the mid-1960's, dentistry was all but ignored.
Medicare, the program for the elderly, provides no dental care while Medicaid, for the poor, offers only spotty and shrinking coverage.


Mutual Funds; Looking Ahead, Long and Hard
Some wrenching changes are ahead for the mutual fund industry, Prof.
Michael E. Porter of the Harvard Business School warned in the keynote address to more than 1,000 mutual fund executives gathered in Washington at the end of May for their annual meeting.
Some of these changes will come from the impending shakeout in an industry that, he said, has peaked -- or will soon do so.
Other changes will come as banks, with their own new offerings, continue to grab market share from mutual fund companies.
And others might come from the panicked reaction of first-time investors to a market correction or interest rate spike.


Lucy S. Waller, Charles J. Huebner
Lucy Sanford Waller, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William C. Waller of Montgomery, Ala., was married there yesterday to Charles John Huebner, the son of Charles A. Huebner of Budapest and Westport, Conn., and the late Suzan L. Huebner.
Msgr.
Thomas Driscoll performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Church.
The bride is a vice president in New York at Mase Westpac Ltd., a bank that specializes in lending to mining and exploration companies.
She graduated from Southern Methodist University and received an M.B.A. from George Washington University.


Freemasons Begin to Lift the Veil of Arcana
After years of being known as a reclusive, secretive society, the American Freemasons have begun to open the door to the public a little.
The reasons are simple: they have developed some important enemies and they are running out of members.
Because national membership has declined from 4.1 million in 1959 to an aging 2.4 million today, the fraternal order began a renewal campaign two years ago.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THE STORY OF MAY Written and illustrated by Mordicai Gerstein.
Unpaged.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $16. (Ages 5 to 9)


Courier vs. Bruguera: Baseline Battery
Who's afraid of Jim Courier, the flint-eyed, two-time defending champion of the French Open who is back on the doorstep of a record third straight title?
Let's start off with Sergi Bruguera, Courier's Grand Slam neophyte challenger in a finale that promises to be chock-full of the baseline battery that has gotten them both where they are.


2 Families Shattered by Bronx Shooting
They were two vivacious, bright-eyed boys who attended the same school and were in the same grade, but now their worlds have been ripped apart -- one of them dead and the other in the hospital with a bullet in his spine.
The two 7-year-old boys were victims caught in a fusillade between rival drug gangs during an exchange of more than 15 gunshots that sent many people scurrying for cover on Friday evening at a playground in the Castle Hill Houses in the Union Port section of the Bronx.


Louisiana State Women Take 7th Straight Title
Clare Eichner of Wisconsin completed a rare sweep of the middle-distance races at the National Collegiate Athletic Association championships, both indoors and out, when she won the 1,500 meters tonight.
But even that wasn't enough to keep Louisiana State from winning its seventh consecutive women's team title.
L.S.U. scored 93 points to more than double Wisconsin's second-place score of 44 points.


Ms. Cacavas, Mr. Scheitinger Jr.
Elena Cacavas, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George J. Cacavas of Buffalo, was married there yesterday to George J. Schietinger Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Schietinger of Hudson, Fla.
Msgr.
William J. Gallagher performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Joseph Cathedral.


In New Jersey Governor's Primary, Candidates Court Perot's Backers
Nearing the end of one of the most expensive and hard-fought primary races in New Jersey's history, the three major candidates for the Republican gubernatorial nomination began the final weekend of their campaigns here today, trying to woo voters who last year gave up on Republicans and Democrats alike: supporters of Ross Perot.
The outcome of not only the Republican primary on Tuesday, but also the general election against Gov.
Jim Florio in November, may hinge on the support the candidates attract from voters like those in Mr.
Perot's state organization, United We Stand America of New Jersey, and from the nearly two million undeclared voters who outnumber registered Democrats, Republicans and independents together.


Tech Notes; Virtual Habeas Corpus
In more and more of the nation's local court systems these days, prisoners are taking a high-tech journey to the courtroom without ever leaving jail.
In Brooklyn and Boston, Dallas and Oakland, and nearly two dozen other jurisdictions, videoconferencing equipment made by the Picturetel Corporation of Danvers, Mass., is being used to let prisoners face arraignment or meet with public defenders and probation officers.
Law enforcement officials find the setup especially useful at the Alameda County courthouse in Oakland, which has a telephone-line video link with the county jail in Santa Rita, more than 30 miles away.


Sports of The Times; Racing Can't Afford More Tragedies
HOW much more of this can racing take?
This is the visceral response after watching Prairie Bayou break down in the Belmont yesterday.
The horse was then "humanely destroyed," as they say in racing, and they say it a lot these days.


MAY 30-JUNE 5: Winnie Mandela Free; With an Uncertain Destiny, South Africa Has a Date For Universal Elections
South Africa may not know exactly what awaits it after apartheid, but now it knows when.
Most of the parties negotiating the end of white rule agreed last week that the country's first universal election will be next April 27.
The date -- provisional, but already on the country's psychological calendar -- should focus the minds of negotiators as they strive for consensus on just what kind of government the voters will be electing.


Charles Is Superb Despite a Soggy Day
Persistent rain and slight wind produced generally mediocre scores today in the second round of the $550,000 Nynex Commemorative.
But Bob Charles, who has had a number of remarkable rounds in winning this tournament twice, shot a four-under-par 66 on the 6,505-yard Sleepy Hollow Country Club course.
Charles had a share of the lead at four-under 136 with Chi Chi Rodriguez, who shot 70 this afternoon; Larry Gilbert, who carded 67, and Tom Aycock, who had 69.
Gilbert and Aycock are looking for their first Senior PGA Tour victories while Charles and Rodriguez have combined for 41, with 2 of the 20 by Charles coming this season.


INSIDE
Scars at the Trade Center
The World Trade Center bears few signs of the Feb. 26 explosion, but the emotional impact lingers.
Page 37.
Columbia Shake-Up Adopted
The university's trustees approved administrative changes urged by the incoming president.
Page 37.
Moscow Forum Is Disrupted
Russia's constitutional conference got off to an angry start as President Yeltsin's main rival stormed out after being denied the floor.
Page 16.


Krone and Colonial Affair Win Bittersweet Belmont
On a rainy day marred by the stunning swings of racing fortune, the star thoroughbred Prairie Bayou suffered a fractured foreleg and did not survive the Belmont Stakes yesterday while the long shot Colonial Affair was taking the race and Julie Krone was riding into history as the first woman to win any of the Triple Crown classics.
Female riders were 0 for 7 in the Classics, and Krone herself had not won in three previous Triple Crown appearances.
But she guided Colonial Affair through the homestretch to defeat Kissin Kris by two-and-a-quarter lengths in a race that saw four outsiders finish on top.


Sandra Levine and Bill Charlap
Sandra Lyn Levine, the daughter of Harry and Fran Levine of Livingston, N.J., was married last evening to Bill Charlap, a son of Sandy S. Triffon of Southampton, L.I., and the late Morris (Moose) Charlap.
Cantor Theodore Aronson officiated at the Cedar Hill Country Club in Livingston.
Mrs.
Charlap, 27, is a freelance ceramic artist and a decorative illustrator in New York.
She graduated from the Parsons School of Design.
Her father is a stockbroker in New York.


In the Region: Connecticut; Recent Sales
Barkhamstead, Conn.  $68,000
167 West Hill Road  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 70-year-old ranch; formal dining room, w/b stove, walk to beach, 1 acre; taxes $917.
Haddam, Conn.  $180,000
69 Church Hill Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 9-yar-old colonial; family room w/cathedral ceiling, sunken living room, 1 acre; taxes $1,730.
Torrington, Conn.  $82,000
280 Clearview Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 44-year-old ranch; deck, breakfast bar, 0.25 acre; taxes $1,758.
Mount Kisco, N.Y.  $200,000
98 St.
Mark's Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2 bath, 7-year-old raised ranch; entry hall, eat-in kitchen, unfinished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $4,383.
New Castle, N.Y.  $380,000
23 Woodmill Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 36-year-old ranch; family room, patio, fireplace, eat-in kitchen, 2-car garage; 1.5 acres; taxes $7,365.
Yonkers, N.Y.  $104,900
2 Bronxville Road  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 32-year-old co-op; foyer, terrace, modern kitchen, outdoor pool, parking space; maintenance, $573.
OTHER AREAS Dix Hills, L.I.  $370,000
5 Sugar Lane  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 29-year-old colonial; dining room, den, finished basement, pool, 1 acre; taxes $7,300.
East Islip, L.I.  $137,000
278 Overlook Drive  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 32-year-old colonial; dining room, fireplace, basement, 1-car attached garage; taxes $5,200.
New Milford, N.J.  $185,000
515 Ryeside Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 43-year-old Cape Cod; full basement, underground sprinkler system, 1-car garage; taxes $3,901.


The New-Politics Myth
The Lani Guinier embarrassment may end a central myth of the Administration -- that President Clinton would usher in an age of New Politics, with divisive choices of left and right merging in happy consensus.
News analysis, page 26.


Pamela S. Hise, Justin Sullivan
Mr. and Mrs.
Phillip W. Hise of Rochester have announced the engagement of their daughter, Pamela S. Hise, and Justin J. Sullivan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph P. Sullivan of New York.
A November wedding is planned.


Putting Lives Back Together After a Fire
AFTER fire ravaged a six-story cooperative apartment building here last month, Dean Fausty counted himself among the lucky ones.
He lost most of his possessions -- among them, furniture, clothing and photographs of his three children -- but he was able to return to the building to retrieve his 17-year-old daughter's prom dress and drive away in the 1990 red Thunderbird Super Coupe that he kept parked in the basement parking lot.
Sixty-two families were left homeless after the May 23 blaze, which started during the middle of the night in the cockloft between the roof and the top floor of the Country Club Cooperative, an elegant Tudor-style building at 68 East Hartsdale Avenue.
The roof and the sixth floor were heavily damaged by fire; other floors suffered severe water and smoke damage.
There were no sprinklers in the building, a factor that contributed to the fire's spread and the extent of the damage, officials said.
Staying in White Plains
Although all of the residents were evacuated safely, most left with little more than the clothes they were wearing.


SURFACING
NOVELTIES -- Miles Davis neckwear: Beware famous musicians who take up painting.
Their art work may eventually appear on silk neckties.
The tradition includes John Lennon, Jerry Garcia -- and now Miles Davis, whose ties make their debut at Bloomingdale's this week.
PARTYING -- And now, "Hetero Xtra"?: The publishers of Homo Xtra a popular weekly guide to New York club life for gay men and lesbians, has started one for "everyone else," called "It." Hardcore techno, retro-bohemian hip-hop, disco -- the guides have much in common.
STATUS -- Oak trees: Maybe it's a need for lots of shade.
Or a desire to import timeless elegance.
Sylvester Stallone, the socialite Mercedes Bass and other high-profile people of wealth are reportedly spending lots of money to transplant giant oak trees to their properties.


Q and A
Vikings in Newfoundland
Q.
Are there any organized tours of Newfoundland that would include a visit to the Viking settlement at L'Anse aux Meadows? -- Gail Morin, Peru, N.Y.


Correction
A response to a question in the Q &amp; A column on May 23 about a co-op board's rejection of a potential buyer without explanation referred incorrectly to the board's obligations.
A board is not obliged to give a reason for rejection.


Shouting Obscures Arts Agency's Good Work; Close the Endowment
To the Editor:
If President Clinton appoints a chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts who supports the "decency standard" passed by Congress, he or she will be opposed by the arts establishment.
But if Mr.
Clinton nominates someone who wants the Government to subsidize art that violates the mores of the average citizen, he will offend many voters.
"Waiting for the Appointment: Who Will Be the Arts Chief?" The Week in Review, May 23, advises Mr.
Clinton to go along with such subsidies because "the arts, like health and education, are a social good, and even if sometimes painful (insofar as they appear to be obscene to the public), they deserve to be supported by the Federal Government."


Dr. Zawaiza, Mr. Tanzersan
Dr.
Theda Ruth Wiles Zawaiza, a senior legislative analyst in Washington for Representative Major R. Owens, Democrat of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Bradford Tanzersan, a legal assistant in Washington.
The Rev.
Robert O. Simpson performed the ceremony at Janes United Methodist Church in Brooklyn.
Dr.
Zawaiza graduated from Colgate University and received a master's degree in education from the University of Southern California.
She received a Ph.D. in education from the University of California at Santa Barbara.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund T. Wiles of Brooklyn.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


For New Parents, a Golden Opportunity
"WE see people come in all the time with children on their laps. They're there to have us check their brakes, but they come in and the children are lying across the seat, not strapped in at all. They didn't even think about the child, but they're worried about their brakes!"
That is Sheila Schube talking in Maspeth, Queens, and she is the regional chairman of a helpful national program that has just come to New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.
Schube owns a Midas muffler shop in Maspeth, and like others who own the 1,800 Midas shops around the country, she is trying to save the children.


NEW CLUES FOUND IN FATAL ILLNESSES
Researchers sounded notably if guardedly optimistic today that they had indeed found the cause of a mysterious flu-like illness responsible for killing 11 and gravely sickening 7 others in New Mexico and Arizona.
When scientists announced Friday night that they believed the disease was caused by a rodent virus called hanta virus, they were hesitant and quick to caveat every word.
Today, the caveats had been cut roughly in half.
"It has not been conclusively confirmed, and there's a lot we do not know," Dr.
Fred Koster of the University of New Mexico Medical Center said at a news conference here today.
"But there's a very good possibility we're seeing the agent that could cause this type of syndrome."


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
107.73
107.30
126.85
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6265
1.5850
1.5915
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2793
1.2713
1.1920
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5090
1.5605
1.8320
U.S. Dollar
per British Pound
Gold
$376.30
$378.00
$338.40
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Where Thin-Crusted Pizza Is a Highlight
AT first sight, Al Forno Brick Oven Pizzeria and Ristorante in Old Saybrook looks like a typical pizzeria, with the cooks at work in the rear, pulling and tossing dough and extracting finished pies from the oven with long-handled peels.
A waiting line for seats and take-out orders forms at the right side of the room next to a long counter.
Alongside the closely spaced tables are auxiliary tables with huge trays of hot pizzas.
Even before opening the menu, one is aware of several touches that differentiate Al Forno from the usual no-frills pizzeria: the golden terra cotta tiles on the floor, the malachite green table tops, and the seven panels along one wall painted to resemble windows opening to a tranquil countryside that evokes Italy.
On each table is a dish of succulent black and green olives and chunks of focaccia.


In the Region: Connecticut; When Rivers Run Amok, Who's at Fault?
AT 5:30 A.M. last June 6 Laura and Richard Raynor were awakened in their second-floor bedroom by frantic phone calls from neighbors telling them to get out of the house before the Quinnipiac River rose any higher than the ground floor.
One neighbor had been awakened by strange noises from the furnace and realized that Garden Road, a new street of neat, year-old houses about 75 feet from the river, was under water.


The Man Who Reinvented the Louvre
By common consent, "The Century of Titian" at the Grand Palais is just about the most beautiful exhibition of European Old Master paintings and drawings that ever was put together.
There are two basic reasons for this.
One is that in the context of Titian and his precursors, friends, rivals, emulators and successors -- among them, Giovanni Bellini, Giorgione, Tintoretto and Veronese -- the show includes a remarkably high percentage of what everyone most wants to see.
No less important is the fact that the Grand Palais show, which continues through June 14, has not been dictated by some satrap of the seminar.
It is an unscripted encounter in which works of art never before brought together in such numbers are left free to sort themselves out.


The Executive Computer; It Wasn't as Easy as 1-2-3, but Lotus Has a Winner
LIKE Wayne Gretzky, Lotus 1-2-3 for Windows, Release 4, is emerging as a leading candidate for the Comeback of the Year award.
The impressive new version of the spreadsheet will reach stores later this month after having been previewed at the recent Spring/Comdex computer show in Atlanta.
Much easier to use than earlier versions of Lotus 1-2-3, this new version -- why don't we call it 1-2-3-4 -- adds features and powers that will be especially interesting for executives who frequently collaborate on financial plans with other workers.
The Lotus Development Corporation has long espoused the gospel of work-group computing, but 1-2-3-4 is the first clear example of how the concept can be applied to basic business applications.


The Executive Life; Learning Their Way Around the Beltway
ALTHOUGH its typical purpose is to tell government not to "help," a visit to Washington to lobby or give testimony is becoming one of the more memorable sidelights of being a high-tech C.E.O.
"Before this, the last time I was in the Capitol was in high school," says George Sollman, president and chief executive of Centigram Communications Inc. of San Jose, who began lobbying four years ago.
"It's a really overwhelming experience to sit at a table looking up at all those Senators and Congressmen."


Mad About the Boys
NOEL AND COLE The Sophisticates.
By Stephen Citron.
Illustrated. 360 pp.
New York:  Oxford University Press. $25.


Harkes, Accent and All, Back for Tourney
John Harkes, the pride of Kearny, N.J., rejoined the United States national soccer team this week to resuscitate his old mates in the U.S.
Cup '93 opener today against Brazil in New Haven.
Fresh from Britain, where he played a rangy midfield for Sheffield Wednesday of England's Premier League, Harkes was strangely disconnected from his American teammates at a reunion dinner at Liberty State Park in Jersey City, N.J., last Wednesday.
He spoke with a thick English accent.
He sported a neo-Old World haircut.
Harkes even strutted, somehow, like a British soccer player.


Whites May Decide Mayor In Multi-Ethnic Los Angeles
In its final days, the race for mayor of Los Angeles has become a slugging match whose closeness embodies the paradox of this multi-ethnic city where the white electorate has a disproportionately decisive voice.
The next mayor will confront immediate budgetary and public safety problems, and also long-term questions of the city's evolving ethnic identity, yet the campaign has been reduced to an exchange of name-calling, with neither candidate offering much in the way of a broad vision.


America's Art Treasures Go to Schools on Video
Schools as diverse as one in a detention center in Miami for children awaiting court action and another in a poor Brooklyn neighborhood were among 700 chosen by the National Gallery of Art to receive free copies of a laser video disk containing the gallery's entire collection of American painting and sculpture.
Ruth R. Perlin, the head of the gallery's education resources department, said that the schools were selected on the basis of proposals they made.


NOTES
The latest George Michael video has a piercing quality -- as in pierced lips and pierced noses.
Bellybuttons and eyebrows, too.
"We shot all these hip-hop rave kids at subway stations," said Marcus Nispel, 30, the video's German director.
"They are the guys who come up with style. They go to Woolworth's and the Salvation Army, and they make something out of it." Mr.
Nispel has interspersed these urban scenes with cartoon images that spoof popular products like Tide and Mr.
Clean.
"It's about how the marketing of these fashion trends went really, really fast," he said.
"How a trend comes out, and three months later it's a whole floor at Bloomingdale's."


Cause and Effect
To the Editor:
In your interview with Jose Rivera, "Another Playwright Confronts an Angel and the Apocalypse"  [ May 16 ] , Mr.
Rivera is quoted as saying, "We need to find new heroes and new myths for our society -- the old ones just aren't working. The God we know now is a right-wing, white male, corporate God, in whose world racism, sexism and political injustice are rampant. As the millennium nears, I am amazed these things are still valid."


With First Pick, Magic Having Interviews
The Orlando Magic screened another prospective No. 1 National Basketball Association draft pick Friday, interviewing Memphis State's 6-foot-8-inch all-America guard, ANFERNEE HARDAWAY.


Ecological Concern Inspires Architects
YOU, too, can have the house of your dreams.
Make it look like Grandma's, if that is your inclination, and show that you care about the earth and want to protect your health all at the same time.
Call it eco-design, sustainability, greening, environmental consciousness or any number of appelations, the concerns are the same and could not be more elementary to human need and well-being.
It simply adds up to fresh air, climate control and safety -- yours and the planet's.


Correction
The diagram with this column last Sunday included a misplaced black king.
It should have been on g8.


REPUBLICAN GAINS TEXAS SENATE SEAT
Kay Bailey Hutchison, the Texas State Treasurer and a Republican, was overwhelmingly elected to the United States Senate today after campaign in which she relentlessly focused on opposition to tax increases proposed by President Clinton.
Mrs.
Hutchison, a 49-year-old former state representative, easily defeated Bob Krueger, the Democrat who was appointed to the seat earlier this year by Gov.
Ann W. Richards after Lloyd Bentsen resigned to become Treasury Secretary.


HOW HOSTILE ARE YOU?
In the May 16 Letters column, Harriet Vane criticized our Hostility Quiz (Good Health, April 25) as meaningless because sometimes the circumstance, rather than the personality of the individual, is the cause of anger.
In our book "Anger Kills," we review the extensive research that has shown such tests to predict increased death rates in large groups of people.
Nevertheless, Vane does make a valid point: not everyone is temperamentally suited to rating himself using questionnaires.


An Orthodontist With a Sideline


'This Town Will Die Without Our School'
THIS Union County borough is a self-contained place.
Most of its 7,574 residents are employed nearby and shop in the strip of stores along Kenilworth Boulevard.
"It's the kind of town where you're born, you go to school, get married, raise a family and die," said Janet Glynos, a Kenilworth native.
Now, forces inside and outside the community have combined to endanger its way of life.
Since 1970, the population has declined by almost 1,600 people.
A new shopping center and supermarket are going up on one end of town, threatening the downtown businesses.
And David Brearley Regional High School, which Charles Vitale, a former school board president, calls "the social and civic hub of the town," is scheduled to be closed at the end of the 1993 school year.


When All Roads Lead to Your Sofa
SUMMER is coming.
It's in the air, on the street, in the loafers and in the hemlines.
Summer is coming to Rome, and the prospect is terrifying, because when summer comes, so do visitors.
I'm not talking about the Mom, Pop and old-fishing-buddy kind, but the kind who reincarnate dead acquaintanceships as true bondings once they discover your address is no longer a cobwebbed mailbox in some place even Indiana Jones wouldn't visit, but Rome, magical Rome, where the hotels are costly -- and doesn't old so-and-so live there now?
Since moving to Rome, I have discovered what seems to be the guiding principle of the world's floating population of unsolicited visitors: the popularity of the potential host rises in direct proportion to his or her proximity to the Pantheon.


A New Generation on Old Broadway
"All About Eve," the smartest movie ever made about Broadway, begins and ends with a glamorous awards ceremony at which decorous theater people speak fondly of their art and one another while accepting trophies and preening for the cameras.
During the two hours of flashback that come in between, the characters, including a dyspeptic drama critic, are revealed as a bunch of back-stabbing schemers at worst and childlike dreamers at best.
When the Broadway of "All About Eve" gives birth to a prize-winning performance or play, it does so despite its own denizens' mean-spiritedness and whimsical artistic instincts.
Much about the street has changed beyond recognition since 1950, the year Joseph L. Mankiewicz's masterpiece was sent forth by Hollywood.
Not even Addison DeWitt, the critic in "All About Eve," could have foreseen a season like that of 1992-93 in which two hits (one of them starring an extant sensation of the 1950's, Chita Rivera) offer uncloseted gay protagonists and onstage scenes of simulated defecation.
Nor could anyone have predicted 40 years ago that Broadway's rate of production would slow to a trickle by the 1990's -- from 60 productions as late as the 1980-81 season to only 32 this season -- or that most important new American dramas would only play Broadway as if it were another stop on the road or even bypass Broadway entirely.


From the Ancient To the Experimental
THIS week and the next will be busy ones for New York numismatists.
Three companies have scheduled auctions, and Sotheby's starts the whirl on Thursday with its auction of United States and foreign coins.
The offerings include a Brilliant Proof 1879 Flowing Hair Stella, a $4 gold piece.
Stellas are among the rarest of the experimental United States coins, with only about 25 of the original Flowing Hair variety struck.
Another 400 were struck later, but to date there is no way to tell the originals from the restrikes.


Brotherly Love Goes Down for the Count
KUSUO EGUCHI stopped his younger brother KATSUAKI in the sixth round of the scheduled 10-round bout yesterday to win the Japan strawweight title in Japan's first brother-brother title bout.
The referee stopped the bout at 2 minutes 12 seconds of the sixth round when Kusuo punished Katsuaki with right and left combinations and a left uppercut.
Kusuo knocked down Katsuaki in the first round and was floored by his younger brother in the second round.
Both entered pro boxing in 1989.
Kusuo was Japan's top-ranked strawweight, and Katsuaki was ranked No. 3.
Kusuo, 24, and Katsuaki, 22, come from a family of 10 brothers and 4 sisters. (AP)


The Beach Is for Bikers
A seaside bicycle ride beneath the stars: a remarkably wholesome concept in a city famed for its sex appeal.
Who could have imagined six months ago that three bikers would unwittingly launch a phenomenon of city spirit?
Back in December, it all seemed so simple.
Marina Beserra, Roberto Braga and Sergio Guimaraes invited a few friends to take a nighttime bike ride along the beach.
The next week, those friends asked a few more friends, and now their number is in the thousands.
The Tuesday-night traffic is a municipal concern, and a giddy euphoria is in the air as Rio de Janeiro's besieged middle class claims back the night.


Health Car, The Job Builder
Health care is a contentious topic these days, but one thing's indisputable: It grows jobs.
About a week ago, the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics announced that health care, already New York City's largest employer in 1989, has added tens of thousands of new jobs in the city since then.


The Focus Is on Delmore Schwartz
To the Editor:
I appreciate the favorable review by Michael Milburn of my edition of "Delmore Schwartz and James Laughlin: Selected Letters" (May 9).
Mr.
Milburn expressed some concern about the "imbalance" of the number of letters by Schwartz versus those by Laughlin.


AIDS and a Dentist's Secrets
FOR three years, medical sleuths have been trying to figure out how Dr.
David J. Acer, a Florida dentist, infected six of his patients with the AIDS virus.
But they are stumped, and the case has become one of the most disturbing unsolved mysteries in the annals of medicine.
Now, some are asking whether it should be considered a murder mystery.


Off-Duty Officer Shot
An off-duty police officer was shot in Staten Island yesterday as an assailant robbed him outside a bank, the police said.
The officer, Detective Dominick Trancucci, 42, was approaching the Gateway State Bank on Forest Avenue about 5:30 P.M. to deposit about $2,000 into the bank's drop slot when he was accosted by a man carrying a handgun, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.
Detective Trancucci struggled for the gun, said Sergeant McCluskey, and was shot in his left shoulder.
Detective Trancucci, a 19-year veteran of the police force, was taken to St.
Vincent's Hospital in Staten Island, where he was listed in stable condition last night, said Sergeant McCluskey.
His assailant fled with the cash.


POSTINGS: Mount Morris Bank; Guaranteeing Integrity For a Harlem Landmark
Acknowledging that the 110-year-old Mount Morris Bank Building at Park Avenue and 125th Street had suffered more than a decade as a vacant hulk, the Landmarks Preservation Commission designated it anyway last January, saying that it had kept its "architectural integrity to a surprisingly high degree."
But before she would vote to sustain the landmark designation, Councilwoman C. Virginia Fields wanted assurances that the city, which has owned the building since 1972, would insure its physical survival until a buyer or new use could be found.
Most urgent, she said, was the closing of the open roof and windows.


Sports of The Times; Knicks Must Endure A Short Cold Summer
When the buzzer ended the Knicks' quest Friday night in the disco din of Chicago Stadium, their short cold summer began.
It's time to pay more attention to the Yankees and the Mets, to think about the Giants and Jets training camps, to await the United States Open in both golf and tennis.
But it won't be that easy to forget the long, hot basketball season.
Not so much the 96-88 loss to the Bulls here Friday night, but the 97-94 loss at Madison Square Garden on Wednesday night, when the Knicks missed 15 free throws, when Charles Smith couldn't get through the spiderweb of arms above him in the final seconds.


Bach Is on Several Programs Today
THE music of Bach figures prominently in several concerts today.
The Master Singers of Westchester under Les Robinson Hadsell will perform the "B minor Mass" at 3 P.M. at the Fox Lane School in Bedford.
The number to call for more details is 234-6535.
Also today, at 4 P.M., in Trinity Episcopal Church in Ossining, Don Kerr plays Bach's "G major Fantasy" on the organ and Bach's "French Suite in B minor" on the harpsichord.
Two sonatas, Mendelssohn's in C minor for organ, and Mozart's in C major, K. 279, for harpsichord, are also on the program.
For further details, the number to call is 941-0806.


'There Is A Third Choice'
To the Editor:
As president of the International Design Conference in Aspen, I was saddened to read Herbert Muschamp's essay "Rocky Mountain Low: Aspen's Design Conference"  [ May 16 ] .
He makes the assumption that there can be only two responses to a human-rights problem such as Colorado's Amendment 2: wholehearted endorsement or boycott.
We believe there is a third choice.
The civil-rights movement of the 1950's and 60's in the American South represents a viable alternative for changing unjust laws.
While boycotts were a part of the movement, they were used selectively, against those directly responsible for discrimination.
The movement's primary focus was change through communication, education and voter registration.


Susannah Hunnewell, Antonio Weiss
Susannah Hunnewell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis Oakes Hunnewell of Wellesley, Mass., was married yesterday in Boston to Antonio Francesco Weiss, the son of Carole Severson-Weiss of New York and Piero E. Weiss of Baltimore.
The Rev.
Peter J. Gomes performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church.
Ms.
Hunnewell, 26, is a news clerk at The New York Times Magazine.
She is a graduate of Harvard University, where her husband is studying for an M.B.A.
Her mother, Elizabeth M. Hunnewell, is a freelance writer.
Her father is president of Oakes, Woodward &amp; Company, investment bankers in Boston.


Beth Callahan, Christopher Fusco
Beth Ann Callahan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward M. Callahan Jr. of Glen Ridge, N.J., was married yesterday to Christopher G. Fusco, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew Fusco of Stony Brook, L.I.
Msgr.
Harold Darcy performed the ceremony at the Immaculate Conception Chapel at Seton Hall University in South Orange, N.J.
Ms.
Callahan, who is keeping her name, is a clerk for Judge Richard Newman of State Superior Court in Newark.
She and her husband graduated from the Catholic University of America, where he also received a law degree.
She received a law degree from Seton Hall.


Update; An Agreement Is Reached Over Jamaica Bay Wetlands
After two years of legal battles, state officials have reached an agreement with the residents of Broad Channel, Queens, that allows them to keep the decks, docks and bulkheads they have built over the legally protected tidal wetlands of Jamaica Bay.
Under the compromise, concluded on Friday, the state's Department of Environmental Conservation said it would lift or reduce most of the fines imposed against dozens of residents for violating a rarely enforced law protecting the fragile wetlands.


In Decade of Study, Few Gains on AIDS
With more than 14 million people worldwide infected with the virus that causes AIDS and the disease spreading at an alarming rate, scientists are heading into the ninth international meeting on AIDS this weekend in Berlin seeking a breakthrough.
But after a decade of research that has yielded neither a cure nor a vaccine, it appears that they will leave with few answers for the many questions about the virus that causes AIDS and the course of the disease.
Article, page 20.


Using Taxation In a Good Cause Often Backfires
RESIDENT CLINTON has given his proposed energy tax a healthy environmental twist: he wants to tax some "dirty" fuels such as oil to the hilt, but he would exempt "green" sources of energy, like solar and wind power and the burning of garbage to generate electricty, from any tax at all.
The Government gets $72 billion over five years; pollution gets pummeled.
Who could resist?
Try environmentalists.
Every year, paper recyclers pulp and press nearly 40 million tons of would-be trash into cardboard, fiberboard, auto dashboards, egg cartons and so on.
The profit margin is, well, paper thin.
A tax break for garbage burning, the recyclers fear, could eliminate it.


Black Lobby Group to Include Foreign Policy
With a celebration more reminiscent of a movie premiere than a staid research group, TransAfrica, the lobby best known for its anti-apartheid campaign, opened its foreign policy institute here this weekend.
In a city with dozens of research institutes offering intellectual grist for everything from urban policy to the arcana of international affairs, another "think tank" would seem superfluous.


Geraniums With That Continental Flair
FEW summer flowers do the yeomen work of geraniums.
These sturdy plants combine well with other summertime flowers for bright displays in window boxes.
Geraniums decorate tubs on the patio, and they provide bright accent color in borders where needed.
Geranium plants are rugged, too, and will survive the first blasts of cool weather.
They keep on flowering until truly deep freezes finish them off.
Each year sees brighter flower colors, stronger foliage and stems and unusual variety in geranium forms.


'Indie' Rock Settles Into the Executive Suite
Jim Dunbar doesn't come across as a typical music industry bigwig.
Instead of a business suit, he's likely to wear worn-out jeans, a T-shirt and a black leather jacket to work.
He doesn't talk numbers or profits, and he doesn't hype, but he tends to launch into long, elaborate yarns about how he was once suspended from his job as a disk jockey for not letting the D.J. after him onto the air.
Mr.
Dunbar's idea of a high-powered lunch spot is Prime Burger, a crazy old 40's-style diner in midtown Manhattan, where swinging table-trays are attached to the chair arms and red meat for two (including fries on the side) comes in at well under $20.
As an A &amp; R (artists and repertory) executive at Columbia, Mr.
Dunbar is responsible for recruiting hip, challenging and (it is hoped) potentially profitable young bands to the label.
His biggest assets for the job, he says, are his long, stringy hair hanging down almost to his waist and his thick, uncombed beard.
Grabbing a fistful of locks, he grins and says: "This is my coat and tie. I can walk into any club in the world and go backstage and start rapping with the band. They're not afraid of me, because I look like one of them."


Eileen Weiler, Robert Judell
Eileen Weiler, a reading specialist at the Chapin School, was married on Wednesday to Robert Buchman Judell, the president and chief executive of James Thompson &amp; Company, textile manufacturers.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi David M. Posner performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El in New York.


Lisa R. Ianuzi, Charles Samkoff
Lisa Renee Ianuzi, the associate graphic director of men's design at the Polo/Ralph Lauren Corporation in New York, was married last evening to Charles Bruce Samkoff, an associate in corporate finance at Rothschild Inc., the investment banking company in New York.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel and the Rev.
Johanna Johanson, an Episcopal minister, jointly performed the ceremony at the Stouffer Westchester Hotel in White Plains.
Mrs.
Samkoff, 26, graduated from the University of Denver, as did her husband.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
Anthony Nicoletti and James B. Ianuzi, both of Syracuse.


Woman Is Voted Vermont's Episcopal Bishop
The Rev.
MaryAdelia R. McLeod of West Virginia was elected today to serve as bishop of the Episcopal Diocese of Vermont, making her the first woman in the nation, and the second in the world, to hold the office of diocesan bishop.
Bishop-elect McLeod, 54 years old, was elected on the third round of balloting by both the clergy and the laity at a special convention in Burlington.


POSTINGS: East 59th Reincarnation; Tenement To Town House
Take a walk along 59th Street, east of First Avenue, check out the neo-Colonial town house at No. 440, and you might think the building belongs in a historic district.
Well, the nearest such district is blocks away, and the building's facade dates from 1993.
The building is the new home of Zoheir and Azita Aghravi and their three children.
Looking for a larger apartment, and contemplating a resettlement in the suburbs, Mrs.
Aghravi, a broker with Eastern Consolidated Properties, found a listing for a late-19th-century tenement building.


Miss Fowlkes And Mr. Moon
Mr. and Mrs.
George Allen Fowlkes of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Elizabeth Spencer Fowlkes to James Graham Moon, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Derek J. Moon of London.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Fowlkes graduated from Denison University.
She is a caterer in New York and Nantucket, Mass.
Her father, a real estate investor in New York, is the president of the Episcopal Church Foundation and a trustee of the Episcopal Diocese of New York.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
HORSEMAN OF THE YEAR
County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke will acquire the title "Horseman of the Year" today, to be bestowed on him during ceremonies at 10 A.M. at the North Ridge Equestrian Center, 960 California Road in Eastchester.


Evelyn Patterson, Mike Donatelli
Evelyn Byrd Patterson, a daughter of the Rev.
Dr. and Mrs.
W.
Brown Patterson of Sewanee, Tenn., was married there yesterday to Mike Marcus Donatelli, a son of Sophia Vetter of Buffalo and Hugo Donatelli of St.
Petersburg, Fla.
The bride's father, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony at the Otey Memorial Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Donatelli, 30, is an administrative assistant with the Robert Lehman Collection at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received a master's degree in art history from the University of Virginia.


Della Robbia Bar
To the Editor:
For the record, several errors in your Streetscapes article of April 4 on the Della Robbia Bar need correction.


Geraniums With That Continental Flair
FEW summer flowers do the yeomen work of geraniums.
These sturdy plants combine well with other summertime flowers for bright displays in window boxes.
Geraniums decorate tubs on the patio, and they provide bright accent color in borders where needed.
Geranium plants are rugged, too, and will survive the first blasts of cool weather.
They keep on flowering until truly deep freezes finish them off.
Each year sees brighter flower colors, stronger foliage and stems and unusual variety in geranium forms.


Tap Water in Bottles
To the Editor:
A May 20 article finds the word "tacky" indispensable and proceeds to give and grade numerous examples of tackiness.
I must take exception to one of these snide illustrations: filling empty bottles of Evian and other brands of bottled water with New York City tap water.
I fill bottles with tap water, but assure you it's not because I want people to think I drink Evian.
I do it because I drink tap water and sometimes want to carry it with me.


Lyme Center Expands Its Hours
TO treat the more than 3,000 new cases of Lyme disease expected in Westchester this year and head off the debilitating complications that often accompany the later stages of the illness, the County Medical Center here has expanded the hours of its Lyme Disease Diagnostic Center.
Since the center opened four years ago, it has evaluated more than 7,000 county residents who suspected they had contracted Lyme disease, with more than half testing positive, said Dr.
Gary P. Wormser, the center's director.


Nepalese Refugees Say Bhutan Forced Them Out
Tens of thousands of people of Nepalese origin have left this remote Himalayan kingdom, many of them accusing Bhutanese officials of driving them out.
Bhutan says many of the migrants were illegal settlers who were identified in a census a few years ago.
The migrants now live in crowded refugee camps in Nepal and with friends and relatives in neighboring India.


THE TELEPHONE TRANSFORMED
Gleick fails to discuss one fundamental caveat of all this seductive information technology: not everyone can afford the computer, the modem and software that allows the vital connection to the electronic highways.
Given that we are becoming an information society, this privation may further stratify the population.
Instead of focusing on the private consumption of electronic information at home or in the office, the Government should work with the private sector to create a network of public facilities where access to electronic information is available to all.


In New Jersey Governor's Primary, Candidates Court Perot's Backers
Nearing the end of one of the most expensive and hard-fought primary races in New Jersey's history, the three major candidates for the Republican gubernatorial nomination began the final weekend of their campaigns here today, trying to woo voters who last year gave up on Republicans and Democrats alike: supporters of Ross Perot.
The outcome of not only the Republican primary on Tuesday, but also the general election against Gov.
Jim Florio in November, may hinge on the support the candidates attract from voters like those in Mr.
Perot's state organization, United We Stand America of New Jersey, and from the nearly two million undeclared voters who outnumber registered Democrats, Republicans and independents together.


Jodi Lynn Roth, A. J. Wasserstein
Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Roth of Fair Lawn, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Jodi Lynn Roth to Adam J. Wasserstein, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin Wasserstein of New York and New Preston, Conn.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Roth, 26, is a graduate of Tufts University and a candidate for a master's degree in public and private management at Yale University.
Her father is a certified public accountant in Hackensack, N.J.
Her mother, Barbara Roth, is a sales associate at the Nordstrom department store in Paramus, N.J.


P. A. Butkiewicz, David B. Parsons
Patricia Ann Butkiewicz, a vice president in the capital markets group at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York, was married yesterday to David Barclay Parsons, a vice president in the liability management group at Lehman Brothers, also in New York.
The Rev.
Richard Nielson performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of Our Savior in New York.
Mrs.
Parsons, 32, graduated from Barnard College and received an M.B.A. from Northwestern University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John V. Butkiewicz of Newport News, Va.
Her father is a surgeon in Hampton, Va.
Her mother, Isabella Butkiewicz, who is retired, was a nurse in Lexington, Mass.


The First Priority Should Be Safety
To the Editor:
The road to "condom comfort" has been long and fraught with struggle.
Everyone is familiar with the old and worn complaints: "It feels like taking a shower in a plastic bag!" or "I can't feel anything," and of course, "It ruins the mood." With a lot of help from various places, women and men of the 90's feel more confident about purchasing and using condoms.
And the market has responded by making those condoms both more effective and more comfortable (for both parties).
In light of this struggle, Elizabeth Kaye's article on the new female condom would seem a large step in the wrong direction.


Challenge of Replacing Old Foundation Sills
OWNERS of older, neglected or poorly built houses and outbuildings, especially in rural or wet locations, often face the problem of replacing decayed foundation sills, the horizontal beams separating the framing of the building from the foundation walls.
Replacing the sills is seldom a job for amateurs, but doing so on a detached garage, shed or small barn makes a challenging, if strenuous, project.
Two helpful books before before starting the job are "Renovating Old Houses" by George Nash (Taunton Press, 1992) and "Renovation: A Complete Guide" by Michael W. Litchfield (Prentice Hall, 1991).
A useful article on sills was in The Journal of Light Construction in October.
The magazine may be available in libraries, or readers can call (802) 434-4747.


Alfresco Dining, Mediterranean Style
WHEN Ed Brown, who is the executive chef at Tropica, the Manhattan seafood restaurant, catered the wedding last year of Pierre Franey's son Jacques to Trish Cancalosi on the beach in East Hampton, he prepared a spectacular outdoor meal for 200 guests.
But instead of making stews and casseroles to be reheated, everything was either cooked on the spot or served at room temperature.
To do this, he brought along a convoy of chefs from Manhattan who had worked through the night to prepare the meal.
"I went for the Provencal style," he said.
"I chose the sort of things you see on the Cote d'Azur, in Tuscany or Tunisia: roast vegetables, grains, herbs, olives, oil, garlic -- boldly, highly seasoned food." While an army of chefs may have been needed to put together the food for the wedding, the individual dishes are simple enough for the home cook to prepare with ease.
They are great for a summer picnic or outdoor meal on a warm day.


Dispute Slows an Inquiry on Crown Heights, Letters Show
A Federal investigation into whether the civil rights of Hasidic Jews were violated in the 1991 Crown Heights violence has been delayed by a dispute between officials at the Justice Department and the lawyer for the Hasidim, letters between the parties show.
The primary focus of the dispute involves the lawyer's charge that the Justice Department has not been vigorously pursuing the seven-month- old criminal investigation, and the department's countercharge that its inquiry has been slowed by the failure of the Hasidim's lawyer to have his clients provide details of what they contend are civil rights violations.


Baby Bull's Baby Signs With the Royals
ORLANDO CEPEDA's son will try to pick up where his famous father left off, now that the Kansas City Royals have signed him to his first professional baseball contract.
The Royals, with whom his father closed his career in 1974, drafted MALCOLM CEPEDA, 20, in the 13th round on the first day of baseball's amateur draft.
The younger Cepeda, who played first base this season for Solano Community College and had a .410 batting average, signed within 24 hours of his selection Thursday.


Does Vitamin E Keep Hair From Graying?
To the Editor:
Your May 20 article on Vitamin E calls the new studies some of the first to find large-dose vitamin supplements beneficial.
In 1958, Devin-Adair, my husband's company, published "90 Days to a Better Heart" by John Loughran.
Chapter 16, "The Amazing Vitamin E," mentions Canadian doctors who found vitamin E beneficial in 80 percent of cases.
Why are our doctors so reluctant to accept the value of vitamins, considering how many are removed from our processed foods?
JOAN GARRITY  Pound Ridge, N.Y., May 25, 1993


Amy R. Rothenberg, Michael E. Klein
Amy Rand Rothenberg, a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Sylvan Glen Rothenberg of Wayne, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael Eliot Klein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Klein of Valley Stream, L.I.
Rabbi Morris S. Friedman officiated at the Fair Lawn (N.J.) Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Klein is a teacher at the Rosa Parks School of Fine and Performing Arts in Paterson, N.J.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is a State Superior Court judge in Paterson.


Treasury Schedule for Week Includes Only Bill Auction
The schedule of Treasury financings this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
By the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.10 percent; the rate on a six-month bill was 3.27 percent.


Essay; Cheer Up, Europe
Europe is entering the third millennium the same way it entered the second -- with the Christians kicking the Muslims out.
Many civilized Europeans are troubled by their New Barbarism.
They are embarrassed at the way Turkish workers, denied citizenship, are being harassed in a Germany still arrogant about ethnic purity.


'Spider Woman' and 'Angels' Win Top Honors in Tony Awards
"Kiss of the Spider Woman," the musical adaptation of Manuel Puig's novel about a gay window dresser and a straight Marxist guerrilla who are imprisoned together in a Latin American jail, was the big winner at the Tony Awards presentation last night, with seven awards, including best musical of the 1992-93 season.
"Angels in America: Millennium Approaches," the first installment of Tony Kushner's two-play epic that uses AIDS as a metaphor for a national spiritual decline in the 1980's, won four awards, including best play, best director of a play, and best leading actor and featured actor in a play.


Accounts
*
Blue Shield of California, San Francisco, to Mandelbaum Mooney Ashley, San Francisco, for its creative and media account, previously at Coleman &amp; Christison, San Francisco.
Mandelbaum Mooney was awarded the account, with billings of $12 million, after a review that included Coleman and 10 other agencies.


Interactive TV Alliance Is Formed
Kaleida Labs Inc., Motorola Inc. and Scientific-Atlanta Inc. said today that they had agreed to develop jointly the software and hardware for delivering interactive and multimedia services to homes through cable television networks.
Scientific-Atlanta had previously been identified as the supplier of set-top control boxes for an experimental interactive cable operation which Time Warner Inc. has planned for Orlando, Fla.


Call New C.C.N.Y. President a Scholar and Skilled Politician
To the Editor:
Your portrayal of Dr.
Yolanda T. Moses, newly appointed president of City College (news article, May 25), reinforces gender- and race-based stereotypes that many of us in the academy are struggling to dismantle.
I was dismayed by your value-laden slant, making Dr.
Moses appear an affirmative action appointment.


First-Inning Hole Is Just Too Deep For Yankees
The hole was massive.
Five Rangers had batted in the first, four had already scored and Melido Perez was dumbfounded on the mound.
The Yankees rarely score runs for him.
How were they going to save him from this 4-0 ditch?
It was a pertinent question and the answer was provided eight innings later because Perez's early disintegration proved too much for the Yankees to overcome.
The Yankees picked and prodded at Kenny Rogers and Perez did calm down and pitch six shutout innings, but the offensive explosion in the first was enough to carry the Rangers to a 4-3 victory last night at Arlington Stadium.


CHRONICLE
At the Opera Ball in Washington the other evening, things began with the skirl of bagpipes at the host embassy.
The odd thing was that the embassy was that of Canada, and the chief piper was the Canadian Ambassador, JOHN DE CHASTELAIN.
"I've had many distinctions, but I've never been piped in by an ambassador before," said MARTIN FEINSTEIN, general director of the Washington Opera, the ball's beneficiary.


Mexico's Currency Problem: Pockets Full of Pesos
Money is causing a problem here. There is too much of it.
Since January, when Mexico decided to slice three zeros from all its denominations and issue new coins and bills, the country has been operating with two systems of money, old pesos and new pesos.
If the 11 bills and 13 coins in circulation were not enough, a new 20-peso coin, worth about $6.60, will be introduced on Monday.


CHRONICLE
Another cross-cultural tale was told by a guest, SENATOR PATRICK J. LEAHY, the Vermont Democrat, who said he inherited his love of opera from his Italian immigrant grandfather who years ago encouraged him (or more accurately, required him) to listen to recordings by Caruso and other classical music on the radio.


Sarah A. Abram, Arthur D. Chabon
Sarah Abbott Abram, a daughter of Dr.
Mary Abram Stockard of Nashville and the late Dr.
Harry S. Abram, was married yesterday to Arthur David Chabon, the son of Dr.
Ada Chabon Stenger of New York and the late Dr.
Irwin Chabon.
Rabbi Randall Falk performed the ceremony at Congregation Ohabai Sholom in Nashville.


P. E. Hoffman, 84, Lawyer Who Held Post on U.N. Panel
Philip E. Hoffman, a lawyer who was a former United States Representative to the United Nations Human Rights Commission and a former national president of the American Jewish Committee, died yesterday in a nursing home in Livingston, N.J.
He was 84 and lived in Verona, N.J.
He died of cancer, his famiy said.


Take My Players, Please, Harazin Says
The sweep was complete, and so the Astrodome scoreboard flashed the cartoon broom.
Al Harazin, the general manager of the Mets, absorbed the indignity and adjourned to the clubhouse.
Staring at the floor after today's 5-4 defeat to the Astros, Harazin had a different sort of broom very much on his mind.
A sweeping of the roster could begin within the week.


Script Disapproval: Kings Complain, but Fault Lies With Actors
The scene of the Stanley Cup finals has changed, from Forum to Forum, but the script has stayed the same: The Los Angeles Kings play well, get the worst of a referee's decision, lose in overtime and complain.
That was the situation here Saturday night when the Kings lost to the Montreal Canadiens, 4-3.
Montreal now holds a 2-1 lead in the four-of-seven-game championship round, which resumes here Monday night.


Woman in the News; From Demure Survivor to G.O.P. Star
Kay Bailey, one of seven women among the 236 graduates in the 1967 class at the University of Texas Law School, says she found herself shut out when she applied for work in the male-dominated world of Houston's law firms.
On a whim, she went by KPRC-TV here one day to check into a reporting job.
The news director at the time, Ray Miller, impressed with both her assurance and her cheerfulness, hired Miss Bailey and sent her back to Austin, to cover the equally male-dominated world of the State Legislature.


House of a Different Color Is Shunned
Four years ago, Lee Jones climbed a ladder and started painting his house a light but distinct shade of purple in a cul-de-sac of beige and gray.
It was an unusual color for English Hill, a development of two-story homes east of Seattle where a standard of esthetic fussiness is strictly enforced.
But mauve with deep purple trim -- combined with just a hint of teal around the windows -- became the new color of the Joneses' home, despite objections from the board that represents the development's homeowners.
The family's defiant attempt to stay with their color combination set off a fight that went from the forested refuge of suburbia to King County Superior Court in Seattle.


Energy Tax Puts Senator In Tough Spot
Senator John B. Breaux once joked that his vote could not be bought but that "it can be rented."
That was during the Reagan era, when the Louisiana Democrat was a lowly backbench Congressman unabashedly seeking sugar subsidies for his farm constituents.


Dance in Review
"My Father Is a Tree"
Mark DeGarmo and Dancers St. Mark's Church
"My Father Is a Tree," declared the title of the new work that Mark DeGarmo and Dancers presented on Friday night as part of the Events series.
Mr.
DeGarmo explained in a program note that after his father died, a tree had been planted in his memory and that in his five-part dance he wished to explore themes of renewal and healing.


In TV Sale, Mexico Seeks to Create a Rival to Mighty Televisa
Each night when they tune in the news, most Mexicans see a country run by dedicated public servants.
There is little sign of corruption, and political opposition is rarely seen.
And that is on the channels not run by the Government.
As an award for its unwavering political support, successive Mexican Governments have allowed privately owned Televisa virtual monopoly control over the airwaves.
More than 90 percent of the country's television audience can be watching one of Televisa's four channels at a given time.
Two state networks struggle to hold the rest.
Between its television and radio stations, magazines, newspapers and billboards, Televisa collects an estimated three-quarters of all advertising spending in Mexico.


Review/Dance; Friendship's Lyricism, On Stage and in Life
Everyone seemed a friend of the entire human race at "Dancers and Friends 2," the second annual benefit for Friends in Deed on Thursday night at the Joyce Theater.
Friends in Deed, an organization founded in 1991, is dedicated to providing support to people affected by life-threatening illnesses, primarily AIDS and cancer.
It was therefore appropriate that friendship was often a theme of this program, in which a remarkable array of ballet and modern dancers took part.
Alessandra Ferri and Julio Bocca, of American Ballet Theater, got on wonderfully together in George Balanchine's lighthearted "Tchaikovsky Pas de Deux," which they danced with ebullient bravura.


CHRONICLE
Four doctors and scientists whose discoveries have advanced the treatment of cancer were named yesterday as this year's winners of the 15th annual General Motors Cancer Research Foundation Prizes.
One winner, DR.
BERNARD FISHER of the University of Pittsburgh, was the principal author of a study published on Thursday by The New England Journal of Medicine that showed a form of breast cancer, intraductal carcinoma, which has often been treated by full mastectomies, can safely be treated less invasively with lumpectomy and radiation therapy.


Age of 5 Can Be Like 65, So Strike the Gold Retires
Strike the Gold, who won the Kentucky Derby in 1991 and became a kind of racing folk hero as he lost his next 12 starts and then rebounded, was retired at the age of 5 yesterday with ruffles and flourishes for a career of 31 races, $3.4 million in purses and many late dashes through the homestretch.
"With the accumulating wear and tear over the years," said his trainer, Nick Zito, "it looks like Strike the Gold has run his last race. He made every dance. He just can't go on anymore."


1,550 Degrees at Staten Island
Former Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro addressed the 17th annual commencement ceremony of the College of Staten Island yesterday.
More than 1,550 degrees were conferred by the school, which is a senior college of the City University of New York.
It was the last ceremony on the Sunnyside campus.
The school is moving to a new campus at the site of the old Willowbrook hospital next fall.


SMUGGLED TO NEW YORK: The Immigrants -- 7 Die as Crowded Immigrant Ship Grounds Off Queens; One Failed Voyage Illustrates Flow of Chinese Immigration
The freighter that ran aground off Rockaway Peninsula in Queens yesterday was part of a recent surge of illegal Chinese immigrants who have made their way to Hawaii, California, Guatemala, Florida and now, for what is believed to be the first time by boat, to the shores of New York.
Why the immigrants chose a tortuous route that took them around the Horn of Africa and north again into the cold waters of the North Atlantic is not clear, but officials said that a highly organized network of smugglers around the world probably provided assistance in stops along the way.


Not on My Median; Park Ave. Sculpture Show Opposed
When the monumental bronze sculptures of Fernando Botero arrived on the Champs-Elysees a few months ago, Paris embraced them.
Thousands flocked to see them.
Children climbed over them.
Tourists posed beside them.
And traffic snarled as drivers craned for a glimpse.
The artist himself marveled at the "orgy of love and sensuality."
Now the sculptures are due to come to Park Avenue -- to New York City's own Champs-Elysees.
And people are outraged.


Gina Lyn Ingber, Scott A. Mirskin
Gina Lyn Ingber, a managing director of grants for Daytop Village Inc., the drug rehabilitation center in New York, was married yesterday to Scott Alan Mirskin, a director of sales at J &amp; C International Seafood Inc., a seafood importer in Brooklyn.
Rabbi Irving Goodman officiated at Kutsher's Country Club in Monticello, N.Y.
Mrs.
Ingber-Mirskin graduated from George Washington University and received an M.B.A. from Baruch College.
She is a daughter of Mac Ingber of South Fallsburg, N.Y., and the late Rose C. Ingber.
The bride is also a stepdaughter of Arline Ingber of South Fallsburgh.
Mr.
Mirskin graduated from Buffalo State College.
He is a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving Mirskin of New Hyde Park, L.I.


BASKETBALL: Sports of The Times; Jordan Experiences The Discomfort Zone
IN a kind of comfort zone, Michael Jordan was stretched out on a couch in a hotel room in Cleveland three weeks ago with earphones on, quietly listening to music, and thinking.
Thinking not so much of the Bulls' playoff game the next night, or of those many games ahead or the glorious games behind, but of his simple good fortune.
"Amazing how things have clicked so perfectly," he said then, "and how easily everything might have gone sour."


Slaying Casts a Pall Over Prospect Park
In the Long Meadow of Prospect Park in Brooklyn, there are fresh flowers now in an old shoe box, a small American flag and crumpled bits of paper -- hand-written tributes to a popular drama teacher who was shot to death while fending off efforts to steal his bicycle last Wednesday.
Amid the park's 526 acres, the heartfelt mementos stand in isolation as a shrine at the spot where 42-year-old Allyn Winslow collapsed and died in a bed of clover.


Liza-Faith Cohn, William Wallach
Liza-Faith Michaelis Cohn, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert Linn Cohn of West Orange, N.J., was married yesterday to William David Wallach, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frederick K. Wallach of Summit, N.J.
Rabbi Jeshaia Schnitzer officiated at Temple Shomrei Emunah in Montclair, N.J.
The bride, 27, graduated with honors from Swarthmore College.
She is a third-year law student at the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law.
Her father is the senior partner of Cohn Lifland Pearlman Herrmann &amp; Knopf, a law firm in Saddle Brook, N.J.
Her mother, Sylvia J. Cohn, is special counsel to the firm.
Mr.
Wallach, 30, is an associate at McCarter &amp; English, a law firm in Newark.
He graduated cum laude from Duke University and received a law degree from Washington University in St.
Louis.
His father is a lawyer with the American Telephone and Telegraph Company in New York.


Barkley Relishes His Prime-Time Spot
With Charles Barkley starring for the Suns, this will either be a championship series or a situation comedy.
No media boycotts out here.
Barkley, a rebounding and quote machine, will be asked in the next fortnight about Michael Jordan, gambling, golf, baldness, role models and Madonna, and he will answer his heart out.
"I'm going to be on NBC at least four times, and Madonna won't be," said Barkley, who is finally admitting that the singer/actress is his telephone pal.
"I'll get more pub than her. Of course, she's got her movies. I've got to win a ring first, then I can make a movie. I'm on a mission."


An Unbreakable Glass Ceiling
The Federal Government, the largest customer of military contractors, requires those companies to diversify their work forces and their managements.
Yet the image of the weapons industry as a group led by white, high-technology ex-military men is as vivid now as it has been for many decades.
Data provided by the nation's 10 largest weapons makers show that of the 2,612 executives listed as senior management, women made up 5.3 percent and minorities 4.8 percent.
That is better than a decade ago but still lags behind what many industry executives and others say is desirable.


Nelsa Gidney, Jordan Ringel
Nelsa Gidney, the president of Gidney International, a television programming consulting company in New York, was married yesterday to Jordan E. Ringel, a lawyer.
Rabbi Albert Thaler officiated at the home of Allan Albert, a friend of the couple, in New York.
Ms.
Gidney, who is keeping her name, graduated from Northwestern University.
She is the daughter of Ruth Wagner of Miami Beach, and the late Louis Gidney.


Cambodian Prince Pits Sons Against Each Other in Bid for Power
Prince Norodom Sihanouk turned old family divisions into a weapon today in his campaign to return to power in Cambodia, pitting one of his sons against the other in hopes of forging a coalition government.
Although diplomats and United Nations peacekeepers say they believe that the Prince will eventually succeed in pulling together a coalition, the political climate of this war-shattered nation has been poisoned by feuding within the royal family.


'Kiss' Is Best Musical


Trenton Acts to Loosen Industrial Cleanup Law
Confronting a precipitous loss of industrial jobs, New Jersey is preparing to weaken environmental cleanup rules for land intended for industrial or commercial use.
Although environmentalists are worried that the proposal will set a bad precedent, urban planners are applauding it, saying it would address a problem that exists to varying degrees across the country: urban land lying fallow, in part because of the costs of cleaning up pollution.


Japan Is Rallying Asian Nations Against New U.S. Trade Policies
In Japan's most direct attack yet on the Clinton Administration, Japanese officials have swept through Asia in recent weeks to rally opposition against America's new trade policies, arguing that while Japan may be Washington's target now, other Asian nations will be next.
The intense diplomatic effort, coming before next month's summit meeting here of leaders of the seven richest industrial nations, underscores a fundamental and widening philosophical split between Washington and its Asian trading partners.


Fed Feels Pressure On Rates
The sharp jump in new jobs in May has brought closer the day when the Federal Reserve will have to raise short-term interest rates, traders and analysts say.
"It changes people's expectations," John E. Silvia, the chief economist for the Kemper Mutual Funds in Chicago, said.
"I think the likelihood of a Fed tightening is up by 10 or 20 percent."


Review/Rock; A Glimpse Of the Dead Of Old, With Sting
Over the years, the Grateful Dead's main musical problem in concert has been consistency: it can produce lapidary improvisational moments, only to join them with hours of swill.
Only the faithful, there for the particularly Californian dream of transcendence the band sells for a living, can overlook the boredom and sluggishness the band has perfected.
At Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J., on a rainy Saturday night, at the first of two sold-out shows there, the Dead turned in what must be a rare thing, a whole three-hour concert that rarely flagged.
The rhythm section meshed well, the singers, Jerry Garcia and Bob Weir, sang in tune and even harmonized without rough edges, and Mr.
Garcia's improvisations, which can plod along at 15 miles an hour, actually hurried, as if he were trying to get somewhere.
Mr.
Garcia, who was hospitalized for exhaustion in August, has recently been on a regimen of exercise and a prescribed diet, and was looking fitter than he has in years.


Italians Reject Established Parties in Local Voting
In their first elections since the full extent of the country's huge bribery scandal became known, Italians swung away from their mainstream political leaders today and endorsed insurgent groups demanding political change.
While the ballot was restricted to the choice of mayors and local councils, some 10.5 million people -- more than a fifth of the electorate -- were eligible to vote under new rules affecting big cities from Milan in the North to Catania in Sicily.
Over all, voters chose 1,000 local administrations.


High Spirits Dominate Gay Parade in Queens
Hundreds of gay and lesbian marchers coursed through Jackson Heights, Queens, yesterday to demonstrate their political clout and celebrate a life style they say has recently been under attack in the borough and throughout New York City.
Taking to the streets of one of the city's most ethnically diverse neighborhoods, the marchers gathered for what organizers said was the borough's first gay pride parade.
There were about 1,000 marchers and 500 spectators along the 15-block parade route, the police said.


Pamela Schiller, Brian Socolow
Pamela Renee Lori Schiller, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Sheldon B. Schiller of Louisville, Ky., was married there yesterday to Brian Roy Socolow, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward L. Socolow of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Rabbi Robert Slosberg officiated at Adeth Jeshurun Synagogue.
Mrs.
Socolow, 27, is the media manager at the Elizabeth Arden Company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.


Young &amp; Rubicam Will Try To Brighten the Sears Image
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company has named the New York office of Young &amp; Rubicam to create advertising campaigns that could prove crucial to the struggling retailer's fate.
Sears, the nation's fourth-largest advertiser, ended a five-month review on Friday by choosing Y.&amp; R. New York to direct the apparel account of its huge merchandise group.
The agency will be responsible for producing broadcast commercials and print advertisements to sell Sears's brand-name and private-label men's, women's and children's clothing.


Jill M. Birnbaum, Todd M. Orlich
Jill Michele Birnbaum, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin H. Birnbaum of Syosset, L.I., was married yesterday to Todd Michael Orlich, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
David Orlich.
Rabbi Daniel Fogel performed the ceremony at the Harbor Club in Huntington, L.I.


Apologies for D.A.R. Racism Never End
To the Editor:
As author of a study on civil rights protests at the Lincoln Memorial (Journal of American History, June 1993), I am writing about your May 18 article on the 1939 refusal by the Daughters of the American Revolution to allow Marian Anderson to sing in Constitution Hall.
The personal biases and autocratic style of Fred E. Hand, the D.A.R. booking manager, do not justify a conclusion that the organization itself merely "acquiesced in an exclusionary policy." Hand was only the first tier of refusal; the D.A.R.'s highest officers promptly and explicitly affirmed the singer's rejection on racial grounds.


Emily Bakemeier, Alain Moureaux
Emily Paviour Bakemeier, the daughter of Cynthia F. Bakemeier of Pittsford, N.Y., and Richard F. Bakemeier of Denver, was married yesterday in Vergennes, Vt., to Alain Gislain Moureaux, a son of Gisele Demoulin of Schwabisch Hall, Germany, and Ghislain Moureaux of Pelham Manor, N.Y.
Anne Merrill-Griswold, a justice of the peace in Ferrisburg, Vt., officiated at the Basin Harbor Club.
Ms.
Bakemeier, 32, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College and is a doctoral candidate in art history at Princeton University, from which she received a master's degree in the same subject.


CHRONICLE
Like father, like son, or so its seems in Washington, where JESSE L. JACKSON Jr., the 28-year-old son of the black civil rights leader, has been appointed field director of the National Rainbow Coalition, the group his father established to join people of all races and colors in a fight for equality.
The younger Mr.
Jackson, who received his law degree from the University of Illinois, will try to mobilize religious, labor, business, and governmental organizations in achieving the coalition's goals.


At Church in South Bronx, Steps Become an Altar


Abigail Rischin, David A. Moss
Abigail Sophia Rischin, a daughter of Prof. and Mrs.
Moses Rischin of San Francisco, was married there yesterday to David Abraham Moss, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur J. Moss of Rochester.
Rabbi Mark Schiftan performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El.
Ms.
Rischin, 28, is keeping her name.
A magna cum laude graduate of Smith College, she is a doctoral candidate in comparative literature at Yale University.
Her father, an author and an authority on American ethnic and immigration history, teaches at San Francisco State University.


PULSE: New York City Water Supply
The New York City reservoir system's 1992-93 "water year" - the 12-month cycle on which official water-supply statistics are based - ended on May 31.
The cycle follows natural seasonal fluctuations in water levels, which peak in May.
Readings were moderately below normal for the first six months, but rose considerably after heavy precipitation in January and March.
A final surge came from a typically rainy April and heavy spring runoff in the watershed area.
Readings for 1992-93, shows by the dotted black line, are compared with normal levels (solid gray line), and with last year (dashed gray line), when reservoirs neared drought level.
Figures are for the Delaware, Catskill and Croton reservoir systems, whichsupply water to New York City and most of WEstchester County.
Distribution reservoirs (Kensico, Hillview, Jerome Park and Central Park) are not included.


A New Notebook Computer
Betting that less is more, where mobile computing is concerned, the Hewlett-Packard Company and the Microsoft Corporation will jointly introduce a new 2.9-pound notebook computer on Monday.
It is one of the lightest machines to date and can run for up to nine hours on four ordinary AA batteries.
The HP Omnibook 300 comes with Microsoft's Windows operating system, Word word-processor and Excel spreadsheet programs, and will sell for $1,950 -- about comparable to other notebooks powered by the Intel Corporation's 386 microprocessor.


Jessica R. Glass, Perry N. Fishkind
Jessica Rachel Glass, an assistant district attorney in Manhattan, was married yesterday to Dr.
Perry Neal Fishkind, a physician.
Rabbi Michael Ehrlich officiated at the Hilton Hotel in Pearl River, N.Y.
Mrs.
Fishkind, 25, received undergraduate and law degrees from Syracuse University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard R. Glass of Tenafly, N.J.


Court Reverses Ruling on Intel
A California state appellate court has overturned an arbitrator's award that had given Advanced Micro Devices Inc. the right to make its own version of the Intel Corporation's 386 microprocessor.
Intel said the decision, issued late Friday, clears the path to a state liability trial over all of Advanced Micro Devices' shipments of the AM386 chip.
Intel, the world's leading maker of computer chips, also said the court's decision allows it to proceed with a Federal suit in which Intel also opposes Advanced Micro Devices' manufacture of the popular 386 chip.


Dance in Review
"Jewels"
New York City Ballet  New York State Theater
No one ever accused George Balanchine of the dire sin of commercialism.
But he occasionally came close.
Remember "Pamtgg," named after and danced to the jingle for Pan American World Airways?
The 1967 premiere of Balanchine's "Jewels" left some bemused.
Could the choreographer have possibly meant to create such an immediately popular crowd-pleaser, inspired, it was rumored, by a visit to Van Cleef &amp; Arpels?
After the initial shock, it became obvious that "Jewels" was a ballet for elitists, too, filled with large and small conceits worthy of the creator of the difficult "Agon" and "Episodes."


Does Vitamin E Keep Hair From Graying?
To the Editor:
Further to "Vitamin E Greatly Reduces Risk of Heart Disease, Studies Suggest" (front page, May 20):


U.N. ASKS ARRESTS OF SOMALIA KILLERS
The United Nations Security Council today condemned the killing of 22 Pakistani peacekeeping soldiers in Somalia on Saturday and called for the "arrest and detention for prosecution, trial and punishment" of those responsible.
In a written report on the incident to the Council, United Nations peacekeeping officials pinned the blame squarely on Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, a Somali warlord who controls much of the capital, Mogadishu.


Russians Fault U.S. on Shifting Ukraine's Arms
In a blunt expression of differences between Russia and the United States over policy toward nuclear weapons in Ukraine, the Russian Defense Minister, Gen.
Pavel S. Grachev, today criticized an American plan to place Ukraine's warheads under international control.
Speaking to reporters after a meeting with Defense Secretary Les Aspin in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany, General Grachev said the nuclear warheads left in Ukraine after the breakup of the Soviet Union were Russian and should remain under Russian control.


SMUGGLED TO NEW YORK: On the Ship; Survivors Tell of Voyage of Little Daylight, Little Food and Only Hope
The human cargo of the Golden Venture saw little daylight during their odyssey around the globe.
The Indonesian crew kept them in the hold -- with no clues to the tortuous route the ship was taking to reach American shores.
One passenger counted the days by marking them off on a bulkhead.
A single toilet was the ship's only concession to hygiene, and most people relieved themselves wherever they were.
Without running water, passengers had no way to clean themselves.
The days rolled into one another in clouds of cigarette smoke.


Karen Korngold, Michael Whaley
Karen Tessler Korngold, a daughter of Carole W. and Robert D. Korngold of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to William Michael Whaley, a son of William F. Whaley and Mrs.
J.
Lawson Kennedy, both of New Canaan, Conn.
Rabbi Miriam Ancis performed the ceremony at the Carlyle Hotel in New York.
Ms.
Korngold, 29, is keeping her name.
She is the director of project development at the Center for Montessori Teacher Education/NY in Scarsdale, which was founded and is directed by her mother.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received a master's degree in poetry from Columbia University.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.
Her father is president of the Manager, a marketing consulting firm in Scarsdale.


SMUGGLED TO NEW YORK: The Overview -- 7 Die as Crowded Immigrant Ship Grounds Off Queens; Chinese Aboard Are Seized for Illegal Entry
A tramp steamer smuggling hundreds of illegal Chinese immigrants into New York ran aground in moonlit darkness and a pounding surf off the Rockaway Peninsula in Queens early yesterday, ending a 17,000-mile odyssey from the Far East in a nightmare of panic, chaos, death and capture within sight of the golden door.
At least 7 people were killed and 16 were injured, officials said, as scores of terrified refugees leaped into the sea and tried to swim and wade ashore from the stricken 150-foot vessel, Golden Venture, her keel fast on a sandbar 200 yards off Jacob Riis Park.


Call New C.C.N.Y. President a Scholar and Skilled Politician; Record Distorted
To the Editor:
As the faculty members of the search committee that recommended Dr.
Yolanda T. Moses, the president-designate of City College, we are deeply distressed by the unfair attacks to which she has been subjected and the gross distortion of her record, presented in your May 25 coverage of her appointment.


Photographs Auctioned to Help Restore Quaker Meetinghouse


Diana J. Lafer, Eric Mendelsohn
Dr.
Diana Joan Lafer, a daughter of Fred and Dr.
Barbara Lafer of Wayne, N.J., was married yesterday to Eric Janvrin Mendelsohn, the son of Louis and Kathleen Mendelsohn of Bloomfield, Conn.
Rabbi Martin Freedman performed the ceremony at Le Chateau, a restaurant in South Salem, N.Y.
The bride, 29, is a veterinarian in Simsbury, Conn.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received a doctor of veterinary medicine degree from Cornell University.
Her father is a senior vice president and corporate secretary at Automatic Data Processing Inc., a payroll service company in Roseland, N.J.
Her mother is a psychologist in Pompton Lakes, N.J.


Apocalypso Now for American Team
There is no show in soccer quite as entertaining as Brazil nursing a lead, with little chance of losing it.
Ambitious and balletic, even on tired legs, Brazil toyed elegantly with the United States national team today at the Yale Bowl for a 2-0 victory in the opener of the U.S.
Cup '93.
The Americans had a couple of opportunities, but really had no clue.
How do you interrupt a performance like this?
How many more years will it take to learn the art form?


Kenya, Calling for Aid, Fights Falling Economy
More than five months after winning the first multiparty elections in Kenya in 26 years, President Daniel arap Moi and his Government are battling to turn around a plummeting economy and win the support of Western aid organizations.
In March, Mr.
Moi confronted the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund with a refusal to carry out their demands for changes aimed at liberalizing the economy, maintaining that they would plunge Kenya into chaos.
But then last month he reversed course, taking a more conciliatory approach and, among other things, lifting controls on prices.


No Headline
"If I had said to my wonderful father, 'Daddy, I'd like to be a United States senator someday,' I know he would have patted me on the head and said, 'Kay, there are a lot of wonderful things you can do with your life, but that's probably not one of them.' " -- KAY BAILEY HUTCHISON, soon to be the seventh woman in the Senate.  [ A15:2. ]


ISRAEL ARRESTS 4 IN POLICE DEATH
The Israeli Shin Bet security service said today that it had arrested four Palestinians in the killing of an Israeli border policeman whose abduction and slaying prompted the deportation of about 400 accused Islamic militants to Lebanon in December.
The suspects, residents of Arab communities in and near Jerusalem, have confessed to the killing, Shin Bet said.
They were identified as Mahmud Isa, 25, and Majed Abu Kteish, 23, both of Anata; Mahmud Atwan, 23, of Sur Bahir, and Musa Akari, 22 from Shuafat.


Meredith S. Saul, John H. Marks
Meredith Stacey Saul, a daughter Dr. and Mrs.
Richard B. Saul of Philadelphia, was married yesterday to Dr.
John H. Marks, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald Marks of Penn Valley, Pa.
Rabbi David Sandmel performed the ceremony at the Hotel du Pont in Wilmington, Del.


Rough Weekend for Smith Concludes With a Victory
In a dramatic climax to a weekend of racing joy and sorrow at Belmont Park, the champion grass colt Lure missed a $1 million bonus yesterday when he was outrun by less than a length by Star of Cozzene.
But the star filly Sky Beauty took long strides toward a championship of her own when she outran Dispute to win the Mother Goose Stakes by five lengths.
The mixed fortunes of the two prize horses reflected the mixed fortunes of the jockey who rode them, Mike Smith.
On Saturday, he was riding Prairie Bayou in the Belmont Stakes when the horse broke down with fractures of the left foreleg, and did not survive.
Smith, shaken but uninjured, then turned to his assignments yesterday as the rider on two of the most accomplished horses in the country.


Azinger's 'Miracle' Shot From Bunker Wins by 1
Paul Azinger, the best bunker player on the PGA Tour, hit his greatest sand shot ever to make a lightning bolt of a birdie on the final hole today and steal the Memorial Tournament from his close friend, Payne Stewart.
Trailing Stewart by one stroke on the final hole, Azinger nipped the ball perfectly from what appeared to be a hopelessly difficult position at the bottom of a steep bunker.
The ball, loaded with backspin, barely cleared the lip, skittered for two hops and then trickled toward the hole 20 feet away.
After an excrutiatingly slow journey, it teetered on the left edge and fell in.


Haitian Advocate Slain in Brooklyn
A Brooklyn furniture store owner who was a prominent figure in New York's Haitian community was shot and killed late Saturday as he was getting into his car shortly after closing time, the police said.
The victim, Wilner Boucicault, 44, owner of A and B Furniture and Appliances in the East Flatbush section, was shot once in the chest, but he managed to drive his 1993 Mercedes-Benz several blocks before crashing into parked cars, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
John McCluskey.


Books of The Times; A Selective History of a Decade Defining America
The Fifties
By David Halberstam
Illustrated. 800 pages. Villard Books/ Random House. $27.50.
Many prominent books have been written about the various subjects that David Halberstam covers in "The Fifties," a history of the decade of which he describes himself "a child," having graduated from high school in 1951 and from college in 1955, and having had his values "shaped in that era."


Magazines Pressed to Change Looks
For a man who makes his living creating the looks of new magazines and redesigning the appearance of old ones, Roger Black sounds suspiciously like a print person.
"The one thing that is going to save magazines is writing; it isn't visuals," said Mr.
Black, a leading art director who has recently been involved in redesigns of Newsweek, Premiere, Esquire, Town &amp; Country and Harper's Bazaar and in the start-ups of Esquire Gentleman, Smart Money and Out.


Review/Pop; A Blend of Celtic and Cajun
At Town Hall on Thursday night, Daniel Lanois talked about his family: the grandparents who sold the farm, a cousin reunited with the child she'd given up for adoption.
The songs that went with the stories were also about heritage, a French-Canadian family tree that Mr.
Lanois traces back to Celtic Brittany, down through Acadia and on south through New Orleans, where Cajun music meets African roots.
Mr.
Lanois is best known as the producer for albums by U2, Peter Gabriel, Bob Dylan, the Neville Brothers and Robbie Robertson.
He helps make their music, and his own, sound stately but open by combining old-fashioned effects -- a tremolo-strummed guitar, a touch of distortion -- with glimmers of the latest technology.
On stage, he chose rawness.
He played vintage Fender guitars through a Vox amplifier pushed to the edge of feedback, accompanied by Daryl Johnson on bass and Brian Blade on drums, whose mallets grew shredded during the set.


25 Years. The Vision of Robert Kennedy Lives On.
For many, in a society that seems always to crave new myths and new idols, Robert F. Kennedy is a rapidly fading memory a quarter-century after his death, brittle with age.
For many others, the third of the nation that was not yet born when he was killed, there is no first-hand memory at all.
But to a remarkable number of Americans, Robert Kennedy remains a vivid presence, the archetype of the charismatic leader.


To Cut Costs, Variety Goes Biweekly in Summer
Variety says it will suspend weekly publication this summer and instead publish every two weeks.
Biweekly publication will begin with the issue that appears on newsstands June 14 and will continue until the end of August.
The cutback is the latest in a series of cost-saving moves for the entertainment publication, including the relocation of many New York staff members -- from Peter Bart, the editorial director and vice president, to copy editors -- to Daily Variety's Los Angeles office.
The relocation will enable the two publications to consolidate their copy-editing functions.
Some editorial staff will remain in New York.


Serbs Attack Two of U.N.'s 'Safe Areas' in Bosnia
Bosnian Serb forces reportedly kept up their offensive against the United Nations-designated 'safe area' of Gorazde today and shelled another safe area, Srebrenica, defying a new United Nations Security Council resolution providing for troops to protect the six Bosnian Muslim areas.
Bosnian Serb commanders denied a five-member team of United Nations military observers access again today to Gorazde, where a year of fighting has trapped some 60,000 Muslims, said Comdr.
Barry Frewer, spokesman for the United Nations force here.


Reporter's Notebook; Amid Motions, Delays and Gawkers, Altman Trial Drags On at Painful Pace
Most trials develop a certain rhythm, but so far there have been decidedly more ebbs than flows in the fraud and bribery trial of Robert A. Altman.
During the last two weeks the pace of Mr.
Altman's trial slowed to a crawl, bogged down in contentions by defense lawyers that prosecutors had failed to reveal in a timely fashion material that would have been favorable to Mr.
Altman.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  SURPRISE CHOICE IN GUATEMALA  In a surprise move, Guatemala's crusading human rights ombudsman, Ramiro de Leon Carpio, is sworn in as President.
Politicians had considered him ineligible as unacceptable to the military.
A1  RUSSIA OPPOSES KIEV PLAN  Bluntly expressing Russian differences over policy toward Kiev, Defense Minister Pavel S. Grachev rebuffed an American plan to place Ukraine's nuclear warheads under international control.
A1


Jitters in a Showplace of Gadgets
Dell Jones played a round of golf today -- without ever leaving a television set here at the Consumer Electronics Show.
His hand on a remote-control device, his eyes on the animated golfer he was guiding, Mr.
Jones, who is middle-aged, happily hacked his way through the Palm Springs Open.
Throughout, he laughed at the kibitzing golf announcer who commented on every shot.
"This is great!" he exclaimed to spectators nodding their agreement.
Mr.
Jones' enthusiasm was typical today in the vast McCormick Place exhibition halls, as more than 25,000 electronic-gadget lovers played video games, watched demonstrations of wristwatch telephones and huge home television sets, put on sunglasses equipped with miniature television screens, and otherwise sampled the newest wares of more than 100 electronics companies.
Joy, but Not Resolution
But if their smiles were music to the vendors' ears, they did little to answer tough questions facing the consumer electronics industry when it came to town four days ago for its 48th semi-annual show.


Clinton Coattails Debated After Senate Loss in Texas
Has President Clinton become such a political pariah that he drove hordes of Texans to the polls on Saturday to vote for a Republican, Kay Bailey Hutchison, to the United States Senate?
Probably not.
The Democratic incumbent, Senator Bob Krueger, had problems of his own, like being such a dreadful campaigner that his campaign produced television commercials extolling that fact.
Besides, analysts warn against making too much of whether any President has "coattails" that significantly affect a local election for better or for worse.


Wynn Gets a Surprise: A Victory in 54 Holes
Bob Wynn went to the driving range in anticipation of a playoff when he saw Bob Charles, considered by many golfers the real legend of Sleepy Hollow, hit his approach shot within 10 feet on the last hole of today's $550,000 Nynex Commemorative.
When Wynn heard a roar near the driving range of the Sleepy Hollow Country Club course, he figured that Charles had made the birdie putt and a playoff was about to get under way for the title Charles had won in 1988 and 1989 in record fashion.


Hillsborough Journal; The Talk of the Isle (Pop. 6,000): Liberty or Death
In these times of blossoming multiculturalism, the tiny island of Carriacou has decided that self-respect demands that it too should join the struggle to say its piece.
For too long, residents say, they have been the silent victims of their administrative overlords in Grenada, or the "mainland," 20 miles to the south, and recently they have begun to insist that they be allowed to assert their own traditions.


Armstrong Feels Like a Million Bucks
Lance Armstrong, the all-America bike rider, won $1 million today. More or less.
With a brash, in-your-face performance, the 21-year-old Texan, a professional only nine months, won the United States' richest one-day bicycle race, the $110,000 CoreStates United States professional championship.


Jacqueline Green, John A. Grossman
Dr.
Jacqueline Dee Green, a pediatric ophthalmologist in New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
John Alan Igra Grossman, a hand surgeon.
Rabbis Peter Rubenstein and Lawrence A. Forman jointly officiated at the Central Synagogue in New York.
The bride graduated from the University of Wisconsin and received her M.D. from the Chicago Medical School.
She is also an assistant professor of clinical ophthalmology at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Isidor Green of Palm Beach, Fla.


Leo Pfeffer, 83, Lawyer on Staff Of the American Jewish Congress
Leo Pfeffer, a well-known constitutional lawyer who had been on the staff of the American Jewish Congress and the faculty of Long Island University, died on Friday at Arden Hill Hospital in Goshen, N.Y.
He was 83 and lived in Middletown, N.Y.
The cause was congestive heart failure following a hip injury suffered in a fall, said his daughter, Susan Beth Pfeffer.


Bruguera's French Is Better Than Courier's
Sergi Bruguera finally lived up to his reputation as a clay-court wizard by winning the 1993 French Open final today, defeating Jim Courier, the seemingly invincible two-time defending champion, in five arduous sets that were made even more oppressive by the steamy summer swelter that descended on Paris this afternoon.
Bruguera, Spain's most promising male tennis star since 60's great Manuel Santana, had hitherto been labeled an underachiever with a tendency to falter in the tough going.
He had previously reached no Grand Slam finales and had a 4-7 record in five-set matches heading into today's confrontation with Courier, who had taken home four titles in five previous Slam finals.


Patricia L. Eby and Peter A. Aldea
Dr.
Patricia Lynn Eby and Dr.
Peter Andrew Aldea, plastic surgeons, were married yesterday at the Long Hill Estate in Beverly, Mass.
Rabbi David Kudan officiated.
Dr.
Eby, 36, is keeping her name.
She is a chief resident in plastic and reconstructive surgery at the Lahey Clinic in Burlington, Mass.
She graduated magna cum laude from Georgetown University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received her M.D. from Washington University in St.
Louis.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald S. Eby of Gordonville, Pa.


Whitman Urges G.O.P. Unity After Vote
Christine Todd Whitman, considered the front-runner for the Republican nomination for governor, exhorted her supporters today not to slow a step until November, and called for Republicans to unify after Tuesday's primary and defeat the Democratic incumbent, Jim Florio.
"After June 8, all Republicans have to come back together," Mrs.
Whitman told about 150 campaign workers at a get-out-the vote rally at the Flemington fairgrounds this afternoon.
"This is going to be a tough battle all the way to Nov. 2."


Question: And Now Do Knicks Get Point?
The nature of professional sports is volatile, especially in New York.
Moments after the Knicks were eliminated from the National Basktball Association playoffs by the Chicago Bulls on Friday night, people began voicing strong opinions about what had gone wrong.
The Knicks' major accomplishments -- a 60-victory season and an appearance in the Eastern Conference finals for the first time in 19 years -- did not ease the disappointment over the fact that the season ended sooner than the team and its fans had expected.


Severance Pay Becomes Issue For Empire
Two weeks after Albert A. Cardone was forced out as chairman of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the company's board has found that it may owe Mr.
Cardone hundreds of thousands of dollars in severance pay and pension benefits, perhaps more than $1 million.
The exact amount is unclear because for years the board routinely approved Mr.
Cardone's severance agreement without ever asking how much it would cost.


Christian Right Splits G.O.P. in South
The Christian right is on the political move again in the South, pushing hard to win offices and influence in the Republican Party at a time when many of the party's national leaders are urging that it become more moderate and centrist.
Here in Richmond this weekend, Christian conservatives dominated the convention that nominated candidates to represent the party in this fall's elections for governor, lieutenant governor and attorney general.


Belmont Seeks Clues But Finds Only Fate
Colonial Affair and the other long-shot stars of the 1993 Belmont Stakes headed into the second half of the racing season with newly won stature yesterday.
But the racing world was still groping for reasons, and finding none, for the fatal breakdown of the reigning 3-year-old, Prairie Bayou.
The weather was drizzly and the surface of the track at Belmont Park was getting heavy when Prairie Bayou buckled in the backstretch about half a mile into the race Saturday.
His jockey, Mike Smith, jumped over the horse's right side and escaped injury.
But Prairie Bayou, who had run second in the Kentucky Derby and first in the Preakness, suffered compound fractures in his left foreleg and was destroyed by injection about 30 minutes later.


Bridge
In North America, the 1993 Epson Worldwide Bridge Contest, played Friday evening, proved to be a triumph for Canada.
In the first session, Friday night, the top score, of slightly more than 75 percent, went to Roland Brunet and Sarko Kassabian playing at the St.
Rose Club in Fabreville, Quebec.
They sat North-South, a slightly easier line in which to score.
The East-West winners, with 71 percent, were Peter Gospodic and Jacques Cloutier of Guelph Ontario, playing in Cambridge, Ontario.
In the second session on Saturday, the North-South winners, with 74 percent, were Nicole Hainault and Normand Hubert, both from the Montreal area, playing at the West Hill Club in Montreal.
The East-West winners, with 73 percent, were Robert Briselli of Broomall, Pa., and Steven Blomstedt of Westchester, Pa., playing at Lola's in Newton Square.


Corrections
A chart on Wednesday with an article about proposed energy taxes described two elements of the plan incorrectly.
As passed by the House, the plan would tax liquefied petroleum gas at 26.8 cents per million British Thermal Units, not 61.0 cents, and would impose a natural gas tax on consumers, not utilities.
The related article referred to an economist incorrectly. He is Philip Verleger.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Consumer Credit . . .
April  Tuesday None  Wednesday  None  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Producer Prices . . .
May Retail Sales . . .
May


2 Magazines Closing Down
Two media trade publications are suspending publication.
Cowles Business Media said Friday that it had acquired Magazine Week and would suspend its publication.
The last issue will appear today.


Spanish Premier Re-elected, But Yields Ground to Right
After its toughest challenge since coming to power in 1982, the Socialist Party of Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez was returned to office today in general elections but lost considerable ground to the conservative People's Party.
Projections by the Interior Ministry, based on 93 percent of the returns, gave the Socialists 159 seats in the 350-member lower house of Parliament against 141 seats for the People's Party, with the balance going to a leftist and to regional parties.


Bolivian Businessman Is Leading in the Election for President
A millionaire mining entrepreneur appeared to have come out ahead in Bolivia's presidential election today, receiving almost 38 percent of the vote, according to early and unofficial results.
For the entrepreneur, Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada, a similar outcome took place four years ago when he came out ahead in the popular vote in the presidential election only to lose out in the negotiations that characterize Bolivia's system of electoral politics.


CHRONICLE
DR.
CARLO M. CROCE of the Jefferson Cancer Institute in Philadelphia received the Charles S. Mott Prize for achievements in understanding the causes of cancer, specifically for identifying many of the cancer-causing genes involved in leukemias and lymphomas.
And HIDESABURO HANAFUSA, Ph.D., of Rockefeller University in New York, won the Alfred P. Sloan Prize for basic scientific contributions to cancer research and work clarifying the relationship of viruses to oncogenes.


CHRONICLE
DR.
CARLO M. CROCE of the Jefferson Cancer Institute in Philadelphia received the Charles S. Mott Prize for achievements in understanding the causes of cancer, specifically for identifying many of the cancer-causing genes involved in leukemias and lymphomas.
And HIDESABURO HANAFUSA, Ph.D., of Rockefeller University in New York, won the Alfred P. Sloan Prize for basic scientific contributions to cancer research and work clarifying the relationship of viruses to oncogenes.


Review/Music; Dutch Opera in an Italian 'Ulysses'
In its unedited form, Monteverdi's "Return of Ulysses" looks at the Homeric tale of Ulysses's homecoming from a split perspective.
Mostly, we see the story unfolding in mythologized but human terms.
Yet there is also an otherworldly overlay, in which discussions between Jove and Neptune suggest the limits to which mortals determine their fates.
This supernatural component, though extraneous to the narrative, resonates with the Prologue, in which Time, Fate and Love sing of their assaults on Human Mortality.
In the Netherlands Opera version of the work, the latest of the Brooklyn Academy of Music's imported productions, this heaven-and-earth symmetry is largely scuttled.
The Prologue remains, but the gods have been banished except for Athene, the only Olympian to interact directly with Ulysses.
One notable mortal, the nurse Euryclea, has also been jettisoned.


Patents
CARPAL TUNNEL SYN DROME can be painful and debilitating and it has become an increasingly common work-related injury.
It is among the most serious of the repetitive stress injuries that can result from continuous wrist and hand motions, like prolonged typing on a computer.
These movements can cause a ligament to thicken and press on the nerve and tendons running through the carpal tunnel, a cluster of bones in the wrist and palm.
The result can be pain, numbness and weakness in the fingers, hands and wrists.


Alisa K. Lincoln, B. E. Lanckton
Alisa Kim Lincoln, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Alan Jay Lincoln of Durham, N.H., was married yesterday to Benjamin Edward Lanckton, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Van C. Lanckton of Newton, Mass.
Rabbi David Mark performed the ceremony at Temple Israel in Portsmouth, N.H.
Ms.
Lincoln, 24, is keeping her name.
She is a doctoral fellow in psychiatric epidemiology at Columbia University.
She graduated from Tufts University and received a master's degree in public health from Boston University.


Pact Seeks Uniformity in Stock Rules
Regulators from 11 Latin American countries, the United States and Canada have signed an agreement to toughen and unify regulation of stock exchanges in the Americas.
The accord, reached in meetings here on Thursday and Friday, reflects the new-found popularity of Latin American stocks and a realization that these emerging markets are plagued by manipulation, insider trading and other abuses.
The regulators agreed to increase the reporting requirements for brokers, to speed up dissemination of trading information to the public and to monitor more closely investment advisers working with foreign clients.


World Economies


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASEBALL  Long Beach State Eliminates Kansas  Mike Fontana threw a two-hitter and Long Beach State eliminated Kansas, 6-1, from the College World Series yesterday in Omaha.
Both hits off the 49ers right-hander were by Kansas catcher Jeff Niemeier, who hit his 10th homer of the year on the first pitch of the fifth inning and singled in the seventh.
Niemeier also made Kansas' final out.
Fontana stranded five runners to keep Long Beach State (44-18) alive in the double-elimination tournament.
Kansas (45-18) was the first team in National Collegiate Athletic Association history to win a football bowl game, play in the N.C.A.A. basketball tournament's Final Four and earn a trip to the College World Series in the same season.
In another game, Armando Rios singled in the go-ahead run with two out in the eighth inning and Todd Walker followed with a grand slam, sparking L.S.U.'s 13-8 victory over top-seeded Texas A&amp;M.
L.S.U. (51-16-1), which trailed by 7-2 in the fifth, had gotten within 8-7 heading into the eighth.
Singles by Mike Neal, Jim Greely and Adrian Antonini loaded the bases.
Kenny Jackson's ground out tied the game and Rios's single gave the Tigers a 9-8 lead.
Walker, who drove in runs earlier with a ground out and a bases-loaded walk, had been hitless in nine at-bats in the series until he hit the clinching grand slam off Chris Clemons (6-2).
L.S.U. is idle until Wednesday, when it meets the winner of Tuesday night's elimination game between Texas A&amp;M (53-10) and Long Beach State.


The Silence of Roxana Ramos
In the Indian summer days of last September, at a time when Roxana Ramos, a high school student here, became pregnant, an outreach worker for the local Planned Parenthood was sending stacks of letters to the public schools and Hispanic organizations of Nassau County.
The worker, Lori Rolleri, offered to broach subjects that were often difficult for immigrant families to tackle: sexuality and intimacy, sexually transmitted diseases, contraception and control over one's own body.


The Fund-Raising Frenzy, Cont'd.
Two weeks ago, embarrassed White House officials canceled a breakfast with President Clinton that the Democratic National Committee had organized for lobbyists and other fat-cat contributors.
Now they've pulled the plug on the committee's plan to establish a private foundation to help sell Mr.
Clinton's health care program.
But other aspects of the D.N.C.'s dubious scheme are proceeding apace, making one wonder whether Bill Clinton's political friends were paying attention when he promised to run the special interests out of town.


Sara E. Barcan, Marc D. Draisen
Sara Ellen Barcan, a master's degree candidate in city planning at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, was married yesterday to Marc Douglas Draisen, a Massachusetts State Representative from Boston.
Rabbi Charles Kroloff performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El in Westfield, N.J.
Ms.
Barcan, who is keeping her name, graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen E. Barcan of Westfield.
Her father is a senior partner at the law firm of Wilentz, Goldman &amp; Spitzer in Woodbridge, N.J.
Her mother, Bettye Barcan, is a reference librarian at the Springfield (N.J.) Public Library.


SMUGGLED TO NEW YORK: The Homeland; High Hopes, and Stakes, For China's Boat People
The desperate risks that Chinese boat people take to get to the United States, even jumping into the ocean to swim to shore, reflect the burden of the trust that has been placed in them by friends and family.
Very few Chinese can afford the thousands of dollars demanded by the "snakeheads," or smugglers.
So those who yearn for a better life in the United States borrow from relatives, friends and even neighbors.


Gunman's Acquittal Sends World a Message; Spirited Defense
To the Editor:
In "Gun Crazy," (editorial, May 25) you lambaste Lewis Unglesby, the lawyer who defended Rodney Peairs for shooting a Japanese exchange student, Yoshihiro Hattori.
Mr.
Unglesby argued that people have the right to answer the door carrying a firearm.
"In his book," you state, anyone from ministers to Girl Scouts can be shot for ringing the doorbell.


Abroad at Home; Bill Clinton's Center
With apologies to Art Buchwald, who had a similar dream in 1965 . . .
I awoke with a shudder the other morning from a terrible dream.
I dreamt that George Bush had been re-elected last fall, and the country still had a President who was paralyzed by fear of the political right.


Dance in Review
Manhattan Tap  Merkin Concert Hall
Manhattan Tap sailed into the airy, pleasant Merkin Concert Hall on Wednesday for an evening of enjoyable tap-dancing.
The most imaginative of the program's 11 dances, five of them New York or world premieres, was the new "Untitled," which the company's director, Heather Cornell, invited the audience to name.
Choreographed by Ms.
Cornell to a score by Keith Saunders, the group's pianist and music director, "Untitled" was a road race for four eager, conniving, exhausted runners seen ingeniously from the side and front.
The hard-tapping runners were Ms.
Cornell, Jeannie Hill, Lisa Hopkins and Max Pollak.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Japanese officials have campaigned through Asia in recent weeks to rally opposition against new U.S. trade policies, arguing that while Tokyo may be Washington's target now, other nations in the region would follow.
The campaign is Japan's most strenuous attack on the Clinton Administration.  [ Page A1. ]
Regulators from 13 countries signed an agreement to toughen and unify regulation of stock exchanges in the Americas.  [ D1. ]


INSIDE
U.N. Seeks Action in Somalia
The United Nations Security Council condemned the killing of 22 Pakistani peacekeepers in Somalia and called for prosecution.
Officials placed the blame on a Somali warlord.
Page A3.
Spain's Socialists Squeak By
The Socialist Party of Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez was returned to office in Spain, but it lost considerable ground to the conservatives.
Page A8.
Bruguera Wins French Open
Sergi Bruguera of Spain defeated Jim Courier, the two-time defending champion, in the French Open tennis final.
SportsMonday, page C1.


Abigail H. Amsterdam, Daniel J. Bial
Abigail Holly Amsterdam, a manager in the Metropolitan Transportation Authority's Office of Capital Program Management in New York, was married yesterday to Daniel Jeremy Bial, the founder and president of the Daniel Bial Literary Agency in New York.
Rabbi Morrison Bial, the bridegroom's father, performed the ceremony at Temple Sinai in Summit, N.J.
Ms.
Amsterdam, 30, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and from which she received a master's degree in public policy.


W. McNeil Lowry Is Dead; Patron of the Arts Was 80
W.
McNeil Lowry, a former vice president of the Ford Foundation who made that institution a major supporter of the arts, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 80.
The cause was cancer of the esophagus, said his wife, Elsa.


Dividend Meetings


An Influential Collector Of Modern Haitian Art
When Selden Rodman, a fledgling poet and American intelligence officer, disembarked for the first time in Haiti in 1944 to witness a performance of his recent play about the country's 19th-century revolution, the trip seemed little more than another colorful stop in a career deliberately conceived as a blend of art and adventure.
Instead of another simple port of call, however, the trip, paid for by the Bureau of Inter-American Affairs, placed Mr.
Rodman in the country at just the right moment to witness the birth of modern Haitian painting.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press Notes; Between the Idea of a CNNNewspaper Alliance and the Reality Falls the Shadow of Ted Turner
SOMETIMES in business you come this close to the dream deal.
That is what happened last week to Leland Schwartz, 44, the founder, editor and publisher of States News Service in Washington.
Mr.
Schwartz's small news organization supplies news reports from the capital to some 300 newspapers around the country.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
AES Corp., Arlington, Va., 2.5 million common shares.
Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Securities.


Moynihan Is Moving to Halve 1993 Tax Increase
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, whose committee will begin work this week on President Clinton's economic plan, said today that under the measure he was contemplating wealthy taxpayers would face only half the tax increase proposed by the President this year, with the full increase not effective until 1994.
"It doesn't feel right to anybody" to make the tax increases retroactive to Jan. 1, Mr.
Moynihan said, so he would make the new rates effective on July 1.


Knicks Off Bandstand, Bulls Feel Like Dancing
The message inside the cartoonlike bubble on the front of Scottie Pippen's hat, "!*?@#," held a sentiment that must have been left over from the last two weeks in the lives of the Chicago Bulls.
With the exception of Michael Jordan's continued public silence, any traces of angst seemed to have been replaced by a relaxed sense of anticipation as the Bulls prepared for the National Basketball Association finals against the Suns, with Game 1 Wednesday at Phoenix, and a chance to make history.


James Bridges, 57, Film Maker Noted for Writing and Directing
James Bridges, a writer and director of films who was twice nominated for Academy Awards, died yesterday at the University of California-Los Angeles Medical Center.
He was 57 and lived in the Brentwood section of Los Angeles.
The immediate cause was kidney failure, and he had been suffering from cancer for two and a half years, said Jack Larson, his companion of 35 years.


The Molding of Masako-san, Japan's Perfect Bride
In Japan this month, only those as dead and buried as the ancient emperors could miss these critical facts about Masako Owada: her favorite coffee-shop lunch is an $8 curry rice special, her Yorkshire terrier, Chocolat, was born in Scotland and joined the Owada family during a diplomatic mission to Paris, and the craftsmen who ruined her traditional Japanese kimono chests by covering the rich wood in tacky gold leaf are now very, very sorry.
For the casual channel-surfer or for anyone lingering in front of a subway newsstand these days, there is hardly a trivial detail you cannot learn about the savvy 29-year-old woman who on Wednesday will become the Crown Princess of Japan.


Kohl Faces Fierce Protests Over German Violence
In the wake of new arson attacks aimed at Turks, Chancellor Helmut Kohl's appearance at the dedication of the newly renovated Berlin Cathedral brought heated protests today from demonstrators who accused him of not acting decisively against rightist violence.
The visit was Mr.
Kohl's first public appearance since the arson attack that killed five Turkish women and girls in the western town of Solingen on May 29.
He has been harshly criticized for not attending their funeral, the subsequent memorial service or the burial in Turkey.


TRANSACTIONS
SATURDAY Baseball  American League
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Placed Keith Miller, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Craig Wilson, infielder, from Omaha of the American Association.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Placed Mike Witt, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to June 2.
Activated Steve Howe, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.


Dr. Grunberger And Dr. Stang
Dr.
Arlene Richman Stang, a psychotherapist in New York and Great Neck, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Lawrence Walter Nicholas Grunberger, a consulting physicist, editor and technical writer.
Rabbi Judith Brazen officiated at the Plumbush Inn in Cold Spring, N.Y.
The bride graduated from Hunter College and received a master's degree in social work and a Ph.D. in clinical social work from New York University.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
Louis Richman of Great Neck and the late Mr.
Richman.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY SMUGGLED TO NEW YORK: 7 DIE AS IMMIGRANT SHIP RUNS AGROUND
A tramp steamer smuggling hundreds of illegal Chinese immigrants into New York runs aground in a pounding surf off the Rockaway Peninsula in Queens, ending a 17,000-mile odyssey from the Far East in a nightmare of panic, chaos, death and capture within sight of the golden door.
At least 7 people are killed and 16 are seriously injured, officials say, as scores of terrified passengers leap into the sea and try to swim and wade ashore.
A1.
A TRIP BOTH DEVIOUS AND DESPERATE
The freighter that ran aground off Rockaway Peninsula is part of a recent surge of illegal Chinese immigrants who have made their way east to Hawaii, California, Guatemala, Florida and now, for what is believed to be the first time by boat, to the shores of New York.
Why the immigrants chose a tortuous route around the Horn of Africa and into the North Atlantic is not clear.
A1.


In Startling Shift, Guatemala Makes Rights Aide President
In a turn that astonished many Guatemalans even after days of political turmoil, the Government's crusading human rights ombudsman, a frequent critic of the military, was sworn in as President early today.
Less than two weeks ago, the former ombudsman, Ramiro de Leon Carpio, was sneaking out the back of his home to escape a squad of military policemen who arrived as Jorge Serrano Elias, then the President, seized nearly dictatorial powers.
In a Delicate Position
The armed forces overthrew Mr.
Serrano on Tuesday with support from business leaders, politicians and others, including Mr. de Leon Carpio.
But when the Attorney General of Human Rights, as he was formerly titled, first emerged as a candidate to finish the remaining half of Mr.
Serrano's five-year term, politicians said they discounted him as unacceptable to the army high command.


Marketing Is First to Enter This Ring
For the last couple of months, George Foreman and Tommy Morrison have been joined at the pocketbook, generating what promoters say will be boxing's richest pay-per-view fight.
But their unusual business relationship will change tonight about the time they touch gloves at the Thomas &amp; Mack Center in Las Vegas, Nev., and come out fighting for the World Boxing Organization's vacant heavyweight championship.
The pay-per-view telecast will begin at 9 P.M.
Eastern time, with the 12-round bout expected to begin at about 10:30.


Dinkins and City Council Strive for Budget Accord
The Dinkins administration and the City Council drew closer yesterday to an agreement on how to cut $300 million from the city's budget but remained far apart on two crucial policy questions, including whether to start a new agency for the homeless.
By late yesterday afternoon, Council leaders had neared agreement with Mayor David N. Dinkins on a partial hiring freeze that would apply to all city workers expect police officers, firefighters, sanitation workers and teachers.
They were also discussing altering revenue estimates to help close the budget gap and reducing by a quarter the number of children receiving city-financed day care.


Experts Wavering on Steep Rise in Cigarette Tax
President Clinton is eagerly eyeing a fat new tax on cigarettes, and for reasons easy to fathom.
Tobacco addicts are a proven menace to themselves and others, so why not turn that to advantage, deterring their destructive behavior with high costs and using the revenue to offset the burden smokers add to the nation's health bill?
While the size of the tax is still being debated in the Administration, reports last week suggested that it could be as high as $2 a pack to help cover the cost of the health-care plan the President is preparing to submit to Congress later this year.


Robert Kennedy Is Honored in Arlington


Dance in Review
Karen Bernard
Dia Center for the Arts  155 Mercer Street  SoHo
Karen Bernard is a big, forthright woman with an interest in nontraditional dance movement and a gift for capturing the essence of a gesture.
The program of new and recent work that she presented on Friday night was full of curious but potent little solos that made refreshing use of Ms.
Bernard's size and authoritative presence.


Gunman's Acquittal Sends World a Message
To the Editor:
It is the summer of 1987, and I am 16 years old.
A high school student from South Carolina, I am living in Osaka, Japan, as a guest of the Goto family.
Yoko, my host sister, decides to take me to a party at a friend's house.
While we are there, I comment on a set of beautiful handmade masks lying on a table.
Our host tells me her grandmother made them, and she asks which one I like best.
A few hours later, when we are leaving, Yoko's friend gives me a handmade, padded silk bag.
Inside is my favorite mask.
The mask hangs on my wall at home now, a reminder of the warm welcome that strangers gave me wherever I went in Japan.


Don't Sacrifice the Needy Workers
The Clinton Administration has agreed to shrink the proposed energy tax in order to push its economic plan through the Senate.
That's an acceptable, though regrettable, compromise.
But it's unacceptable that the Administration seems willing to make up for much of the lost revenue by cutting back its proposed tax credit for low-paid workers.
Such reneging would trash President Clinton's lofty pledge, repeated as recently as last week, that his budget would guarantee full-time workers enough money to bring their families out of poverty.
Political compromises are fine, but not when they victimize America's poor.


Editorial Notebook; Germany Is Not to Blame for Bosnia
Hawks and doves disagree passionately over whether the West should intervene militarily to stop the slaughter in the Balkans.
But almost everyone is too ready to agree on a key issue of historical responsibility.
It is now conventional wisdom that Germany, by extending diplomatic recognition to Croatia and Slovenia in late December 1991, forced the breakup of the old Yugoslav federation, making the subsequent tragedy in Bosnia inevitable.
That's a strained reading of the chronological record.
Worse, it conceals the real dynamics of the crisis, inviting future policy mistakes.


Robin Shanus, Stephen Merkel
Robin Shanus and Stephen Marcus Merkel, both lawyers, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Lori Forman officiated at Wave Hill in the Bronx.
The bride is an associate in the New York law firm of Debevoise &amp; Plimpton.
She graduated from the University of Rochester and received her law degree from Fordham University.


Funeral Is Held for Cyclist Shot Down in Prospect Park


Addy Salute For Campaigns
Advertising's annual awards season is bringing more winners.
At the American Advertising Federation's Addy Awards, presented Saturday, best-of-show honors in the broadcast category went to J. Walter Thompson New York, for a television campaign featuring candid couples for E.P.T. pregnancy-test kits.


Marsi Fein, Todd D. Miller
Martha Susan Fein, a daughter of Drs.
Richard and Helen Fein of Cambridge, Mass., was married yesterday to Todd David Miller, a son of Harley Miller of Canton, Ohio, and the late Elaine Miller.
Rabbi Avis Miller officiated at the Historic Car Barn, a catering hall in Washington.
Ms.
Fein, 31, is keeping her name.
She is known as Marsi.
She is a public-policy researcher in the Office of Social Responsibility, the public-policy research arm of the Union Institute in Cincinnati.
She graduated from Syracuse University, and she and her husband received master's degrees in public administration from New York University.


Art Appreciation 101


Two Big Agencies Start Special Units
Agencies within agencies are being established by two large New York shops.
At DDB Needham New York, a unit called DDB Needham Worldwide Marketing is being formed under Peter le Comte, 41, who has been named president.
The initial client is the National Federation of Coffee Growers of Colombia, an account the agency has handled since 1959 and which Mr. le Comte has served as executive vice president and account director.


Review/Television; From Adolf to Elvis, Fame and Its Many Faces
"Fame in the 20th Century" is a cruise through the waters of 20th-century celebrity under a wisecracking captain.
Clive James, an Australian-born writer who has appeared on BBC television when he was not reviewing the medium for the British press, embarks on his droll eight-hour tour with the announcement that fame as we know it was invented in America in the 20th century.
As two hours' worth of clips from old newsreels and silent movies roll by in tonight's opener, you may suspect that the whole enterprise is merely a pretext for bringing on delicious glimpses of Queen Victoria and Enrico Caruso, Henry Ford and Thomas Alva Edison, Mahatma Gandhi and Mata Hari, Babe Ruth and Vladimir Ilyich Lenin (who, it is noted, attained divinity through a propaganda machine that Mr. James calls "the most successful thing in the Soviet Union except for the secret police").


More U.N. Appeasement on Bosnia
The West has dithered so pathetically, and Bosnia has suffered so terribly, that Bosnian leaders are justifiably suspicious of the new "joint action program" approved by the U.N.
Security Council on Friday in response to Belgrade's grab for a Greater Serbia.
The plan centers on establishing six "safe areas" around the besieged cities of Sarajevo, Srebrenica, Zepa, Tuzla, Gorazde and Bihac.
The U.N. promises protection, but with the whiff of appeasement in the air Bosnians hear a Western euphemism for refugee camps and capitulation.


Market Place; An Industry Debates How Long EMC Can Keep a Technology Lead
MICHAEL C. RUETTGERS, the chief executive of the EMC Corporation, says his company is at the forefront of a revolution in the way information is stored on big computers.
EMC makes small disk drives that are grouped together in so-called disk arrays, which replace the traditional bulky disks on mainframe computers.
EMC's disk arrays, Mr.
Ruettgers says, are the data-storage equivalent of the microprocessor -- a breakthrough technology that is smaller, faster and cheaper than its predecessor.


Ellen S. Levy, Merrill Halpern
Ellen Sue Levy, a sales representative and executive assistant at the American Jewish Congress in New York, was married yesterday to Merrill Bennett Halpern, a vice president at Citibank in Stamford, Conn.
Cantor Henry Weintraub performed the ceremony at the Plaza in New York.
Mrs.
Halpern, 32, graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is the daughter of Bernice Levy of New York and the late Sheldon S. Levy, who was an acting justice of the New York State Supreme Court.


In Neighborhood Courts, Meting Out Local Justice
"TO it come all the common woes of the common people, a constant stream of human trouble," Mildred Adams wrote in The New York Times in 1930.
"The West Side Court boasts a proportion of confidence men, fur-clad women whose escorts somehow cannot keep out of fights, sleek youths with occupations as uncertain as their places of residence."
In the half-century since the West Side Magistrates Court was merged and the three decades since dozens like it were consolidated, that constant stream still surges.
With consolidation, though, the stream now courses well beyond the neighborhoods where magistrates dispensed justice to New York City's distant downtowns.


CHRONICLE
Another cross-cultural tale was told by a guest, SENATOR PATRICK J. LEAHY, the Vermont Democrat, who said he inherited his love of opera from his Italian immigrant grandfather who years ago encouraged him (or more accurately, required him) to listen to recordings by Caruso and other classical music on the radio.


SMUGGLED TO NEW YORK: The Scene; Waves of Panic Yield To Elation of Refugees
Some wore suits, maybe the best clothes they owned, as they leaped frantically into the dark, whitecapped water only 200 yards from America's shore.
Perhaps it was a sign of high hopes in a new land.
But there was likely no time to think as they surged to the deck when their ship ran aground, plunking one after another into the sea as they clutched all they owned in plastic bags.
When rescuers arrived, they found the surf off Rockaway Peninsula dotted with Chinese refugees in a desperate flailing dash to the beach.
The air echoed with screams for help.


Boston Acoustics reports earnings for Qtr to March 27


Repayment and Ban Set In Insider-Trading Case
Robert M. Freeman, a former partner at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, whose arrest in 1987 was a high-water mark of the insider-trading investigations of the 1980's, reached an agreement with the Securities and Exchange Commission yesterday to repay illegal profits and accept a three-year banishment from employment with securities firms or registered investment advisers.
Mr.
Freeman served four months in jail in 1990 and paid a fine of $1 million after pleading guilty to a criminal charge involving one day of trading in the Beatrice Companies early in 1987.


Web of Scandal: A special report.; Neither Votes Nor Candor Lighten the Pall Over Italy
It is now almost a year and a half since Italy's corruption scandal erupted, and hundreds of prominent executives and politicians have been humiliated or ruined by the revelations.
Not only has the scandal touched virtually every political party and corporation; it has also demonstrated the hollowness of Italy's economy, where hundreds of millions of dollars -- some say billions -- have been wasted in payoffs and other bribes.
The Political Damage
As local elections showed on Sunday, the damage wrought to the established parties has redefined Italy's political geography.


Shih-Chun Wang, Leading Specialist On Brain, Dies at 83
Dr.
Shih-Chun Wang, a neuroscientist and pharmacology professor at Columbia University, died on Sunday at Englewood Hospital in Englewood, N.J.
He was 83 and lived in Tenafly.
The cause was septic shock, Columbia-Presbyterian Hospital said yesterday when it reported his death.


2 Flu Drugs Work In Tests on Animals
JUST as scientists have identified the flu strain that they expect will fell Americans next year, a group of Australian researchers has offered a glimpse of hope for the future.
They have designed two new drugs that in animals can protect against influenza if given early and can shorten the course of the disease if given after symptoms appear.
Scientists caution that much work must done before it is known whether the drugs will benefit peoople.
And there is no guarantee that the ever-changeable influenza viruses will not develop resistance to them.
But, the researchers say, the drugs' discovery shows at the very least that it is possible to find new drugs by rationally designing them to block key viral proteins.


Airlines See Little Effect Of Ruling on Bumping
A Federal appeals court in San Francisco has ruled that airline passengers can sue for damages if they are prevented from boarding overbooked flights for which they have a valid ticket, but the major carriers said yesterday that they expected little if any change in their advance booking procedures.
"We already have the lowest involuntary denied boarding rate in the industry, and we don't have any changes planned," Tim Smith, a spokesman for American Airlines, said.
Trans World Airlines also said it contemplated no changes.


Thor Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Fellow Officers Honor Slain Narcotics Detective


INSIDE
New Trade Plan for Tokyo
The White House offered a plan for specific import targets to reduce Japan's trade surplus.
Page D1.
Discrimination Suit Settled
New York City will promote about 75 white supervisors at the Human Resources Administration who said they were discriminated against.
Page B1.
Setback for Space Station
A design team said all options for a scaled-down version of the space station exceeded budget goals.
Page C8.


Making Fishing Easier For All Kinds of Anglers
AFTER his father was in a serious accident nearly a decade ago, Chris Marino got to thinking about how he would handle it if he were ever incapacitated.
He spends a lot of time mulling such matters, working nights loading U.P.S. trucks.
And he decided that one of the things he would miss most would be fishing.
Since he was a boy, he has fished with friends in nearby Spy Pond, where bodies were supposedly dumped during the Revolutionary War.
For him, a driver's license meant the freedom to fish all over the massive Croton Reservoir.
When he married, he and his wife, Christine, went on a honeymoon fishing trip.


Max &amp; Erma's Restaurants (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 9


White House Tries Out a Cheerful Face
David R. Gergen, President Clinton's newest senior adviser, arrived at the White House today for his first formal day on the job, determined to put a more hospitable face on the Administration's dealings with press and public.
"This is a time for us to turn a page," said Mr.
Gergen, who helped three Republican Presidents sell their programs to the American electorate.
He promptly made peace overtures to the White House press corps and to Ross Perot, neither of whom have recently had many good things to say about Mr.
Clinton.


Law Upheld on Bank Insurance Sales
A unanimous Supreme Court decision today resurrected a 77-year-old provision of Federal banking law that forms the basis of the Comptroller of the Currency's policy permitting national banks to sell insurance from their small-town branches to customers nationwide.
The decision did not address the actual validity of the Comptroller's policy, which has been bitterly contested by the insurance industry and will now be the object of resumed proceedings in the Federal appeals court here.
Rather, the question today was whether the 1916 law that the Comptroller relied on in issuing the insurance-sales policy in 1986 was still on the books.


Babbling Brooks and Talking Dogs
Advertising executives are reeling over the sheer ingenuity of the proposal by Space Marketing Inc. to orbit mile-wide billboards that would send corporate logos gliding across starry skies from Tokyo to the Tampa Bay.
Advertising Age called it "the most ambitious marketing endeavor ever contemplated." But competitors of the Roswell, Ga., agency have not been caught napping, and many are thinking big when it comes to exploiting overlooked venues in the natural world.
Among the more innovative proposals:
Bird-belly billboards.
"There are billions of birds in the world," says Nathan Tarr of Birdvertising Corporation, "and virtually all of them have dishwater-dull bellies." Mr.
Tarr is out to change that, by placing ads on what he calls "millions of square feet of non-utilized feather space." He's starting with a small project involving the release of 300 doves bearing tiny Gucci emblem's on their undersides.
If that goes well, flocks of migrating geese will soon sport the Eddie Bauer logo.
Fish flank signs.
Researchers at Silurian Systems in Tacoma, Wash., are seeking ways to genetically engineer fish so that corporate emblems will appear just behind the gills.
A company spokesman said, "With a bit of genetic tweaking, your next piece of Dover sole could display a brief, tasteful message such as, "How about a chocolate mousse for dessert?" Adfish planned for released into the environment include steelhead trout bearing the Bud Light logo.


No Agreement on Budget As Talks Pass Deadline
Mayor David N. Dinkins abruptly broke off negotiations with the City Council on a $31 billion budget early this morning without reaching an agreement on how to fill a $300 million budget gap.
The Mayor, dressed in sweatpants and a windbreaker, marched silently and quickly through a legion of lobbyists and out of City Hall at 1:20 A.M., after a full day of talks failed to produce a compromise.
Although his departure was considered a setback, negotiations were expected to resume sometime today.


Ukrainian Official Backs U.S. Plan on Atom Arms
Ukraine's Defense Minister endorsed an American plan today to put the nuclear warheads based there under international control, pending their elimination.
Gen.
Konstantin Morozov said that he had a "positive attitude" toward the proposal, which was presented by Defense Secretary Les Aspin as part of a broad plan to defuse tensions between Russia and Ukraine and convince Kievthere is no need to rely on nuclear weapons.


Settle Down -- and Toughen Up
Well, it was quite a weekend, wasn't it?
The talking heads, the pollsters, the Democrats in Congress all unloaded.
Call it The Weekend Everyone Gave Up on Bill Clinton.
It's worth remembering that there have been other watershed moments in the annals of Presidential haplessness.
There was the time people realized that George Bush was not going to perform the Presidency that Peggy Noonan had written for him.
There was the moment when we realized that all the Reagan jokes were true.
"It's true hard work never killed anyone," quoth the Gipper when teased about his naps, "but I figure, why take the chance?"


Don't Rush the Choice of a School Chief
In three more weeks, New York City will be without a Schools Chancellor.
Joseph Fernandez, who assumed the post in January 1990, will not serve beyond June 30.
Earlier this year the Board of Education voted 4 to 3 not to renew his contract.
The board now seems determined to choose Mr.
Fernandez's successor by the time he leaves.
That's desirable, but may not be realistic.
Meeting an arbitrary deadline should not take precedence over choosing the right candidate.


6 Officers Promoted At Grey Advertising
Grey Advertising, in moves to broaden its ranks of top management, has promoted six longtime executives.
Robert L. Berenson, 53, was named to the new position of president of Grey's New York office, which handles more than $1.6 billion of the agency's total billings of almost $4.6 billion.
He has been executive vice president for administration and account management at Grey since 1980, and has worked at the agency for 29 years.
Mr.
Berenson is often referred to as the right-hand man of Edward H. Meyer, the chairman, president and chief executive.


'Watch Over Me' to Close
"Someone Who'll Watch Over Me," a drama by Frank McGuinness, is to close after the matinee on Sunday at the Booth Theater, 222 West 45th Street.
The matinee of the play, directed by Robert Lefevre, will be its 232d regular performance; it had five previews.


Enough Calvin Klein Minimalism to Fill Hollywood Bowl
Twenty-five years ago, Calvin Klein pushed a delivery cart with his coat designs hanging on it from Seventh Avenue to the office of Mildred Custin, the president of Bonwit Teller, on 57th Street at Fifth Avenue.
The Calvin legend was born.
On Thursday night, 350 models wearing Mr.
Klein's clothes strolled casually down a runway that slashed 120 feet into an audience of 4,750 people at the Hollywood Bowl.
Guests paid from $50 for a bleacher seat to $25,000 for a box, and they clearly felt they had got their money's worth.


In an Instant, Glitter of 3-Year-Old Class Is Gone
Patrice Smith watched her husband riding Prairie Bayou down the backstretch for the last time in the Belmont Stakes the other day, and when the colt broke down she realized that Mike Smith had just lost something along with everybody else.
"The horse," she reasoned, "was his ticket to greatness."
Prairie Bayou was a lot of people's ticket to greatness.


World Health Official Says AIDS Spread Could Be Controlled
The AIDS epidemic that is galloping through much of the world could be curtailed if known preventions measures were more widely applied and if an additional $1.5 billion to $2.9 billion a year were spent in developing countries on AIDS prevention, a World Health Organization official said here today at the ninth international AIDS meeting.
The extra money would represent an increase of about 1.5 percent over current health-care budgets in developing countries and would translate into the cost of one soft drink for every person in the world, said Dr.
Michael H. Merson, who heads the W.H.O. program on AIDS.


Interstate General Co. L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Long Island Church At Center of Not What but Who
It was not what would be on the screen but who would be running the projector that sent a Long Island case to the United States Supreme Court.
And today the small church group that wanted to present movies in the high school auditorium after school hours said it would try again this fall to show films that it says promote Christian family values.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the observance of the 25th anniversary of Robert F. Kennedy's assassination referred incorrectly to an associate of the Senator's who attended.
He is John Seigenthaler, a retired newspaper editor and former Kennedy spokesman.


Northwest Teleproductions (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Start by Johnson Finishes the Yankees
The debut was a debacle.
Jeff Johnson made his first start of the season tonight, and the way hits rocked and rolled around Royals Stadium, you'd have thought it was a giant pinball machine.
Royals scampered from base to base, and by the time the second inning had ended, Johnson had disappeared into the dugout and maybe even from Yankee plans.
If the 26-year-old left-hander wanted to earn a one-way ticket back to Columbus and the minor leagues, allowing seven hits and five earned runs through 10 batters was one definite way of doing so.


Ayer Executive Joins Trade Group
Marcella Rosen, executive vice president and managing director for media services at Ayer Inc. in New York, said yesterday that she would leave to join the Network Television Association in New York as president and chief executive, effective June 21.
She will join a trade organization that promotes network television as an advertising medium at a time when it faces unprecedented challenges from cable and interactive television.
Nevertheless, Ms.
Rosen said, "There's so much promise and potential that the networks stand to play a major role in, particularly in the future of television."


Latest Version of Supreme Court List: Babbitt in Lead, 2 Judges Close Behind
President Clinton continued today to wrestle with his first Supreme Court appointment.
The latest version of the President's short list has Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt as the top contender to fill the seat of Justice Byron R. White, who is retiring, with two Federal appeals court judges, Stephen G. Breyer and Gilbert S. Merritt, also in the running.
"Stay tuned," Mr.
Clinton told reporters in the Rose Garden.
"I have not made a decision yet, but I'm working on it."


Leeway on Searches
The Justices ruled that the police do not need a warrant to seize drugs detected while frisking a suspect for concealed weapons.
Page A23.


. . . And Historic Scorer
ANTHONY YEBOAH became the first black player and only the second foreigner to win the German scoring title because of four goals that didn't count for his team.
The 27-year-old Yeboah, a Ghanan who plays for Eintracht Frankfurt, ended the season Saturday with 20 goals, tied with ULF KIRSTEN of Bayer Leverkusen for the Bundesliga lead.


Books of The Times; Forced Smiles and Low Profiles in Romanian Tales
Compulsory Happiness  By Norman Manea Translated by Linda Coverdale. 259 pages.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.
There's little laughter or forgiving in "Compulsory Happiness," Norman Manea's bold new book of stories, which confirms in fiction what was known in fact: during the reign of Nicolae Ceausescu, Romania was the most repressive of the Iron Curtain countries for writers with something to declare.


Accounts
*
The University Brands division of Genesco Inc., Nashville, to Frankfurt Gips Balkind, New York, for advertising and direct marketing for its Toddler University line of children's shoes, previously handled by Angotti Thomas Hedge, New York.
Billings were estimated at $3 million.


Star Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Attacks in Los Angeles Fly on Eve of Election
On the eve of what many people say could be a watershed election Tuesday, the two candidates for mayor of Los Angeles called each other liars and racists today, keeping up their personal attacks to the end in a close race.
The volley of accusations by the two candidates, City Councilman Michael Woo, 41, and Richard Riordan, 62, a millionaire businessman, have come in two televised debates and a joint television interview since Sunday.


Pacific International Services Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Q&amp;A
Flitting Butterflies
Q.  Why do butterflies flit aimlessly, in a random path from point to point?
A.
"It looks like flitting, but you're not the butterfly," said Dr.
Louis Sorkin, an entomologist at the American Museum of Natural History in New York.
Depending on the time of day and the species, he said, the butterfly could be searching for or avoiding a number of things.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.98
3.72
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.14
3.10
3.66
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.30
3.27
3.79
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.69
5.72
6.92
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.87
6.91
7.84
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.80
7.83
8.77
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.88
5.89
6.62
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Cryotech reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Morrison Defeats Foreman By Decision
George Foreman sucked in his stomach tonight and stayed upright once again.
Tommy Morrison flailed at the 44-year-old aspiring actor, and hit him high and in the tummy, but it was as if Morrison were asking Foreman to leave a kitchen.
Foreman would not budge.


Electric &amp; Gas Technology Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Power Authority, Facing New Fines, Dismisses Its President
After years of poor performance at its nuclear plants, the New York Power Authority today dismissed its president and chief operating officer.
The authority announced that John C. Brons, its president since March 1991, would resign immediately and would be replaced for the time being by Robert G. Schenberger, who had been executive vice president for finance and administration.


Supreme Equipment reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Kit Manufacturing Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


A New York Cabaret Diva Is Storming Hollywood
Every Sunday evening, the limos and sports cars line up along a bleak stretch of Hollywood for an evening with Jenifer Lewis of "The Diva Is Dismissed."
"Divas are usually rich, famous and disgusting," said Ms.
Lewis.
"I was a poor diva. A diva is someone who pretends to know who they are and look fabulous doing it! That was me."


C.I.A. Funny Businesses
Erwin Rautenberg ran an air freight company in Los Angeles called Air-Sea Forwarders.
But in 1956 he agreed to let the Central Intelligence Agency use the company name.
In return he began handling some of the agency's air shipments.
Air-Sea became a subsidiary of a C.I.A. proprietary called Air Asia.
Now, Mr.
Rautenberg says, the C.I.A. has left him holding the bag for huge debts.
That's the least of the troubles caused by proprietaries.
These are corporations secretly owned by an intelligence agency that do business as private companies, or appear to.
They provide useful cover for agents and launder money for covert operations.
They also provide contacts with bona fide businesses to gather intelligence and facilitate covert operations.
But they are open to abuse and are very difficult to police.


Observer; Elvis, Pelvis &amp; Mundt
David Halberstam's new book about the 1950's -- titled "The Fifties," believe it or not -- makes them feel heavier with significance than they felt to me while they were still in progress.
This shows once again how hard it is to see the forest when you spend ten years up to your eyeballs in trees.
From his commanding vantage high upon a peak in the faraway 1990's, Halberstam can see, for instance, that Elvis Presley was one of the most important phenomena of the 1950's, in a class with the invention of the hydrogen bomb.


U.S. Gives Trade Plan To Japan
The Clinton Administration presented the Japanese Government a broad proposal today to open Japan's markets by setting specific targets for imports of goods and services from the United States and other countries.
But while the proposal calls for the two countries to work out numerical benchmarks for opening the Japanese market for everything from cars to computer chips, senior Administration officials said at a briefing today that the proposal explicitly ruled out any automatic retaliation if the targets were not met.


Prudential Executive Forced Aside
The senior executive in charge of Prudential Securities' southwest region has been forced aside in the wake of reports of widespread abuses of customer accounts at the firm's north Dallas branch, people at the firm said yesterday.
At the same time, the Securities and Exchange Commission has expanded its investigation of the branch to examine whether Prudential improperly withheld incriminating documents requested by the agency, people with knowledge of the inquiry said.


LTX Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Answer: A Value-Added Tax
Equity or efficiency arguments can be made for each of President Clinton's tax proposals.
But there are also legitimate problems with each of them.
Opening up a large gap between the maximum personal income tax rate (a proposed 40 percent) and capital gains tax rate (28 percent) creates an enormous incentive to get back into the loophole business.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
The Administration presented Japan a broad proposal to open Japan's markets by setting specific targets for imports from the United States and other countries.
The proposal also rules out any automatic retaliation if the targets are not met.  [ Page D1. ]
Reviving Spain's economy will be the Socialist Party's main job after winning Sunday's general election.  [ A14. ]


Immigrant Dream of Plenty Turns to Misery and Regret
It took $27,000 of borrowed money, a harrowing 52-day voyage by sea eating rotten rice and two days by van and on foot from Mexico before Hua Zhen was finally smuggled into the United States from China.
That was six weeks ago, before another ship bulging with passengers like him ran aground off of New York City, when Mr.
Hua was still flush with hope.
Already, gloom has consumed Mr.
Hua, who would give only the nickname his friends call him.
He is homesick, deeply in debt, and still in pursuit of work while he lives with relatives in New Jersey.
At best, he hopes to land a job as a dishwasher in a New York restaurant and maybe a bunk to call his own above the kitchen.
Not until years in the future, once his passage is repaid, does he imagine he will see his wife and 10-year-old son again.  'A Modern-Day Slave Trade'
"I regret coming," he said.
"I feel like I was tricked. Everybody said life in America is wonderful, that everyone has a big car and a big house."


U.N. Moves Troops to Somali City And Vows Punishment for Attack
The United Nations command increased its firepower in Mogadishu today and warned a Somali factional leader that it would punish those responsible for killing about two dozen Pakistani peacekeepers in attacks on Saturday.
Adm.
Jonathan Howe, the special United Nations envoy to Somalia, said on United Nations radio, "A full investigation will be made into the affair, and appropriate steps will be taken against those responsible."


Judge Allows Dredging To Continue
A Federal judge held today that a permit for ocean disposal of dioxin-tainted silt from Newark Bay was flawed, but he rejected pleas from environmentalists that the dredging and dumping be halted.
The judge, Dickinson R. Debevoise of United States District Court here, said that the Army Corps of Engineers, which granted the permit to port officials, had failed to show that the dioxin existed only in trace amounts, less than 1 part per trillion.
Federal law permits ocean disposal of dioxin only in trace amounts.


Telxon Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Last Chances In New Jersey


A Forest Absorbs More Carbon Dioxide Than Was Predicted
FOR years, scientists concerned about the environmental effects of burning fossil fuels have tried to balance the global carbon budget.
Now Harvard University researchers have found that temperate-zone forests may play a more important role in absorbing atmospheric carbon dioxide, a key greenhouse gas given off by burning, than was previously believed.
Greenhouse gases in the atmosphere are believed to trap heat, possibly leading to global warming.


Rebound for Treasury Bond Prices
Treasury prices rose yesterday in a rebound from the sharp decline that occurred Friday after the Government reported a suprisingly large increase in nonfarm payroll jobs in May.
But trading yesterday was very light, which means the rise in prices could have been exaggerated.
When trading is thin, action by a few speculators and traders can move prices much further than would occur with normal trading volume.


Daffy Logo


Casino Magic's Shares Fall As a Routine Audit Begins
Shares of the Casino Magic Corporation, whose new riverboat casino opened Saturday in Biloxi, Miss., fell 11 percent yesterday as investors apparently misinterpreted the nature of a routine Government audit that is causing the casino to close for two days.
Casino Magic's shares fell $8 each to close at $70.50 in Nasdaq trading.
Trading was heavy, with more than 1.9 million shares changing hands.


Allen Loses to Farrow in Bitter Custody Battle
Describing Woody Allen as a "self-absorbed, untrustworthy and insensitive" father, a judge in Manhattan yesterday rejected his attempt to win custody of his three children and awarded custody to their mother, Mia Farrow.
In a scathing 33-page decision, Acting Justice Elliott Wilk of State Supreme Court denounced Mr.
Allen for carrying on an affair with one of Ms.
Farrow's daughters, trying to pit family members against one another and lacking knowledge of the most basic aspects of his children's lives.


Ida Sciolino, 73, Dies; Bloomingdale's Officer
Ida Sciolino Antonucci, a retired senior executive and buyer of clothes for young women at Bloomingdale's department stores, died on Sunday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 73.
The cause was a heart attack, her family said.


Review/Television; Friendships, Beautiful and Otherwise
Desperately needing a ratings boost, NBC has decided to face the immediate future on Tuesdays by bowing to the past.
Two new summer series wear their redux badges prominently.
At 8 tonight, "Route 66" takes its cue directly from the 1960's series that starred Martin Milner and George Maharis as adventurous wanderers on the road, Jack Kerouac-style.
At 9, "South Beach," which had a special two-hour premiere on Sunday, is determined to do for cop shows and Florida in the 1990's what "Miami Vice" did so stylishly in the 1980's.
This time around, the youthful heroes of "Route 66" are Nick Lewis (James Wilder) and Arthur Clark (Dan Cortese).
Though he never knew his father, Nick is the son of Buz Murdoch, the Maharis character in the original series.
Learning of Murdoch's death, Nick leaves depressed Pennsylvania and heads west to claim an inheritance, which turns out to be a perfectly preserved 1961 Corvette.
Actually, that car had belonged to the character played by Milner, but let's not get finicky about plot lines.


Mercado 2-Hitter Gives Monroe P.S.A.L. Title
Move over, Hank Greenberg.
Move over, Ed Kranepool.
Make room for 18-year-old Ulises Mercado in the baseball annals of James Monroe High School.
The 5-foot-6-inch, 135-pound senior right-hander pitched a two-hit shutout against Franklin Delano Roosevelt High of Brooklyn yesterday at Yankee Stadium to give the Bronx school its first Public Schools Athletic League championship in 24 years.
The score was 4-0.


Voters Choose Florio Opponent Today
New Jersey's long and expensive campaign for the Republican nomination for governor concludes on Tuesday, when as few as 120,000 voters can select the candidate who will oppose Jim Florio in November.
Secretary of State Daniel Dalton predicted that only 16 to 19 percent of the state's 4 million registered voters would cast ballots in both the Republican and Democratic primaries.
Based on past performance, that means only 350,000 or so voters are likely to turn out in the Republican primary, dividing their votes among the party's three major candidates.


Stewart Enterprises (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASEBALL  Sun Devils Are Sent Packing  Jay Hogue shut down top-ranked Arizona State with four innings of two-hit relief and Ernesto Rivera singled to break a 4-4 tie with two down in the eighth inning as Oklahoma State stayed alive in the College World Series with a 5-4 victory yesterday.
The Cowboys (44-16) advanced to an elimination game today against the loser of last night's game between Texas and Wichita State.
Arizona State (46-20) was eliminated.
It was only the second time in 16 trips to Omaha that the Sun Devils failed to win a game. (AP)


Linebacker Action for the Giants
In a rapid pair of moves yesterday, the Giants signed one free-agent linebacker and cut the cord to another.
They signed Michael Brooks of the Denver Broncos for $5.4 million over three years, then lifted the transition-player status from Carl Banks, freeing him to sign with any team, including the Giants.
The unanswered question is where the Giants plan to play Brooks.
The Broncos used him as an outside linebacker his first three years and inside the last three years.
He made the Pro Bowl last season.


Assembly Approves Ban on Assault Weapons
The New York State Assembly approved a near-total ban on assault weapons today, the first time that either house of the Legislature has acted to outlaw possession of the rapid-firing guns.
Officials in the Republican-controlled Senate, where an assault-weapon has never been voted out of committee, said passage of the bill is doubtful.
But the bill's Senate sponsor said he was hopeful that the vote by the Democratic-majority Assembly would improve the bill's chances.


Rottlund Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bulls' Ethic in the Finals: Work Those Suns Weary
He understands how they think.
He knows how to make them uncomfortable.
Now that B. J. Armstrong's role with the Chicago Bulls has expanded to include a starting spot and specific defensive assignments, he can draw upon his previous basketball life as an outstanding offensive player at the high school and college level.
Armstrong's 3-point shooting percentage of .453 led the National Basketball Association this season.
But it is his role within Chicago's defensive structure, and his ability to share in the attempted containment of Phoenix guard Kevin Johnson, that could become a central factor in the championship series against the Suns, which begins Wednesday night in Phoenix.


AGP &amp; Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Fixing Immigration
The human cargo washes up on America's shores -- Chinese bodies, Haitian bodies.
Congress considers narrowing the gateway to liberty.
Anti-immigration groups argue passionately that there is no more room at the American inn.
Will the United States always remain a refuge for the tired, the poor and the tempest-tossed?
Or will the nation move, as Germany did last week, to restrict its policies of political asylum -- "to shut this traffic down," in the words of New York's top immigration official?


Sportmart Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Settlement In Lawsuit On Job Bias
Accused of using reverse discrimination to diversify the municipal work force, the Dinkins administration agreed yesterday to give raises and higher ranks to about 75 supervisors at the Human Resources Administration who contended that they were passed over for advancement because they were white.
The administration did not acknowledge wrongdoing in settling a lawsuit brought in March by the Social Service Employees Union, Local 371, which charged that top officials manipulated city rules to promote black and Hispanic supervisors who did not perform as well as whites on Civil Service tests.


PLEADING FOR LIFE, STUDENT IS SLAIN
A 16-year-old student on a lunch hour stroll outside a Brooklyn school for troubled teen-agers was chased by two older youths, cornered between two parked cars and shot several times at close range yesterday as he pleaded for his life, the police said.
He died on the street minutes later.
New York City police detectives said that at least two assailants had pursued the student through the streets after a dispute earlier in the lunch hour that appeared to focus on a leather jacket or vest.


Temple Official Resigns
CHARLES THEOKAS, Temple's athletic director, resigned yesterday "to pursue other professional opportunities."
His resignation goes into effect on Aug. 31.


Cable TV Chimes In With Some High-Tech Plans
The cable television industry, traditionally a technology laggard, invoked Silicon Valley's high-tech reputation and pledged a panoply of interactive services at the the National Cable Television Association convention, which opened here today.
The cable providers, which now reach more than 57 million American homes -- about 62 percent of the nation's television households -- are eager to stake their claim as the builders of the national data highway.


Hungary Party Ousting Four Leading Rightists
Hungary's governing party has disassociated itself from the small but vocal right-wing circle that has coalesced around Istvan Csurka, one of the party's leaders.
The action followed months of indecision on how to handle the party's internal right-wing opposition.
The steering committee of the Democratic Forum recommended this weekend that the party's ethics committee should expel Mr.
Csurka and three right-wing colleagues.


Santos Is Suspended
Belmont Park stewards suspended jockey JOSE SANTOS for seven days, from June 11 through June 17, for careless riding.
Santos was cited yesterday for his ride aboard Runaway Storm in Belmont's second race on June 6. (AP)


Work Begins on Museum for Rock-and-Roll


COMPANY NEWS
GLOBAL MARINE INC., Houston, said it had agreed to acquire a 50 percent stake in three oil-and-gas drilling rigs from Transocean Drilling A.S., a Norwegian drilling conractor.
JOHN H. HARLAND CO., Atlanta, said it planned a stock repurchase of up to 10 percent -- or 3.4 million shares -- of its outstanding stock with a current market value of $92 million.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Benjamin S. Carson; For Many, Pediatric Neurosurgeon Is a Folk Hero
WHEN he first came to Johns Hopkins Hospital as a neurosurgery resident, Dr.
Benjamin S. Carson was occasionally mistaken for an orderly.
"It wasn't deliberately racist," he recalled, without a trace of bitterness.
"It's just that orderlies were the only black hospital employees these people had ever seen before."
Today, at age 41, eight years after becoming the nation's youngest chief of pediatric neurosurgery -- he is one of only three African-Americans in that position -- Dr.
Carson is arguably the most famous surgeon on the Hopkins staff.
As director of the 22-member team that in 1987 successfully separated Siamese twins joined at the head, he was in the national news for weeks.


Corrections
Because of a computer malfunction, a review in Weekend on Friday about "Latin American Artists of the 20th Century," at the Museum of Modern Art through Sept. 7, rendered the names of four artists incorrectly.
They are Matta, Joaquin Torres-Garcia, Rufino Tamayo and Carlos Merida.


Eugene Braun-Munk, 58, International Publisher
Eugene Clarence Braun-Munk, an international publisher, died in Paris on June 2.
He was 58.
The cause was AIDS, said Page Ashley, a friend.


ESPN Going Into Overtime
ESPN yesterday unveiled ESPN2, a 24-hour sports network that will go on the air Nov. 2 and will offer a mixture of news and information, live events and programming aimed at viewers between the ages of 18 and 34.
ESPN appeals mainly to the 25-54 age group.
ESPN2 will show up to three nights a week of National Hockey League games, and will feature college basketball, arena football, volleyball and extreme sports like sky-surfing.
The cornerstone program will be SportsNight, a news and highlights show to air Friday-Monday, from 8-11 P.M.


Search Advances For 'Antisense' Drugs
SCIENTISTS at a small biotechnology company have taken a significant step toward developing a new class of drugs designed to block the action of specific genes.
Such drugs hold the potential to treat many viruses and cancers that elude current therapies.
The drugs are an improved version of "antisense" agents, chemicals intended to target and impede messenger RNA, which mediates translation of the genetic information of DNA into specific proteins.
The researchers, from Gilead Sciences Inc. of Foster City, Calif., report their findings in the current issue of Science.


New Chairman For Merrill
Merrill Lynch &amp; Company said yesterday that it had named Daniel P. Tully, the brokerage firm's president and chief executive, to the additional post of chairman.
Mr.
Tully, who is 61 and has been president and chief operating officer at Merrill since 1985, succeeds William A. Schreyer, 65, who is retiring after eight years as chairman of the nation's largest securities firm.
The announcement came at Merrill's regular board meeting, which was held in Berlin.


Ghost Town Where Byzantines Mined Gold
ARCHEOLOGISTS exploring a ghost town in the remote eastern desert of Egypt have discovered the remains of what almost certainly was a major gold-mining operation for the Byzantine Empire.
The stark granite cliffs surrounding the town were the source of a rich supply of the metal that gilded the icons and lavish art of early Christianity.
The site, called Bir Umm Fawakhir, should give scholars a rare look at the conditions of ordinary people in Byzantine Egypt, a poorly understood period from A.D. 330, when control of the Roman Empire shifted to Constantinople, until the Muslim conquest in A.D. 642.


Patterns
Snubbing the Couture
The tease of the season has been that John Galliano was planning to show during Paris's haute couture collections in July.
In fact, that was the understanding at Untitled, his primary Manhattan boutique.
The theory was that the four-figure price tags on Mr.
Galliano's finely worked pieces seemed most compatible with the extravagance of the couture.
Mr.
Galliano himself hinted as much when he sat out the last round of ready-to-wear collections.
Seated instead in the audience at the Chanel show last March, he said the date of his next show would be "a surprise."


N.Y.R.A.-OTB Merger?
The 23 trustees of the New York Racing Association will receive a private briefing tomorrow by members of the Governor's Advisory Commission on Racing in the 21st Century and will reportedly be told that N.Y.R.A. must be receptive to negotiating a merger with the Off-Track Betting Corporation.
"From our perspective," an executive of the commission said yesterday, "this is N.Y.R.A.'s best and last hope to work cooperatively with the state. Both N.Y.R.A. and OTB are in big trouble financially, and they will have to be willing to follow the commission's report and try to negotiate a longterm relationship with the Offtrack Betting Corporation."


Weighing Milky Way, Astronomers Find Halo of Dark Matter
The serenity of the Milky Way in the night sky masks the appetite of a cannibal.
That cannibalism provides an important clue to the extent and nature, if not the identity, of the mysterious invisible matter that dominates the universe.
The clue is that a vast halo encompassing the Milky Way galaxy contains 10 times the mass that astronomers can see in the multitude of visible stars.
Astronomers said this was the most important estimate yet of the amount of invisible matter in a single galaxy, and proof of the existence of what is known as dark matter.


By Design; Summer Successes
Summer shoppers have spoken.
A roundup of a few stores' best sellers reveals what will be hot stuff when the torrid season hits.
It's no surprise that Bergdorf Goodman can barely keep up with the demand for little floral-print granny dresses.
They are rolling out at every price, from under a $100 all the way up.
The success of the sneaker is no surprise, either; it's suddenly de rigueur for the young and beautiful as well as for the just plain weary.
What is a surprise, however, is that the Chanel boutique on East 57th Street has sold out its high-top version -- at $660 a pair.


One for His Lifetime, Three for Her Crown
One two-time champion underwent a torturous four-hour test before being dethroned by a jubilant neophyte who spoiled his attempt to become the first American man to win three French Open titles.
Another two-time champion was reinstated to the winner's circle, and to the world's No. 1 ranking, after a five-year drought in Paris that had left her shaken about her ability to perform like a champion at all.
The French Open remained the most grueling event on the Grand Slam calendar, an event that sometimes was metronomic because of its numerous baseline rallies.
But this year its outcome was far from repetitious.


Discarded Files Add to Turmoil at Sunbeam
The Sunbeam-Oster Company said yesterday in a letter to a Delaware court that employees had mistakenly discarded 120 files from the office of its ousted chairman, Paul B. Kazarian, who had requested the documents as part of a lawsuit.
The company had also announced Sunday that two top managers, former assistants of Mr.
Kazarian, had requested and been granted paid leaves of absence to fight their legal battle against Mr.
Kazarian.
The company also said it would buy back $50 million worth of its shares.


Softimage Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Market Place; With Telecom buying American, will A.T.&amp; T. buy British?
THE deal last week by British Telecommunications P.L.C. to buy a 20 percent stake in MCI for $4.3 billion and cooperate in marketing corporate telephone services worldwide has piqued the interest of investors in the two other British telecommunications stocks.
Investors are wondering if A.T.&amp; T. will respond to the British Telecom-MCI link by buying all or part of Cable and Wireless P.L.C. or Vodafone Group P.L.C.
Cable and Wireless and Vodafone, both of which are traded on the New York Stock Exchange as well as in London, could be attractive to an acquirer like A.T.&amp; T., though for different reasons.


St. John Knits reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


From Game 6 to June 7: Knicks Clean Out Lockers
Cleaning out their lockers and saying their goodbyes, the Knicks held their season-ending meeting today and closed a successful season that ended in disappointment.
It was still too early for the players to feel satisfaction from their 60-victory season and their Atlantic Division title.
They were still downcast about the way their season ended, with a 96-88 loss to the Bulls in Chicago last Friday in Game 6 of the Eastern Conference finals.


Stock Prices End Lower Across the Board
Stocks closed lower across the board yesterday, despite a late afternoon comeback that briefly took the Dow Jones industrial average into positive territory.
Among the weakest sectors were banking, technology and gambling.


Guatemala's New Chief Ousts Some Top Officers
The former human rights ombudsman who is Guatemala's new President, Ramiro de Leon Carpio, moved quickly today against the military high command, sweeping out some officers who played leading roles in the political turmoil of the last two weeks.
On his first full day as Commander in Chief of the armed forces, Mr. de Leon Carpio ordered the retirement of the Defense Minister, Gen.
Jose Domingo Garcia Samayoa, and the transfer of several other commanders.


What Makes Energy Tax Scary; It Will Create Jobs
To the Editor:
There are at least two aspects of the energy, or British Thermal Unit, tax that seem to be missing in the debates on the subject:
(1) The tax will create jobs, rather than lose them and will not necessarily lead to inflation because, as it becomes economically disadvantageous to waste energy, we will insulate our homes better.
Then, reduced energy consumption will reduce pollution and the needs for extensive and expensive emission controls.
Also, we will build, rather than merely talk about, high-speed rail lines in high-density traffic corridors.
Insulating homes, building tracks and railroad cars will provide new jobs.
Jobs come and go: we now produce very few horse-drawn carriages, full-fashioned stockings or vacuum tubes.


Nigeria Nervously Awaits Vote to End Army Rule
By the laws of political logic, this should be a time of euphoria in Nigeria as the military appears poised to hand power to civilians.
But as Saturday's multi-party presidential elections draw near, attention has shifted to the broken promises, corruption and economic mismanagement of the military leaders.
There is "a lot of skepticism and disbelief" about whether the military leader, Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida, is genuinely prepared to go, said Gen.
Olusegun Obansanjo, a former head of state and the only Nigerian military leader to yield power to civilians voluntarily.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  IN ITALY, A WEB OF SCANDAL  The corruption scandal in Italy suggests that its emergence as an industrial power was composed in part on the myth that an economic boom was built on free enterprise rather than on an unholy alliance that denied the notion of competition.
A1  U.N.
RAISES FIREPOWER IN SOMALIA  The United Nations command in the Somali capital increased its firepower there and warned a faction leader that it would punish those responsible for killing about two dozen Pakistani peacekeepers.
A1


Latest Resume Entry: Brown to Coach Pacers
LARRY BROWN was named coach of the Indiana Pacers yesterday, succeeding the dismissed BOB HILL.
It will be the fifth National Basketball Association coaching assignment for Brown, who recently quit as coach of the Los Angeles Clippers.
He also coached at U.C.L.A. and Kansas as well as in the American Basketball Association.


The Doctor Fashions Building Block. Again.
Doc Gooden stood before his locker and said the words almost sheepishly.
He knew he was being repetitive.
He knew everyone had heard it before.
Still, he couldn't help hoping.
One day, he figures, it has to come true.
"I probably sound like a broken record saying this," Gooden acknowledged last night at Shea Stadium, "but, hopefully, we can build on this."


It's a Soft Sell Amid High Hopes
They want at least $500 million but won't say so boldly.
Not anymore.
But Atlanta Olympic organizers believe that network TV rights for the 1996 Summer Olympics are worth what Billy Payne, the president of the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games, brashly said they were last year.
But now they're trying a softer sell, which they hope will lead to the same conclusion.
Top committee officials -- minus Payne, who has just returned to work after recent heart-bypass surgery -- were in Manhattan last week to convince ABC, NBC and CBS of the value to be gained by paying 25 percent more for Atlanta than the $401 million NBC paid for the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.


Political Memo; A Landslide Remakes Texas's Political Landscape
For Texas Democrats, and for Gov.
Ann W. Richards in particular, it is not a good sign when party insiders here start making nervous cracks about Yellow Dog Republicans.
There has never been any such thing as a Yellow Dog Republican in Texas, of course.
From the Civil War on, the term applied to loyal Democrats, so named, the legend goes, because they would vote for a yellow dog before they would vote for any Republican.


Capitulating, Bosnia Backs Plan to Create Safe Areas
The Bosnian Government announced today that it would cooperate in carrying out a Security Council resolution calling for the deployment of thousands of United Nations military forces to protect six regions it has designated as safe areas for Muslims.
The decision, made on Sunday, came despite sharp local criticism of the resolution, which many people here regard as capitulation by the West to nationalist Serbs who have seized 70 percent of Bosnia and as a move toward the creation of reservations for uprooted Muslims.


City Hall Can't Brag About Water Practices
To the Editor:
In "Money Down the Drain" (Op-Ed, May 21), Timothy D. Searchinger would have us believe that Mayor David N. Dinkins and New York City's Commissioner of Environmental Protection, Albert F. Appleton, are secret environmentalists out to save clean water and city money.
Their newfound interest in low-flow toilets, shower heads and leaky faucets, while greatly needed and long overdue, is really part of a much larger city effort, more about raising money than saving it.
Their misguided and ill-planned effort to meter the city's water use has created havoc and hardship in all five boroughs.


The Talk of the Tonys; After the Tonys, Some Fault Is Found, But Tickets Sell
Almost everyone was happy, though maybe not happy enough.
In the aftermath of Sunday night's Tony Awards, the grumbling was minimal, but it was there.
Some of the winners were a little irritated at the 30-second limit on acceptance speeches and the swelling strings that drowned them out as they outstayed their welcome.
It was, as Tony Kushner, author of the Tony-winning "Angels in America," said on the air, "a scary orchestra."


Corrections
An article in Your Money on May 8 about personal bankruptcy misstated the court fee for filing a petition under Chapter 13 of the United States Bankruptcy Code.
It is $150.
This correction was delayed because the author of the article did not learn of the error, from a telephone caller, until her return from vacation.


Cost Cutters Shouldn't Target Elderly Widows
To the Editor:
Your longstanding commitment to defending the rights of those without access to political power deserves the commendation of all of society.
In editorials and columns, your newspaper has championed women, minorities, the less affluent and the disadvantaged.
However, a group that is overwhelmingly composed of older women, many of them members of minority ethnic elements, is being subjected to unfair treatment by the Federal Government.
I refer to the future survivors, almost all widows, of retired Federal employees.


Worker-Participation Programs Are Found Illegal
Employers, lawyers and business trade associations expressed dismay yesterday after the National Labor Relations Board ruled that an employee-involvement program at E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company violated Federal labor laws.
The board ordered Du Pont last week to dismantle seven committees established to deal with safety and recreation issues at the Chambers Works plant in Deepwater, N.J., and to bargain in good faith with the plant's union, the Chemical Workers Association.


Court Ruling Hits the Stock Of Advanced Micro Devices
Shares in Advanced Micro Devices Inc. took a beating today as investors reacted to a California state appeals court ruling that raised new doubt about the company's right to manufacture its clone of Intel's 386-class computer chip.
But analysts were quick to note that the court ruling, issued late Friday, could itself still be overturned and that there would be no real impact on Advanced Micro Devices' business until a separate Federal suit was resolved.


CHRONICLE
It was one of the high points of this year's Troia International Film Festival, named after the resort town where it is held, south of Lisbon: LAUREN BACALL, sleek in black silk pants and pearls, unveiled a rose marble plaque in her honor on Saturday.
Silence.
Then with characteristic candor, she said in a booming voice: "It's too small. I can't see my name." Ms.
Bacall pointed out that plaques honoring such male stars as Kirk Douglas, Robert Mitchum, Ben Gazzara and Mickey Rooney were considerably larger than those made for her and for Jane Russell.


Altman Film in Festival
Robert Altman's "Short Cuts" will be the opening-night film of the 31st New York Film Festival, the Film Society of Lincoln Center has announced.
The festival opens on Oct. 1 and will run through Oct. 17.
The film, based on the short stories of Raymond Carver, has 22 principal roles.
The cast includes Anne Archer, Bruce Davison, Robert Downey Jr., Peter Gallagher, Buck Henry, Jack Lemmon, Frances McDormand, Matthew Modine, Tim Robbins, Madeline Stowe, Lily Tomlin and Tom Waits.


Ketchum Forms Health-Care Unit
Ketchum Communications Inc. said yesterday that, like many other large agencies, it would consolidate its consumer health-care communications and medical advertising in a single organization.


Italian Pianist Awarded Top Prize In Cliburn Contest
From the outset of the Ninth Van Cliburn International Piano Competition two and a half weeks ago, many have called it the year of the Italians, and they were right.
It is the year of one Italian, at least: Simone Pedroni, from Novara, who took first prize at the awards ceremony on Sunday evening at the Tarrant County Convention Center Theater here.
Valery Kuleshov of Russia finished in second place and Christopher Taylor of the United States was third.
Mr.
Pedroni received a gold medal, a silver cup and a $15,000 cash prize.
Along with Mr.
Kuleshov and Mr.
Taylor, he will be given concert tours and career management for the next two seasons and a Philips recording.
Mr.
Pedroni also won the Steven de Groote Memorial Chamber Music Award of $1,000 for his performance of the Franck Piano Quintet with the American String Quartet.
On Succeeding Horowitz
Mr.
Pedroni's concerts are to include a debut recital in Carnegie Hall at a date to be determined.
"It will be one of the most beautiful experiences of my life," he said through an interpreter.
"One of the first records I ever bought was Horowitz at Carnegie Hall. I never thought I would succeed him there."


What Makes Energy Tax Scary
To the Editor:
"A Bipartisan Disservice" (editorial, May 21), on the proposals by Senators David Boren, Oklahoma Democrat, and John Danforth, Missouri Republican, to cut taxes and spending from President Clinton's proposed budget, was not clearly thought out where you touch on the Administration's plan to tax energy by British Thermal Units used.
You maintain that the Clinton-backed energy tax hurts oil-producing states like Oklahoma and Louisiana, and that the Boren-Danforth approach would shift the burden from South to North.


Inquiry on General's Remarks
The Air Force said tonight that it was investigating reports that a two-star general had disparaged President Clinton in a speech, calling him, among other things, a "pot-smoking" and "draft-dodging" Commander in Chief.
The investigation, disclosed tonight by The Washington Post, was confirmed by an Air Force spokesman who identifying the officer as Maj.
Gen.
Harold N. Campbell.


NOMINEE RETHINKS VATICAN POSTING
Mayor Raymond L. Flynn of Boston, disappointed that he may not be able to expand the position of Ambassador to the Vatican to include a role in global trouble spots, is reconsidering his appointment by the Clinton Administration, members of his staff said today.
In interviews this weekend with Boston newspapers, Mr.
Flynn said he did not want to accept the position if he was not given the money and authorization to travel to sites of conflict like the Balkans and Haiti.


Adirondack Survival Waits for State Senate
To the Editor:
The Adirondack Forest -- part of the heritage of New York State and the United States as priceless as the Statue of Liberty -- is in danger, unless the State Legislature acts promptly.
Money to preserve the Adirondacks is available, in unclaimed bottle deposits and existing taxes, but the State Senate has to approve legislation to earmark this money for an environmental trust fund.
The legislation has been approved by the Assembly and is strongly supported by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.


Striking Coal Miners Fight To Protect Shrinking Power
It was just before midnight, an hour very dark and still in the mountains south of Charleston, and a dozen men were gathered around a fire on the picket line at the Hobet 21 Mine.
The strike by the United Mine Workers of America was in its third week, and a certain domesticity had settled in: The men had built a sturdy picket shack and stocked it with food and drink.
They had adopted a stray dog and named it Striker.
They had become enough of a fixture along U.S. 119 that motorists honked their horns, and many stopped with firewood and food.


Senate Repeals No-Fault Insurance Law
The state Senate gave final legislative approval tonight to a repeal of Connecticut's 20-year-old no-fault automobile insurance law, which critics say has led, despite the statute's intent, to higher premiums and clogged courts.
The repeal measure -- which still requires approval from Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., who has not said whether he will sign it -- would replace no-fault insurance with a modified tort system that proponents said could cut premiums on a basic automobile insurance policy by more than 19 percent.


Volt Information Sciences Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


William Steiner, 80, Expert in Marketing
William Steiner, who was long prominent in the fields of direct marketing, advertising and promotion, died May 20 in his apartment on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
He was 80.
The cause was heart failure, said his brother, Clyde Steiner of San Francisco.


Power in a Small Box
THE Hewlett-Packard Company introduced a new subnotebook computer yesterday, the 2.9-pound Omni Book 300.
It appears to be the best compromise yet for those people who demand full power to run Windows software in the smallest and lightest possible package.
The Omni Book 300 packs a lot of technology into its trim, black case, which measures 11 inches wide by 6.4 inches deep by 1.4 inches tall.
Those dimensions make it substantially smaller than a conventional notebook computer, but still wide enough for a full-size keyboard and deep enough for a generous monochrome VGA display.


For a Reintroduction of Its Sodas, Soho Beverages Tries Stirring Up a Mock Controversy.
WHEN consumers learn of Soho Natural Soda's comeback, they're supposed to respond with a hearty "Soho!" instead of a sneering "So what?" So the entrepreneurs who bought the upstart soft-drink company are embarking on a humorous campaign that manufactures controversy in hopes of attracting attention.
Advertising for Soho Beverages Inc., being introduced this week by Burkhardt &amp; Christy of New York, uses the device of an imaginary anti-Soho outfit called "The Committee to Preserve Artificial Soft Drinks," complete with logo showing the Soho trademark obscured by the international symbol for "No."


CAPTAIN AND CREW CHARGED IN VOYAGE OF CHINESE TO U.S.
The captain and crew members of the decrepit freighter that ran aground off Queens were charged yesterday with smuggling illegal Chinese immigrants as Federal prosecutors described a bizarre voyage in which the agent of a crime boss in China seized control of the ship and locked the captain below deck.
The long, sweaty voyage began in January, according to a complaint filed in Federal District Court in Brooklyn yesterday, as speedboats loaded the first of nearly 300 immigrants on the freighter in the South China Sea off Bangkok, later joined by more who boarded off Kenya.
It ended when the captain and crew twice failed to make rendezvous with smaller ships in the Atlantic to carry the immigrants to America, leading to a mutiny.
A Desperate Struggle
An immigrant on board, hired by a crime boss to transport the human cargo, then took the freighter to New York, where the ship ran hard aground off the Rockaway Peninsula early Sunday as he tried to drop off the passengers, the Federal complaint said.
With their goal in sight, the startled immigrants rushed to the deck and leaped into the sea, beginning a desperate, frantic struggle through the pounding surf, in which eight of them died.


Home Shopping to Get Work for Macy Channel
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company, which last week announced its intention to start a 24-hour television shopping channel, said yesterday that it had signed a letter of intent with Home Shopping Network Inc. to have the competing cable operator fill orders and provide customer service.
"A retailer's ability to efficiently process customer orders is a critical component of any television shopping program," said Myron E. Ullman 3d, chairman and chief executive of Macy.


Cascade Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Executive Changes
BODINE CORP., Bridgeport, Conn., a manufacturer of automatic assembly and test systems, appointed David Bodine president.
CAMINO LABORATORIES, San Diego, a manufacturer of critical-care medical devices, named Randall L. Whitfield president and chief executive.


The Season, Is Over, But Oakley Battles On
Charles Oakley wants more playing time next season.
He would also like a contract extension.
And if the Knicks do not meet his wishes, then Oakley will consider asking for a trade.
"I'm going to talk to David Checketts," Oakley said, referring to the Knicks' president.
"I'm just not happy now. It's bad, because I don't get unhappy too much. I'm just not happy about a lot of things. I gave all I had. There's a lot that went on that people don't know about. I can't go through it another year."


Chess
If you are going to play a match billed as the world championship -- even though it is apparently not going to be sanctioned by the International Chess Federation -- it is important for your morale not to falter in the last competition before you turn from practice to the vital pre-match study.
That is surely why Nigel Short, Gary Kasparov's challenger in their renegade title contest in London coming up in September, put on a special final-round effort to tie for first in the Verenigde Spaarbank International Tournament in Amsterdam in early May.
Short had announced that he would make this his last tourney before meeting Kasparov.
At the start of Round 6 of the six-round event, which was held as a memorial to Max Euwe, the former world champion from the Netherlands, Short trailed the leader, Viswanathan Anand of India, by a point.
He defeated Anand impressively, however, and like his co-winners, Anand and Vladimir Kramnik of Russia, was awarded a prize of about $6,500.


Protection of Region's Open Spaces Urged by Planning Group
The planning group that more than half a century ago proposed the system of parkways that today unites the New York region has concluded that it is now critically important to identify and protect broad corridors of woods, open space and sparse development that still survive 40 to 100 miles from New York City.
The group, the Regional Plan Association, said that vast expanses of open space, previously considered invulnerable, are now threatened.
A decade of frenetic development has claimed farmland, forests and verdant private estates from northern Connecticut to southern New Jersey, it said.


Political Memo; Answer: Cut Entitlements. Question: But How?
Like a weed run rampant, entitlement programs are taking over the Federal budget, and unless they are brought under control, politicians and economists agree, no hope exists for lowering the deficit in the long run.
The issue dominated the House debate on President Clinton's budget last month and is sure to be a main element of the debate in the Senate later this month.


When Americans Are No Longer No. 1
To the Editor:
Re "New Tally of World's Economies Catapults China Into Third Place" (front page, May 20): In proposing to abandon measuring the size of national economies by current exchange rates in preference for purchasing power equivalents, the International Monetary Fund replaces one imperfect method with another.


Fate of Space Station Is in Doubt As All Options Exceed Cost Goals
A NASA design team told a Presidential committee today that all options for a proposed scaled-down version of the space station exceeded budget goals set by the White House.
The findings raise the possibility that the station may never be built.
The team also reported that the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's estimate for the present design of the space station Freedom was understated by some 10 percent because of costs hidden elsewhere in the agency's budget.


Sports of The Times; Ashe Legacy: Strong Talk From Heart
IF only Arthur Ashe could have shared his feelings in increments over the next 30 or 40 years, as a grand old man of sport and public activism.
How much better it would have been to have Arthur Ashe available this month to comment on Wimbledon and Lani Guinier's being scuttled by President Clinton.


Nets' Petrovic Dies in Auto Accident in Germany
Drazen Petrovic, the New Jersey Nets' 28-year-old guard and the team's leading scorer, was killed yesterday in an automobile accident in Germany, according to his father.
Reached by telephone at his home in Croatia, Jole Petrovic confirmed reports of his son's death, saying, "It is true."


Harold's Stores reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


The Victor in Spain Has New Hurdles Ahead
With the domestic economy in a slump, the governing Socialist Party muddied by corruption scandals and the electorate tired of the same old faces in power, Spain's conservative opposition seemed to have everything going for it in general elections on Sunday.
But in the end, emerging from the seclusion of the Moncloa Palace, apologizing for past mistakes and single-handedly carrying his party's flag, Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez again showed his ability to charm Spanish voters by winning his fourth successive general election.


No Headline
"Mr. Allen has demonstrated no parenting skills that would qualify him as an adequate custodian for Moses, Dylan or Satchel. His financial contributions to the children's support, his willingness to read to them, to tell them stories, to buy them presents and to oversee their breakfasts, do not compensate for his absence as a meaningful source of guidance and caring in their lives." -- ACTING JUSTICE ELLIOTT WILK.  [ B4:3. ]


A Historic Captain . . .
PAUL INCE became the first black player to be named captain of the English national team yesterday, and his first game with his new responsibility is tomorrow night, against the United States in a U.S.
Cup '93 match in Boston.
Ince, a 25-year-old midfielder for Manchester United, was picked by Coach GRAHAM TAYLOR to replace DAVID PLATT, who was hurt on Sunday playing for Juventus of Turin in the Italian League.


Justices Allow Religious Groups After-Hours Use of Public Schools
The Supreme Court ruled today that public school systems that open their schools to after-hours use by community groups must permit religious groups to use the buildings on the same terms.
The 9-to-0 decision in a case from Long Island had the effect of overturning a New York State law that state courts and education officials had long interpreted as barring the use of school property for any religious purpose.


Tokyo Journal; A Model Prince? Well, He Could Do the Washing
When Crown Prince Naruhito sips a cup of sacred sake at his wedding Wednesday morning, it will not only conclude his arduous courtship of his American-educated bride.
It will also culminate the long and surprisingly public search for identity by Naruhito himself.
Most of the wedding publicity has focused on the future Empress, Masako Owada, a former Foreign Ministry official who was pursued by the Crown Prince for six years.
Indeed, the publicity has overshadowed the man who is the most international, down-to-earth and perhaps the most ambiguous heir to the Chrysanthemum Throne in modern history.


Employers Taken For Philanthropists
To the Editor:
A May 20 news analysis on health care states of President Clinton: "He has already said he wants employers to pay for the cost. He is considering two forms of taxation, requiring employers to pay either a fixed percentage of the total payroll or a fixed amount of money for each worker."


CHRONICLE
The guard at the State Department changed yesterday when RICHARD BOUCHER, the bearded and unflappable press secretary whose soft but authoritative voice and skill at obfuscation were well known to diplomatic reporters, stepped aside in favor of MIKE McCURRY.
Mr.
McCurry is a veteran press secretary, whose expertise lies in political campaigns more than in international affairs.
He served as spokesman for three candidates for the Democratic Presidential nomination: Senator John Glenn (1984), Bruce Babbitt (1988), now the Interior Secretary, and Senator Bob Kerrey (1992).
He is also a former spokesman for the Democratic National Committee.


SFG Corp. reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


American Software (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Vietnam Forest Yields Evidence Of New Animal
IN a lush, primeval forest of Vietnam, barely explored even by the villagers who live nearby, scientists have identified an entirely new species of mammal: a cowlike creature with the glossy coat of a horse, the agility of a goat and the long horns of an antelope.
"It's a striking animal that appears to be a cow that lives the life of a goat," said Dr.
John MacKinnon of Hong Kong, a British biologist who made the find with five Vietnamese scientists.


Overtime Still No Time for Kings as Canadiens Take 3-1 Lead
The Montreal Canadiens continued their domination of playoff overtime tonight and they are now one victory away from their 24th Stanley Cup championship.
John LeClair scored for Montreal at 14 minutes 37 seconds of the extra session to clinch a 3-2 victory over the Los Angeles Kings at the Forum.
The Canadiens can clinch the series Wednesday night at home in Game 5.


Energy Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Court Says Drugs Can Be Seized in Weapons Frisk
The Supreme Court ruled today that the police do not need a warrant to seize narcotics detected while frisking a suspect for concealed weapons, as long as the contraband is instantly recognizable by "plain feel."
In a unanimous opinion, the Court for the first time authorized a warrantless pat-down search going beyond a protective search for weapons.
The ruling created a tactile analogue to the doctrine known as "plain view," under which the police do not need a warrant to seize items like guns or narcotics that are clearly visible from a place where the officer has a right to be.


A New York Cabaret Diva Is Storming Hollywood
Every Sunday evening, the limos and sports cars line up along a bleak stretch of Hollywood for an evening with Jenifer Lewis of "The Diva Is Dismissed."
"Divas are usually rich, famous and disgusting," said Ms.
Lewis.
"I was a poor diva. A diva is someone who pretends to know who they are and look fabulous doing it! That was me."


James Bridges, 57, a Film Maker Twice Nominated for Oscars, Dies
James Bridges, a film director and writer who was twice nominated for Academy Awards, died on Sunday at the University of California-Los Angeles Medical Center.
He was 57 and lived in the Brentwood section of Los Angeles.
The immediate cause was kidney failure, and he had been suffering from cancer for two and a half years, said Jack Larson, his companion of 35 years.


Under-30 Crowd Piles Up Under-70 Scores
When the Saint Andrews Golf Club was established in Yonkers in 1888, the New York area became the cradle of the game in America.
In the next two weeks, it will be the nerve center.
Beginning Thursday, the Westchester Country Club in Rye, N.Y., will once again be the site of the Buick Classic.
And next week, the Baltusrol Country Club in Springfield, N.J., will host the United States Open for a record seventh time.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Signed Craig Phillip, Shayne Bennett, Steve Hayward, Shawn Senior and Greg Kennedy, pitchers; Kevin Clark, Lou Merloni and Jim Murphy, infielders, and Fausto Abad, Wilfredo Rivera and Eric Ford, outfielders.
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Signed Phillip Brassington, Nevin Brewer, Jason Huffman, and Matthew Aminoff, pitchers; Larry Smith, outfielder; Lino Diaz and Stephen Wojtkowski, third basemen, and Daron Dondero, shortstop.


Rough Ride
After months of smooth traveling, shares of the TBC Corporation, an auto parts and tire distributor, hit a pothole yesterday on the company's report of disappointing earnings.
The shares fell nearly 25 percent on the heaviest volume of the year.
TBC blamed an industrywide slowdown in demand for replacement tires.


CPT Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bancinsurance Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bridge
The Reisinger knockout team championship ended on Sunday in a victory for John Roberts, George Tornay, Saul Bronstein and August Boehm, all of Manhattan, and Bob Sartorius of Lake Hiawatha, N.J.
In the final at the Manhattan Club, at 23 West 72d Street, they trailed throughout but surged in the last quarter to win by 20 imps against Peter Parella, Bjorn Fallenius, Jacqui Mitchell and Judge Amalya Kearse, all of Manhattan; Bob Jones of Auburndale, Queens, and Dr.
Howard Hertzberg of Alpine, N.J.


90's Minimalism Clashes With Ancient Rome
When Sir Norman Foster, the British architect, flew to the south of France a decade ago, he had one overriding question on his mind: What design would coexist with a Roman temple he saw as "one of the most beautiful buildings in the world"?
His answer, in glass and steel, is ready.
Sir Norman's cultural center in Nimes is remarkable if only because it faces one of the world's oldest surviving Roman temples, among the most graceful of its kind.
The architect insists on talking about the temple because, he says, it was this sanctuary, built by Agrippa, the Roman military leader and statesman, a few years before Jesus' birth, that determined the shape of his modern building.


Poll Finds Knowledge About AIDS Increasing
AMERICANS show improved knowledge about AIDS as well as increased personal acquaintance with victims of AIDS, and half of all adults now say they have acted to avoid getting AIDS themselves, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
Forty-nine percent of the 1,347 adults interviewed June 1 to 3 answered "yes" when asked, "Is there anything in particular you have done to avoid getting AIDS?" The nationwide telephone poll had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus three percentage points.


Big Banks' Goal: Higher Ratings
Over the last few months, the Chase Manhattan Corporation has presented its 34,000 employees with a four-page pamphlet detailing the bank's mission for the turn of the century: to be world class, balanced, financially strong and big.
Amid those broad goals, however, there was one strikingly concrete objective: By 1995, Chase wants to raise its credit rating to the pristine double-A.
Now it is triple-B, the level just above junk bonds.
Chase is not alone in this ambitious goal.
After waves of bad loans starting with the developing-country debt crisis in the mid-1980's to the real estate collapse of 1990, America's largest banks are trying to recover their financial strength.
And like Chase, several other large banks have publicly set goals for raising their credit ratings.


Following A Mouse Through History
A COMPUTER can teach you about computers.
Computerworks, a program from the Software Marketing Corporation of Phoenix, offers a colorful and lively series of on-screen lessons.
Most of each screen is taken up by a picture of the component being studied.


S.&amp; P. to Speed Ruling on Chrysler Upgrade
Pleased with the progress of financial recovery at the Chrysler Corporation, the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation said today that it was moving its decision forward on whether to reinstate its investment-grade rating on the auto maker's debt.
The upgrading is important because it would allow banks, mutual funds and other institutions that are required to buy only investment-grade securities to invest in Chrysler's bonds.
That would create more demand for them and reduce the rate of interest at which they are sold, which in turn would cut Chrysler's interest expense.


Nets Star Killed


After the Parents Are Gone; Programs Provide Continuing Care for Mentally Ill Children
Pat Wallace doesn't agonize over her daughter's mental illness anymore.
Thanks to medication, Kelly, 31, has emerged from a decade-long nightmare of psychiatric confinement and suicide attempts amid conflicting diagnoses, from schizophrenia to manic depression.
"It was almost like I was on the moon -- in a different atmosphere -- but without the proper gear," said Miss Wallace, her voice a little wobbly but her demeanor perfectly poised as she talked in her parents' apartment in Brooklyn Heights.
It is the same apartment where she once jumped out the window, landing on a patch of soil four stories below with barely a bruise.


Tucker Drilling (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Doubling as Twins as Buskers Fare Opens


Medical Resource Cos. of America reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Senators See Compromises As Talks Begin on Budget
President Clinton met this evening with the two leading Democratic Senators on tax and budget matters, the start of a two-week sprint to win Senate committee approval of his tax and spending plans.
Afterward, the Senators -- George J. Mitchell of Maine, the majority leader, and Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, chairman of the Finance Committee -- and Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen predicted that the negotiations would lead to legislation encompassing the basic elements of the President's proposals.


U.S. Defers Response to Iraqis' Plot Against Bush
The Clinton Administration will postpone a decision about whether to retaliate against Iraq for its apparent sponsorship of an assassination plot against former President George Bush until Kuwait completes its trial of the suspects in the case.
In a first day of testimony last weekend, two Iraqis pleaded guilty to carrying out the plot at the behest of Iraqi intelligence agents.
But Administration officials said today that the nature of an American response would depend on whether the Kuwaiti proceedings are regarded as fair.


On My Mind; Give Them a Parade
Let them in, those heroes from China, those men and women who sought the beautiful land, let them out of detention as swiftly as possible and then treat them with the courtesy, dignity and respect their brave hearts merit -- that is what America should do for its own soul's sake.
Worry later about the fears of our poor little country being swamped by hordes of refugees.
But right now, how I hope that the Mayor of New York City will walk down Broadway to City Hall with them, and tell them to come and see him personally if anybody tries to squeeze blackmail money out of their foul months at sea.


U.C.L.A. Hunger Strike Ends
Ending a two-week hunger strike, nine protesters at the University of California at Los Angeles today reached a compromise with administrators to strengthen the campus's Chicano studies program.
The new program will give the 20-year-old Chicano studies program more of the trappings of an academic department.


METRO DIGEST
D'AMATO CONSIDERS RUN FOR GOVERNOR
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, who won re-election to a third term last year, says that he is considering running for Governor next year, and he puts the odds that he will make the race as "at least 50-50 or better." B3.
NEW YORK CITY  CHARGES FOR CREW OF IMMIGRANT SHIP
The captain and 10 crew members of the freighter that ran aground off Queens are charged with smuggling illegal aliens.
And the Immigration and Naturalization Service says that the 276 Chinese immigrants who were seized after they came ashore will remain in custody while their claims for political asylum are considered.
A1.


Ralph Lauren Wins Ad Awards
Ralph Lauren Fragrances and its agency, Carlson &amp; Partners of New York, took top honors last night at the Fragrance Foundation's 21st annual fragrance awards ceremony in New York.


A Tribute to Marian Anderson, For the Most Part in Her Voice
Four familiar portraits of Marian Anderson were suspended over the stage of Carnegie Hall and bathed in light on Monday morning, when some 2,000 admirers of the contralto, who died on April 8, attended a tribute to her.
The memorial was a quiet, uncomplicatedly dignified affair, very much in keeping with Miss Anderson's public persona.
The printed program carried the title "Remembering the Art of Marian Anderson," and indeed the focus was on her singing, not on her struggles and triumphs.


Military Justice
To the Editor:
Airman Apprentice Terry M. Helvey got what he deserved for killing Radioman Allen R. Schindler: life imprisonment (front page, May 28).
But why was Mr.
Schindler, who had a fine Navy record, being discharged merely for identifying himself as a homosexual and Mr.
Helvey, with a "long history of violence and bullying," not considered for discharge?
Instead of arguing that homosexuals should not serve in the military because they may be harmed, why don't we get rid of those people who would use violence -- a real threat to military discipline -- against their fellows?
ARLENE EISENBERG  New York, May 28, 1993


D'Amato Says He May Run for Governor
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, the New York Republican who won re-election to a third term last year, said today that he was considering running for Governor next year, and he put the odds that he would make the race as "at least 50-50 or better."
A number of political leaders in both parties characterized Mr.
D'Amato's public musings as a trial balloon.
And both Mr.
D'Amato and the state Republican chairman, William D. Powers, explicitly linked the talk of a D'Amato candidacy to fund-raising efforts, raising the possibility that the balloon may have been floated to help retire outstanding campaign debts.


ISRAELIS SOUNDING UPBEAT ON TALKS
Israeli leaders offered unusually optimistic assessments of the Middle East peace talks today, with Foreign Minister Shimon Peres saying that Israel and Jordan were so close to an agreement that "we just have to take out the pen and sign."
The upbeat mood echoed remarks several days ago by the new Jordanian Prime Minister, Abdul-Salam Majali, who forecast breakthroughs before the end of the year that could produce Israeli accords not just with Jordan but also with other Arab neighbors.


CHRONICLE
President Clinton was on the Washington end of a speaker phone Sunday evening as 50 friends of VIRGINIA KELLEY sang "Happy Birthday" at her 70th-birthday celebration in the Las Vegas home of Dr.
Elias Ghanem.
Dr.
Ghanem raised funds for the Clinton campaign last year.
Among the guests were Wayne Newton and Col.
Tom Parker, formerly Elvis Presley's manager, The Associated Press reported.
Wishing his mother well, the President said that she seemed to be having a good time in Las Vegas.
Mrs.
Kelley spent last week at the Mirage Hotel there with her husband, Richard Kelley.
She is planning to be in Washington this week for eighth-grade graduation of her granddaughter, Chelsea.


Review/Dance; A Tribute to a Ballet Master, in Workshop Form
George Balanchine was doubly honored last weekend.
The New York City Ballet continued its Balanchine Celebration at the New York State Theater.
Nearby, at the Juilliard Theater, the company's School of American Ballet offered its own mini-celebration.
The school's 29th annual Workshop Performances were devoted entirely to choreography by Balanchine.
The standard of dancing was very high on Saturday afternoon and evening.
Both programs included the same ballets, but there were changes of cast in several roles.
One complete work was given, as well as excerpts from five others.


Defying the skeptics, the Weather Channel finds a silver lining in Mother Nature's mood swings.
ANYONE updating the Gershwins' "They All Laughed" could do worse than to include a lyric about the Weather Channel.
Imagine, a television network devoted entirely to weather news and information, 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
What next, the Dormant Volcano Channel?
The Hibernating Bear Network?


Public &amp; Private; 1-800-UH OH
I am not what you would call a compulsive shopper.
I am more of a manic-depressive shopper; first I buy things, then I feel bad about it.
My problem has been exacerbated by the meteoric rise of catalogue shopping in America over the last 10 years.
During the next 20 minutes, it is not totally beyond the realm of possibility that I could acquire a pair of gardening clogs, a rustic birdhouse, a dog bed filled with cedar shavings or a pair of silk charmeuse lounging pajamas merely by picking up the phone.
A confab with the 800 operator for the J. Crew company is much better than hot milk for combating insomnia.
The U.P.S. truck pulls up to the house like a loyal dog, big and brown.


Christopher in Europe to Discuss Plan to Create Havens in Bosnia
Five weeks after Secretary of State Warren Christopher failed to convince the Europeans to embrace an American plan to arm the Muslims of Bosnia, he is back, this time with a different, more modest, agenda.
Having abandoned an American initiative for Bosnia, Mr.
Christopher will discuss ways to put into effect a European initiative to protect six "safe havens" for Bosnian civilians.
And amid doubts about American leadership in the post-cold-war world, Mr.
Christopher may be called on to assure his European partners that the Clinton Administration has not abandoned its role and responsibilities as the world's sole superpower.


Cable Pact Is Reached By States
In a move that could spur competition and reduce prices in the cable television industry, seven of the nation's biggest cable companies have settled a long-running antitrust investigation and agreed to make programming more available to aspiring rivals.
The agreement with the attorneys general of 40 states will be announced Wednesday by Attorney General Robert Abrams of New York.
It settles a five-year investigation by state prosecutors into charges that cable companies had smothered competition by blocking access to popular channels like Home Box Office or round-the-clock sports networks.


Another Campaign For Miller Lite Beer
The Miller Brewing Company said yesterday that it was once again changing the advertising campaign for its flagship Miller Lite brand.
The revamped campaign, created by Leo Burnett U.S.A. in Chicago, introduces a theme "Can your beer do this?" to replace "C'mon, let me show you where it's at," which replaced Burnett's original, much-derided theme from 1991, "It's it and that's that."
"The brand heritage has been humor and that is what this campaign is all about," said Paul Basquin, the director of Miller's low-calorie category in Milwaukee.
The campaign's new style is meant to echo the light-hearted arguments at the center of Lite's long-running "Tastes Great. Less Filling" advertising, which Burnett dropped when it was awarded the account two years ago from Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. in New York.


Diversity on the Supreme Court
In drifting toward the choice of Bruce Babbitt as his nominee for the Supreme Court seat being vacated by Justice Byron White, President Clinton is squandering an opportunity to enhance the diversity of the nation's highest court.
Mr.
Clinton seeks high court candidates who are "supremely qualified," the main quality his press secretary stressed yesterday.
He seeks someone with "keen intellect, good judgment, experience both with the law and with the lives of everyday people . . . and a big heart."


Nonbanks' Community Role Will Be Target of U.S. Study
The Treasury Department is planning to study whether money market funds, consumer finance companies and automobile financing companies should be required to follow the Community Reinvestment Act, which calls on financial institutions to lend money to poor communities, a senior Treasury official said today.
Frank N. Newman, Under Secretary of the Treasury for Domestic Finance, said that as nonbanking institutions like money market funds play a larger role in the economy, it was important to determine what their "community responsibilities" should be.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASEBALL  No. 1 A&amp;M Eliminated  Texas A&amp;M Coach Mark Johnson could have accepted a loss.
Self-destruction is another matter.
"We gave things away," Johnson said after the top-seeded Aggies were eliminated from the College World Series yesterday with a 6-2 loss to Long Beach State in Omaha.
Long Beach Coach Dave Snow saw it differently: "We saw an opportunity and came up big with it." Texas, the Aggies' rival and another top team, was also eliminated, losing by 7-6 to Oklahoma State in another elimination game.
In Long Beach's victory, Cobi Cradle drove in two runs in support of Daniel Choi (17-2).
Cradle singled in a run in the third and another one in the seventh, sparking a four-run inning by the 49ers (45-18).
For the Cowboys (45-16), Sean Hugo homered to tie the score at 6-6 in the eighth and Hunter Triplett doubled in the go-ahead run in the ninth. (AP) TENNIS  2 Seeded Stars Ousted  Goran Ivanisevic and Ivan Lendl expected to use the Queen's Club grass-court tournament as a key warmup for Wimbledon, but now they will have to get ready on the practice courts.
Chris Wilkinson, a British wild-card entry ranked 176th in the world, shocked Ivanisevic, 6-3, 3-6, 6-3, in one second-round match at the London tournament.
Byron Black of Zimbabwe, ranked 116th, upset Lendl, 6-2, 7-6 (13-11), in another match.
Among yesterday's winners were second-seeded Stefan Edberg and No. 3 Boris Becker.
The fourth-seeded Ivanisevic, last year's Wimbledon finalist, fired nine aces but also had eight double faults.
The fifth-seeded Lendl had a chance to level his match when he served at 5-4 in the second set but was broken. (AP) A Struggle for Navratilova: Top-seeded Martina Navratilova had to fight hard for a 7-5, 7-6 (7-1) victory over Maria Strandlund of Sweden in the second round of the Edgbaston tournament in Birmingham, England.
Navratilova was kept on court for 96 minutes by the 23-year-old from Stockholm, who broke the nine-time Wimbledon champion's serve four times. (AP) Victories at the Top: Top-seeded Andrei Medvedev and second-seeded Richard Krajicek won in straight sets to advance to the second round of the Continental grass court championships in Rosmalen, the Netherlands.
Medvedev, ranked eighth in the world, defeated a Dutch wild-card entry, Fernon Wibier, 6-4, 6-4.
Krajicek, ranked 12th, beat Christian Saceanu of Germany, 7-6 (7-4), 6-1.
Also advancing was third-seeded MaliVai Washington, a 6-4, 7-5 winner over the Dutch player, Jacco Eltingh. (AP) FENCING  New Yorker Wins Foil  Felicia Zimmermann of Rush, N.Y., last night won the national fencing championship in Division I women's foil in Fort Myers, Fla.
The 17-year-old Zimmerman defeated 20-year-old Olga Chernyak of Lafayette, Calif., 6-5, 5-1, for the gold medal.
Zimmermann finished fourth in this event last year.
The New York Athletic Club won the men's foil team title for the ninth time in 14 years with a 9-7 victory over the Stanford Fencing Club.
In the under-19 women's epee, Lauren O'Brien of Aurora, Colo., defeated Wendy Hall of Boulder, Colo., 5-2, 5-3, for the gold medal.
Yvette Losman of South Orange, N.J., took the bronze. (AP)


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALBANK FINANCIAL CORP., Albany, the parent of Albany Savings Bank, said it has completed its second stock repurchase -- 1.53 million shares -- in a year and plans to buy back another 5 percent of its shares.
HONDA MOTOR CO., Tokyo, will sell recreational vehicles made by Britain's Rover Group in Japan under the Honda name beginning in November.


Whitman Wins Republican Vote To Take On Florio in New Jersey
Christine Todd Whitman, who nearly went to the United States Senate three years ago on a tide of anger against New Jersey's Governor, Jim Florio, tonight won the right to try to unseat Mr.
Florio herself.
Mrs.
Whitman, 46, soundly defeated two vastly more experienced rivals to win the Republican primary.
In doing so, she became the first woman in New Jersey to win a major party's gubernatorial nomination.


ON THE SET WITH: Sylvester Stallone; All Right Already, No More Mr. Funny Guy
JOEL SILVER, the producer and maestro of those Lethal-Weapon-Die Hard-Predator action movies, bounds over to Sylvester Stallone on a glittering, futuristic movie set at Warner Brothers studios in Burbank.
"How's it going, big guy?" Mr. Silver asks.
The big guy grunts in reply.
He has just pumped iron for 90 minutes.
He has had his standard breakfast of a protein drink mixed with eight egg whites (but only two yolks) and a half cup of oatmeal and some rice.
He drinks mineral water all day.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY GANG SUSPECTED IN IMMIGRANT SMUGGLING
Law-enforcement officials say they believe a Chinese gang, which has recently emerged as a major force in the growing world of illegal-immigrant smuggling, helped organize the ill-starred voyage of the tramp steamer that ran aground off Queens on Sunday with nearly 300 Chinese men and women aboard.
A1.
CONNECTICUT GUN BAN IS APPROVED
A bill banning assault-type weapons has been passed by the Connecticut General Assembly after a series of close votes in Hartford and has been signed by the Governor.
A1.


Vichy Aide Accused of War Crimes Is Slain in France
A prominent official in France's collaborationist Vichy government who was facing charges of crimes against humanity for deporting Jews to Nazi death camps during World War II was shot dead by a lone gunman at his home here early today.
A few hours later, a 49-year-old frustrated author, Christian Didier, was charged with murder in the death of Rene Bousquet, 84.
Before his arrest, Mr.
Didier summoned television reporters to a suburban hotel and recounted in detail how he had fired four bullets at the man he described as "that piece of garbage."


Salvator Attanasio, 79, A Literary Translator
Salvator Attanasio, a translator of more than 200 works of literature, history and philosophy, died on Thursday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 79.
The cause was prostate cancer, said Barbara Kennedy, the executor of his estate.


Whitman Pursues 'Family Business'
Christine Todd Whitman tonight won both the Republican nomination for governor and a place in New Jersey political history.
In her quest for the governor's office, Mrs.
Whitman has presented herself as a political outsider.
In truth, given her family background, it would have been surprising if she did not go into politics.


Haiti's Premier Quits After Four Ministers Refuse to Step Down
Prime Minister Marc Bazin resigned today, saying that the refusal of four ministers to step down after their dismissal had made governing impossible.
Mr.
Bazin, appointed by the ruling military nine months after the coup that overthrew the the President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, said the actions of the four ministers gave him no choice.


Paramount Communications Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Butler National reports earnings for Year to April 30


Gooden Is Reflective On the End of an Era
Dwight Gooden knows when he looks at his championship ring, or remembers that special fall of 1986, that no one can take away those special memories.
Nothing else has been that sacred.
Not the winning in the 1980's nor the teammates who helped build that tradition.
Not Gooden's once unhittable fastball.
Not even his health.


Lester J. Grant, 67, Real Estate Developer
Lester J. Grant, a Boston real estate developer and businessman, died Wednesday at his winter home in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
A former resident of Weston, Mass., he was 67 and lived in Bedford, N.H.
He died after a long illness, his family said.


U.S.-England: A Matchup of Miseries
The United States national soccer team, featuring an anemic offense and a feeble reputation, today faces a more famous opponent with an even greater level of desperation.
England not only has been disappointing recently in big matches, it also must answer to rabid supporters who really care about the sport.
When the two teams meet at Foxboro Stadium in a U.S.
Cup '93 match, the British team will be under severe scrutiny.


U.S. Ordered to Free Haitians
A Federal judge ordered the Government to release all Haitians held in a detention camp at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base in Cuba.
Page B4.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Signed Kurtiss Bogott and James Fernandes, pitchers; Joseph Hayward, outfielder, and Gregory Patton and Nathan Tebbs, infielders.
MINNESOTA TWINS -- Optioned Pat Mahomes, pitcher, to Portland of the Pacific Coast League.
Purchased the contract of Eddie Guardado, pitcher, from Nashville of the Southern League.
Signed Aaron Santini, shortstop and Deron Dowhower, pitcher.


Review/Film: What's Love Got to Do With It; Tina Turner's Tale: Living Life With Ike and Then Without Him
"What's Love Got to Do With It" begins perfectly.
It presents Anna Mae Bullock (Rae'ven Kelly) as a shy little country girl singing with a church choir.
The song is "This Little Light of Mine," and Anna Mae is letting her own light shine a lot more brightly than the choirmistress wants it to.
This girl can't help herself.
She has a natural talent.
It's a gift that will save her from poverty and obscurity, turn her into the world-famous musical dynamo known as Tina Turner, and place her in the clutches of a sexy, smooth-talking Svengali named Ike.
In less confessional times, the tale of Ike Turner's stormy, violent relationship with his long-abused wife and star attraction might not have had the makings of a Hollywood biography.
Even in the abridged, somewhat sanitized account given here (adapted by Kate Lanier from "I, Tina," the autobiography Ms. Turner wrote with Kurt Loder), this Touchstone Pictures release is hardly the Disney version.
Forced into show business servitude no matter how sick or exhausted she might be, Tina Turner suffered years of vicious beatings, marital infidelities and other indignities.
It took vast reserves of courage for her to break free and tell her husband, "Go straight to hell, Ike."


Judge May Cut Helmsley's Term
A Federal judge indicated yesterday that he was seriously considering a reduction in the four-year prison term currently being served by Leona M. Helmsley, the hotel chain owner, for tax fraud.
"I am considering a sentence reduction which will, in effect, grant her parole," Judge Thomas P. Griesa of Federal District Court in Manhattan said during a hearing yesterday.
"I do not see why she should not be granted parole," he said, citing in particular her age, 72.


A Knick Fine for Oakley?
After complaining publicly about his playing time, his contract and his role, power forward Charles Oakley met yesterday with Dave Checketts, the Knicks' president.
While Checketts would not say if any disciplinary action would be taken against Oakley for speaking out before speaking with him, a fine is probably forthcoming for the Knicks' co-captain.
"This is the second time Charles has done something like this," said Checketts, referring to an incident last season when Oakley said the Knicks made a mistake by failing to keep Xavier McDaniel.
"It's almost like Charles is a volcano waiting to erupt. It's O.K. to be frustrated after a season, but this is not the way to handle it. Discussions like that should be kept inside. I'm disappointed, but we'll deal with it."


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Consolidated Edison Co., New York, is offering $380 million of 7.5 percent debentures due in 2023 at 99.045 to yield 7.581 percent through Lehman Brothers.
Noncallable for 10 years, the debentures are rated Aa-2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc., AA- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps. *
Federal National Mortgage Association, Washington, is offering through various dealers $800 million of debt securities in two parts.
The first consists of $300 million of 5.375 percent debentures at par due in 1998.
The second consists of $500 million of 6.45 percent debentures, which are callable after five years, at 99.8125 to yield 6.476 percent.


Canadiens Find LeClair's Value Is Rising as Season Winds Down
In each of the last two games, John LeClair has scored the winning goal in overtime for the Montreal Canadiens.
Both times, his coach, Jacques Demers, has sat next to LeClair in the post-game news conference and declared, "John LeClair is going to be a rich man."
Because LeClair is making a modest $225,000 as he heads into the option year of his contract, Serge Savard was asked for his views on the subject.
Savard, the general manager of the Canadiens, is the man who negotiates salaries with the players.


BOYCOTT OF ISRAEL IS SAID TO RELAX
Most Arab countries have dropped the decades-long boycott of companies that do business with Israel, a senior Kuwaiti official said today, but direct commercial dealings with Israel will have to await the conclusion of peace treaties.
The assertion by Sheik Sabah al-Ahmad, Kuwait's First Deputy Prime Minister and Foreign Minister, confirms an evident trend that has been taking place quietly in the past few years as one Arab country after another has abandoned the commercial boycott on foreign companies that do business with Israel.


Putting the Food in 'Great Good Food' to the Test
"GREAT GOOD FOOD" by Julee Rosso (Crown/Turtle Bay; cloth, $29; paper, $19), Ms.
Rosso's first solo effort at cookbook writing, mirrors the breathless enthusiasm of the astonishingly successful books she wrote with Sheila Lukens, who was her partner in the Silver Palate.
The book, dedicated to lowering the amount of fat used in food, is crammed with recipes, helpful tidbits and line drawings.
Those who have learned to rely on the books produced by the Rosso-Lukins collaboration may be tempted to buy "Great Good Food." But they deserve better.
Although the book offers hundreds of perfectly fine recipes, too many others are flawed by errors and lapses that could cause consternation in the kitchen and chagrin at the table.


Financial Federal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


The Pop Life
Beck on Track
Jeff Beck, one of rock's most influential guitarists, is traveling along new byways and retracing old ones.
Later this month, Epic will release "Crazy Legs," an album that brings Mr.
Beck together with a British roots-rock band, the Big Town Playboys, in a collection of classics originally performed by the 1950's rocker Gene Vincent and his band the Blue Caps.
The album, a tribute to the Blue Caps' original lead guitarist, Cliff Gallup, features Mr.
Beck playing what he says he was struggling to learn to play when he was 15 years old.


Next Year's Revised S.A.T. Is Here, and Already Students (and Parents) Are Jittery
Just mention the S.A.T. and people who took the test a decade or two ago will often feel a residual pang of anxiety.
So it is not surprising that future test-takers and their parents are worried about changes in the all-important standardized test.
The changes -- intended to put more emphasis on reading skills and move the examinations away from multiple-choice answers -- were announced in 1990.
But next year's high school juniors will be the first to take the revised version.
And it seems that the time has come to panic.


School Boards In New Jersey Face Scrutiny
With $12 billion in annual spending and jobs for 110,000 people, local schools are big business here as in so many states.
Those numbers add up to a lot of potential for conflicts of interest.
That's where a new nine-member School Ethics Commission comes in: to shine the light of public scrutiny on patronage and corruption on school boards in New Jersey, where the state Education Department has taken over operation of the Paterson and Jersey City schools.
It has intervened in the business operations of the Newark and Trenton districts.


60-Minute Gourmet
NOT so long ago, curry was largely confined to Indian restaurants; today, it is found in all sorts of sauces, soups and even mousses and terrines.
Lentils, likewise, were considered an ethnic food, mostly found in Middle Eastern cuisine, yet today they are encountered throughout French and American cooking.
A renewed interest in dried beans has a lot to do with it, as well as health concerns.
Lentils are an excellent source of low-fat protein.
They also go well with curry.


Weicker Signs Bill to Forbid Assault Rifles
Connecticut, long a center of gun manufacturing, tonight became the third state, after New Jersey and California, to ban the sale of semiautomatic military-style assault rifles, including the Colt Sporter, a gun made here in Hartford.
The State Senate passed the landmark measure as an 18-to-18 tie was broken by Lieut.
Gov.
Eunice S. Groark at 8:30 P.M.
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. signed it into law an hour and a half later at a brief ceremony with the bill's bipartisan supporters.
The law forbids the sale of a category of arms that the police say is turning up in greater numbers in the hands of urban drug gangs.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about Asian-Americans' political campaigns referred incorrectly to their record in mayoralties of major cities.
The first such winner was Norman Y. Mineta, a Japanese-American, who served as Mayor of San Jose, Calif., from 1971 until 1974, when he was elected to Congress.


Lotus Buys Approach Software for Its Data Base Program
The Lotus Development Corporation, in search of a data base software program, said yesterday that it would acquire the Approach Software Corporation of Redwood City, Calif.
The acquisition, the subject of industry rumors for the last several months, means that Lotus will now have a data base software product to add to its line of spreadsheet, word processing, communications and graphics software packages.
Data base software allows users to create and access multiple lists of information, like mailing lists broken down into demographic categories.


Simmons in Hospital With Chest Pains
The Pirates' general manager, TED SIMMONS, was admitted to St.
Francis General Hospital in Pittsburgh yesterday with chest pains and was in stable condition.
Simmons, 43, had a series of tests after being admitted, according to a short statement issued by the Pirates.
He is expected to remain hospitalized for the next several days.
A Pirates spokesman, JIM TRDINICH, said that after developing the pain, Simmons consulted with Trainer KENT BIGGERSTAFF before being admitted to the hospital.


John Thies, 95, Dies; Scarsdale Civic Leader
John Thies, a Westchester civic leader, died on Saturday at his home in Scarsdale, N.Y.
He was 95.
His family said he died of natural causes.


Georgia Tech Leader Is Player of the Year
DAVID DUVAL of Georgia Tech, the runner-up in the last two National Collegiate Athletic Association golf championships, was named player of the year yesterday by the Golf Coaches Association.
The senior from Ponte Vedra Beach, Fla., will receive the Jack Nicklaus Award.
Duval is only the third collegiate golfer to earn first-team all-America honors four consecutive years. (AP)


Reviving Ailing Retail In Downtown Hartford
In the eerie darkness, one can still make out the splendor of the former G. Fox &amp; Company, once the grande dame of Connecticut department stores.
Above the faded mauve rugs gleams the playful splendor of Art Deco.
Wooden and aluminum strips run side by side along the wall; elaborate swirls of aluminum still sweep alongside a silver escalator.


60-Minute Gourmet
NOT so long ago, curry was largely confined to Indian restaurants; today, it is found in all sorts of sauces, soups and even mousses and terrines.
Lentils, likewise, were considered an ethnic food, mostly found in Middle Eastern cuisine, yet today they are encountered throughout French and American cooking.
A renewed interest in dried beans has a lot to do with it, as well as health concerns.
Lentils are an excellent source of low-fat protein.
They also go well with curry.


Suspect Volatility
In the last three months, the stock of Andrea Electronics, a maker of communications equipment, has been unusually active, with an average daily volume of 50,000 shares.
In the first week of the month, the stock nearly tripled in price.
Yesterday, a CNBC report said the company was under investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission and the stock lost more than 20 percent of its value.


Personal Health
MANY factors can touch off an asthmatic attack in people prone to this frightening constriction of the airways: pollens, dust, cigarette smoke and even cold air.
But one of the most distressing and most often unrecognized triggers is vigorous physical exercise.
Exercise-induced asthma is extremely common, affecting more than 80 percent of people with ordinary asthma, 30 to 40 percent of those with allergic rhinitis ("hay fever") and 9 percent of people without asthma or allergies, who develop asthmatic symptoms only when they exercise.


Disabled and Chronically Ill Gain Health Coverage and Jobs Rights
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission declared today that employers may not refuse to hire people with disabilities because of concern about their effect on health insurance costs.
It also said that disabled workers must generally be given "equal access" to any health insurance provided to other employees.
At a meeting this afternoon, the Federal agency adopted a broad policy statement explaining how it intended to enforce a 1990 law, the Americans with Disabilities Act, to curb discrimination by employers and insurers providing health benefits.


Central Guaranty reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Mail Boxes Etc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


True to Style, Mayor Tells Boston He Will Get His Way as Envoy to Vatican
People here have been telling Ray Flynn stories since the popular, populist Mayor announced at a tearful news conference outside his Gate of Heaven church in March that he would leave by early July to become Ambassador to the Vatican.
But now the latest one, already being proclaimed a Ray Flynn classic, is unfolding: the former Providence College basketball star goes one on one with the State Department over his job description, and wins.


Angelenos Vote A Conservative As New Mayor
Richard Riordan, a conservative businessman, was elected Mayor of Los Angeles tonight, ushering in a new political era after the 20-year leadership of Tom Bradley and his coalition of blacks and white liberals.
Mr.
Riordan, 62, defeated Michael Woo, a liberal City Councilman, in a hard-fought, nonpartisan race in which personal attacks drowned out serious debate over the future of this city as it struggles with its evolving multi-ethnic identity and with the aftermath of last year's riots.


Morrison on Right Side of His Dark Side
George Foreman, a stand-up comic even with swelling around his eyes, bumped his jello stomach into Tommy Morrison after their fight Monday night and whispered, "Do me a favor, never cuss on television."
In this case, it was a good tip.
Morrison is 24, keeps his gentle blond hair combed, is about to draw straws to decide if he should box Riddick Bowe or Lennox Lewis next and has a dream house and fishing rod all picked out in Grand Lake, Okla.
But do not let his good looks or luck fool you.
Not long ago he was considered a pathological bully with a foul mouth who, until recently, had heard only sour nothings in his ear.


Blue Dolphin Energy Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


TENSION GROWING IN SOMALI CAPITAL
In anticipation of United Nations military action against Somali armed factions, the exodus of aid workers continued today, and the tension wound tighter with at least five gunfights and sniper attacks reported between Somalis and peacekeepers.
There was also a sense of dread among the Somalis today, and many said they were sending women and children out of the city.


Wine Talk
MOST people are acutely conscious of cost when buying Champagne and other sparkling wines.
Champagne is usually purchased for special, festive reasons.
It is invariably used as part of some ritual; a wedding, an anniversary, a graduation dinner, an awards banquet.
Under those circumstances, is it any wonder that few people pay any attention to it?
When was the last time you heard someone say, after a toast, "This is a particularly good Champagne."?
Most of the people who cater dinners and weddings are well aware of how little attention guests pay to what they drink, especially the Champagne.
So, while they may talk "Champagne," they often deliver something else -- usually cheap sparkling wine -- from places other than the Champagne region of France.


WHITE HOUSE PICKS ENVOYS TO 3 LANDS
The White House plans to break the logjam that has delayed the appointment of ambassadors to several major countries, an Administration official said tonight.
Former Vice President Walter F. Mondale is to be named ambassador to Japan; Richard C. Holbrooke, an investment banker who was a State Department official in the Carter Administration, is to get the post in Germany, and former Representative Stephen J. Solarz of Brooklyn is to be named envoy to India.


Software Giant Aiming at the Office
The Microsoft Corporation, the software giant, is trying to extend its powerful reach beyond the computer to the rest of office machinery -- the copier, the printer, the fax, even the phone.
For more than a year, William H. Gates, the company's 37-year-old chairman, has circled the globe, signing up equipment makers to become part of his vision of an office in which machines can pass work from one to another seamlessly, thanks to Microsoft software.


Kelly Has Cure for What Ails Yankees
The Yankees were slipping and sliding on their road trip, turning Buck Showalter's face redder, playing listlessly and ready to plummet in the standings.
Their slump stood at three losses in four games, but it felt worse.
Much worse.
So on this night when the Yankees needed Jimmy Key to be a stopper and resuscitate a stumbling team, what was Showalter to think when his ace had his shortest outing of the year and was finished before the seventh inning?
How much redder could his face get?


Bill Would Free Rivals In Communications
A bipartisan group of influential senators plans to introduce legislation on Wednesday that would give telephone and cable television companies much greater freedom to compete against each other.
The bill, drafted by Senator Daniel K. Inouye, Democrat of Hawaii, would lift a longstanding law that prohibits local telephone companies from owning or packaging television services in their operating areas.


Man Sues Company for Cost of Quitting Smoking
A Washington man says it cost him $1,153.54 to quit smoking, and he wants the Philip Morris Companies to pick up the bill.
The man, Al Deskiewicz, a 50-year-old design engineer from nearby Kirkland, told Judge Linda K. Jacke today that the tobacco company should pay for the the cost of his doctor's visits, nicotine patches and health club membership.


ESTEE LAUDER TO ENTER CHINESE MARKET TODAY
Continuing its tradition of breaking into emerging markets early, the Estee Lauder Companies announced that it would sell its Estee Lauder and Clinique cosmetics lines in a department store that is opening today in Shanghai.
The store is being opened by Isetan, a Japanese retailer.
Lauder, which also manufactures and markets the Prescriptives and Origins cosmetics lines and several perfumes, paved the way for its entry into China with advertisements in Elle China magazine over the last three years.
The company said it would expand its distribution in China in the next year.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 4
May 28
June 5
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.6
7.4
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.0
3.0
Gasoline stocks
225.8
223.4
217.9
Distillate stocks
101.8
100.6
95.7
Crude imports, daily
5.7
6.7
6.4
Product imports, daily
2.0
2.0
2.2
Crude stocks
350.2
352.2
347.1
Crude production, daily
6.9
6.9
7.1
Refinery utilization (%)
91.3
91.9
90.9
Source: American Petroleum Institute


The Golden Venture, Plus 100,000
The four-month nightmare voyage of the Golden Venture ended Sunday morning when the tramp freighter dumped its starving and frightened cargo of nearly 300 Chinese immigrants into frigid waters off one of New York City's most popular public beaches.
Six passengers died from drowning or exposure, several had to be hospitalized and the remainder were sent to detention centers to await Federal hearings.
But for the estimated 100,000 illegal Chinese immigrants who arrive each year, mostly to New York, the nightmare typically goes on and on.
The $3,000 down payment they make to "snakehead" smugglers before departure -- several years' earnings for a typical Chinese -- covers barely a tenth of what they must ultimately pay to travel huddled below deck for months without adequate food or sanitation.
The remaining money must be paid off through years of indentured servitude -- virtual slavery -- in Chinese restaurants and sweatshops.


Northwest Nuclear Plant's New Strategy
The new head of the Washington Public Power Supply System will outline his strategy on Thursday for preventing a shutdown of the Pacific Northwest's last nuclear plant, which has been under fire for high costs and poor performance.
William G. Counsil, who became managing director in April, will tell the Northwest Power Planning Council of his plans to reduce the plant's work force of 1,400 by 300 employees, pare $15 million from capital programs, reorganize work and beef up the spare parts inventory to reduce repair time.


For Malawi Dictator, Time Will Soon Run Out
To the Editor:
Your May 29 and June 1 articles on Malawi succintly describe the political pressure cooker that Malawi is today.
But you fail to underline the most serious denials of basic human rights that Life President Hastings Kenneth Banda inflicts on the Malawian people.
The opposition leader, Chakufwa Chihana, remains in jail, unwell and cruelly punished for the "crime" of believing in democracy.


A Royal Wedding and a New Princess in Japan


S.E.C. Inquiry: Politics and Municipal Bonds
As many as 30 Wall Street firms have received requests for documents from the Securities and Exchange Commission as part of a broad investigation into the links between political contributions and the awarding of municipal bond underwriting business, Wall Street executives and Government officials said yesterday.
Even as the inquiry unfolds, S.E.C. commissioners indicated that they anticipated significant changes soon in the municipal bond business, including new rules that would require underwriters to disclose in public bond offering documents any political contributions to officials involved in the offering.


Dolphins Sign Golic to $1.5 Million Deal
The Miami Dolphins yesterday signed unrestricted free agent MIKE GOLIC to two one-year contracts at a reported $1.5 million.
Golic, a nine-year defensive tackle, had spent the last seven years with the Philadelphia Eagles.
Golic, 30, is expected to compete for a playing time with Dolphins nose tackle CHUCK KLINGBEIL and defensive end JEFF CROSS.


U.S. Says It Won't Rely On Japan Market Target
While the Clinton Administration's new trade proposal to Japan will include plenty of numerical targets, Clinton officials said today that they were trying to avoid relying on the numbers that bother the Japanese most: targets for the market share of imports.
Japanese officials and some economists have denounced market share targets as managed trade since the United States trade representative, Mickey Kantor, began suggesting an aggressive use of them recently.


A.T.&amp; T SEEKS TO FORCE MCI TO DISCLOSE DISCOUNTS
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said yesterday that it was asking a Federal court to force the MCI Communications Corporation to disclose large discounts for clients like Citibank, Kmart and Chrysler.
A.T.&amp; T. contended that MCI was defying a Government order to file rates for all its long-distance services.
In a complaint filed yesterday in United States District Court in Washington, A.T.&amp; T. took the unusual step of naming MCI customers.
They include Bank of America, Caesars World, Gateway 2000 and Compaq Computer.


Market Place; Has the winning streak for casino stocks finally ended?
SHHH. Listen closely. Hear the sound of a bubble popping?
A lot of the air that has been pushing up casino stocks for months began to blow out yesterday, as investors scrambled for cover amid concerns that shares in the gaming companies had grown far too pricey.


Chiefs Planning to Sign Allen?
The Kansas City Chiefs, who have been pursuing the free-agent running back MARCUS ALLEN, called a news conference for today amid speculation they would sign the former Los Angeles Raiders star.
Allen, 33, the Raiders' career rushing leader, has running and pass-catching abilities that would fit nicely with the offense the Chiefs are installing behind newly acquired quarterback Joe Montana. (AP)


Bridge
There are two major single knockout team championships in New York City, the Grand National and the Reisinger, and one player has a remarkable streak in progress.
A year ago, George Tornay of Manhattan won the Grand National Swiss teams plus the subsequent knockout and was a runner-up in the Reisinger.
This year he again won the Grand National Swiss, was a winner Sunday in the Reisinger, and later this month will compete in the final of the Grand National knockout.
John Roberts and August Boehm also won five of the six events but were derailed in the sixth by external circumstances and had to withdraw.
Stay tuned for next year to see if the streak will continue.
On the diagramed deal from the Reisinger semifinal Tornay held the South cards.
He had a difficult rebid after opening one diamond and hearing a one-spade response, and made a slightly eccentric rebid.
He chose three no-trump, which is normally based on stoppers in the unbid suits, which he had, and a long solid suit, which he did not have.


Corrections
A picture caption last Wednesday with an interview with John Cardinal O'Connor misstated the scene of the interview.
It was at the Catholic Center, 1011 First Avenue.


No Headline
"These are life-and-death issues. We just cannot wait until health-care reform is adopted and we have a health insurance system for the whole country." -- ROSALIE GAULL SILBERMAN of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, on access to health insurance.  [ A1:5. ]


Theater in Review
Race John Houseman Theater 450 West 42d Street Clinton Written and performed by Paul Mooney; lighting by Robert Bessoir; production coordinator, E. F. Morrill; sound by Charles McIntyre; general manager, Paul Morer.
Presented by Eric Krebs.
The most acute point that the comedian Paul Mooney drives home in his funny and very profane one-man show, "Race," is how a white person's cultural nostalgia can easily be a black person's nightmare.
Commenting on a recent movie adaptation of "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn," he excoriates the film makers for choosing to romanticize a time when black people like himself were in chains.


The Woman in Command in Warsaw
In a country where women are reverentially greeted by men with a kiss on the hand, Prime Minister Hanna Suchocka has surprised most Poles, and perhaps even herself, by surviving for the last year as a popular national leader through tough economic and political times.
Her Government fell nearly two weeks ago after losing by one vote a no-confidence motion called to protest her tight budget.
But Ms.
Suchocka stays as Prime Minister until September elections, which she could win, and in an interview on Monday she showed in her firm yet cautious manner how a woman has succeeded in a position of power in such a male-dominated society.


L, L, L, L, L, L, L, L, L, L, L, L, L, L, L, L, L, L, L, L!
A start might bring an end.
That was the theory, anyway, concerning Anthony Young and his 19 straight defeats.
"Put his destiny in his hands," Manager Dallas Green had said.


Of Lost and Founds; They're Home to the Missing, or Even the Stolen
Eileen O'Flaherty has seen her share of strangers' sombreros.
As director of the lost and found department at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel, it is her job to see that hats, silk pajamas, X-rays, parakeet cages and unpaired shoes are returned to their owners.


Costly Relic, Nuclear Unit Sits Ready for Atmospheric Tests
On the edge of the Nevada desert, and on a remote Pacific atoll, a cadre of national security sentries keeps a long, strange vigil, ready to explode a nuclear bomb in the sky.
The scientists and contractors work for Safeguard C, a program to enable the Government to resume testing nuclear weapons in the atmosphere.
Thirty years after the Government forswore such tests, the Safeguard crew stays on watch, waiting for a call that never comes.


ITT to Consolidate Auto Parts Units Worldwide
The automotive-parts subsidiary of the ITT Corporation, one of the world's largest makers of auto parts, announced a broad restructuring today that would consolidate all its parts companies in Europe and North America, eliminating several layers of management.
The move comes in the wake of initiatives by the world's auto manufacturers to become more competitive by reducing parts costs and eliminating waste from suppliers' operations.


American Building Maintenance reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Death Throws A Pall Over The Title Talk
Before a ball could be dribbled, a point scored, a game completed or a championship won, the Chicago Bulls and the Phoenix Suns were sadly forced to put their battle for the National Basketball Association title into a different place today because of the death of Drazen Petrovic of the Nets.
With Game 1 of the N.B.A. championship series on Wednesday night, there was the usual talk of maneuvers and matchups, but mortality seemed foremost on everyone's mind.


CLINTON BACKS OFF PLAN FOR NEW TAX ON HEAT IN FUELS
Warned by leading Democratic senators that he was probably facing defeat, President Clinton backed away today from his proposal for a new tax based on the heat content of fuels.
Later, Democrats in the Senate met for more than two hours over lunch to try to forge a compromise that would be acceptable to the White House and could command a majority in the Senate.
No consensus was reached, but senators said afterward that a different form of energy tax was still likely.


Ecology &amp; Environment reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Fish Stars in a Meal of Easy Elegance With a Surprise Ending
IF you are holding to a tight food budget, it is often difficult to justify buying fish, which tends to be expensive.
Whole fish sometimes seems to be well priced, perhaps as little as $2 a pound, but remember that it may consist of as little as 25 percent meat.
Some large fish, like rockfish and grouper, have big heads, lots of bones and relatively little meat.
Fish fillets, on the other hand, may seem more costly but may ultimately be a better buy -- and save you a lot of work.
Blue cod (sometimes called pollack), the main course in this menu, is plentiful and inexpensive.
It is available almost year-round, but since there is not usually a large demand for it (it's not as well known as regular cod), you may have to ask your fishmonger to order it.
Blue cod fillets are beige on one side and slightly darker on the other, but they lighten as they cook.
The flesh is very delicate and mild.
Be aware that blue cod is sometimes misnamed, labeled cod or haddock, when in fact it is a separate species.


E.J. McRickard, 79; Retired Broker Led Real-Estate Board
Edmund J. McRickard, a retired commercial real-estate executive and past president of the Real Estate Board of New York, died on Sunday at the Brandywine Nursing Home in Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
A 45-year resident of Briarcliff Manor, he was 79.
The cause was Parkinson's disease, his family said.


Chic by H.I.S. Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 8


Graf and Agassi Uncertain for Wimbledon
With Wimbledon set to start in less than two weeks, STEFFI GRAF and ANDRE AGASSI are nursing injuries that might keep them from defending their titles.
Graf, who won the French Open on Saturday, was then treated at a hospital in Essen, Germany, for an injury suffered during her quarterfinal match, last Wednesday.


Big Board Stocks Continue Their Decline
Like a staggered prizefighter, the stock market came off the floor a number of times yesterday, trying to rally but still closing lower for lack of buyers.
Many of the stocks that declined on Monday, like technology and gaming issues, continued their losses, but others, like banks, found support among investors looking for bargains.


Long Hours Still Imperil Resident Physicians
To the Editor:
A May 30 article details the long days and short life of Frank Ingulli, a medical student, whose death in an automobile accident was very likely caused by exhaustion from sleep deprivation and chronic fatigue.
I was chairman of the New York State Health Department committee that recommended the kinds of regulations adopted by the state to prevent such tragedies by rationalizing working conditions and supervision of resident physicians.
These recommendations were developed after 18 months of study.
They were primarily to protect the public from the dangers associated with expecting sleep-deprived resident physicians to carry out their duties safely.
The committee also learned that sleep deprivation and chronic fatigue were killing and maiming resident physicians and medical students who attempted to drive home after working unusually long hours.


A Peek Behind the Smile At Rough Journey's End
THE photograph on the front page of The Times on Monday showing a huddled mass of Chinese certainly evoked hard passages and disorientation.
It showed the illegal refugees looking out in grayness at the grounded steamer that had carried them 17,000 miles to Jacob Riis beach.
But there in the left-hand corner was a laughing face.
Wet and cold, a man was plainly laughing.
For months he traveled on a tramp steamer where close to 300 people ultimately gave up sharing a single toilet.
He has arrived in America with nothing more than his clothes and they were soaking wet.
He may not have realized it when the picture was taken, but at least six of his fellow passengers died in the last leg of the voyage through the waters of Queens.


Freedom for Doctors
To the Editor:
Lest my fellow physicians get into an emotional tizzy over being controlled by the Government, I'd like to mention that somewhere in the literature is an article indicating that doctors in Europe who work for the Government usually feel freer than those working largely for themselves.
I tried private practice myself; it was a hassle.
Keeping an office going, handling complicated problems alone, filling out insurance forms, isolation and worrying about fees were just a few of the problems.


Theater in Review
Classified  Union Square Upstairs 100 East 17th Street Manhattan Written and performed by Fred Adler; co-written by Dan Cedeno; directed by William Oliver; set by Bernie Honigman; lighting by Michele Disco; costumes by Sama Meschel.
Presented by WonderWorks Unlimited.
As satirists go, Fred Adler is like a puppy: young, frisky and eager to please.
These characteristics are on display at the Union Square Upstairs Theater, where Mr.
Adler is appearing in his one-man show, "Classified," Thursdays through Sundays until June 27.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  COLD WAR OVER, ILLEGAL SEX UP  Since the end of the cold war, criminal organizations have set up networks to bring young women from the former Soviet bloc into the sex industry of Western Europe, police officials in Belgium, the Netherlands and Germany say.
A1  VICHY OFFICIAL ASSASSINATED  An official in the Vichy Government in France, facing charges for deporting Jews to Nazi death camps, was shot dead in his Paris home.
A 49-year-old frustrated author was charged with murder.
A3


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press on Saturday about a trip to Florida by Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of Connecticut, paid for by UST, a Greenwich tobacco company, referred incorrectly to an opinion that the trip violated the state ethics code.
It was the personal view of the State Ethics Commission's executive director, not a draft opinion for the commission.


Sprint's President to Retire; Had Differences With Chief
John P. Frazee Jr., who led the successful merger of the Centel Corporation into the Sprint Corporation last year after the most bitter proxy fight in recent memory, is retiring at the age of 48, Sprint announced yesterday.
The surprise change in management comes as Sprint's larger rivals are also forming new combinations.
American Telephone and Telegraph is scheduled to buy a large stake in McCaw Cellular, the nation's largest wireless carrier, and MCI Communications last week announced an alliance with British Telecommunications, a principal international competitor to A.T.&amp; T.


New Entry In Finance Software
Computer Associates, a leading software company, and Kiplinger's, a personal-finance publisher, fired what may be the ultimate weapon in the personal computer software wars yesterday: a free product.
The companies introduced a personal-finance program, CA-Simply Money, with the announcement that the first million copies would be given away to people who call the toll-free number 1-800-FREE-MONEY.
Recipients will have to pay $6.95 shipping and handling.


Its Schools Ruled Inadequate, Alabama Looks for Answers
At the Shiloh Elementary and Middle School here the library has not bought any books in 20 years.
There are no science labs, no band, no music, no art, no foreign language courses.
The roof leaks and the dingy 43-year-old building is about worn out.
There are worse schools in Alabama, like the one in adjacent Wilcox County where raw sewage seeped for years onto a playground and termites ate through books, and there are better ones.
But while legislatures around the nation are struggling with questions of how to equalize spending between poor school districts and rich ones, Alabama is grappling with something even broader: a judge's ruling that its public schools violate the State Constitution by failing to provide an adequate education.


Food Notes
Tastes of France
Every year for five years, the Comite Colbert, a French association of manufacturers of luxury goods, has held a promotional week in New York.
This year, the theme is food.
Visitors to a number of shops will have an opportunity to taste French delicacies through the middle of next week.
Today from noon to 2 P.M., chocolates made in the kitchen of Le Bernardin will be available for sampling at Hermes, 11 East 57th Street.
D'Artagnan foie gras will be served from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. today at Baccarat, 625 Madison Avenue (59th Street).
Tomorrow and June 17th from 6 to 7 P.M., Christofle, 680 Madison Avenue (61st Street) will offer a glass of Champagne to those with reservations; call (212) 308-9390.
All of the samples are free.


Block Drug Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Seeking to Curb Auditor Job-Hopping
Noting a gradual loss of confidence in the country's auditors, the leading accounting group in the United States proposed yesterday that the Government ban head auditors from accepting jobs at former clients for at least a year and proposed other measures aimed at mending the tattered image of the profession.
The recommendations, voted on by the directors of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants in May and made final last week, were in response to a number of financial disasters that occurred without setting off warnings from the outside auditors, including several where the auditor-client relationships seemed too cozy.


Washington Talk; White House Offices: Matter of Inches
When President Clinton announced that David R. Gergen would be brought into the White House as a new and important adviser, all the signs of a classic Washington power play were evident.
Except one.
Mr.
Gergen has no office.
Mr.
Gergen, who has worked at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue before and knows well the value of its internal real estate, has been temporarily relegated to a basement office with one assistant that he brought with him.


Mourning Hero Who Transcended Sports World
Fans gathered in front of the coffee bar co-owned by the New Jersey Nets star Drazen Petrovic to pay tribute today to the basketball player and national hero of this war-torn country who died in a car accident Monday in Germany.
A mound of freshly lighted candles outside Cafe Amadeus illuminated scores of crying faces as people sat in silence in front of pictures of Petrovic, whom many regarded proudly as a symbol of this newly-independent republic's nationhood.


Immigrants Both Renew and Unsettle Chinatown
The elderly man, influential and well known in Chinatown, stood in the front room of his office on Mott Street and hovered between the desire for full disclosure and the need for discretion.
He talked about illegal immigrants, like the ones who came ashore in Queens on Sunday morning.
He worried that they faced years of misery and hardship here, that they would contribute to a loss of control in the community, a lessening of the influence of the old guard.
Some of them, he said, would inevitably be tempted by gang membership, already a growing problem in Chinatown.


New York City Sees Decline In Math Scores
New York City public school students performed at about the national average on a new mathematics achievement test given for the first time this year, and testing experts said yesterday that the results cast doubt on school officials' claims of sharp improvement in student performance.
In recent years, citywide student performance on the annual mathematics achievement tests has gradually moved upward; on last year's test, 6 of 10 students performed at or above the national average.
The administration of Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez has pointed to those numbers as a validation of its efforts to improve students' basic skills.


Details Emerge, but Petrovic's Death Still Baffles
The death of Drazen Petrovic, a Croatian player who with the Nets became one of the National Basketball Association's top shooting guards, sent shock waves yesterday throughout this country and much of Europe, where his career began.
Petrovic was killed instantly Monday when the car in which he was riding slammed into a trailer truck on a rain-slick road in Germany.
He was 28.


Santa Fe Portrait; A Longtime Pillar of the Government Now Aids Those Hurt by Its Bombs
East of the Nevada Test Site, where the Government conducted atmospheric tests of atomic bombs, the town of Alamo, Nev., rises in the desert.
In August 1978, at the urging of a cousin, Stewart L. Udall went to Alamo and listened to mothers tell of the dust and radiation from the blasts that settled over the town in the 1950's and of the children they had lost to leukemia.
"Until then, there were a lot of people in that country who suspected a link, but they kept it to themselves," said Mr.
Udall, who once was Secretary of the Interior for Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson.
"They had been fed a steady diet of lies by the Government that there was no danger. That was my first trip to investigate, and I felt there was more to it, that it would be difficult and that we would be breaking new ground."


Giant Food Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 22


Russia Will Formally Seek Full Status in Trade Group
As part of an effort to integrate Russia into the world economy, President Boris N. Yeltsin is expected on Friday to present an application for full Russian membership in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, the 111-nation, Geneva-based group that oversees world trade, a senior official of the organization said today.
In a telephone interview, the official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that Moscow would probably not become a member for at least a year, and perhaps not for several years.
He suggested that the changes it would have to make to meet GATT standards would undoubtedly accelerate the nation's transition to a market economy.


Fluor Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


East Europeans Duped Into West's Sex Trade
Judith's dream to travel West, and her descent into prostitution, fell together one night in September 1991, when a car arrived to take her and two other young Hungarian women to work as waitresses in Belgium.
The heady drive across the heart of Europe took 20 hours, as planned.
But the Crazy Cabaret in Ghent was no restaurant.


Review/Film; Of Skinheads High on Hate And Violence
"Romper Stomper," Geoffrey Wright's viscerally supercharged film about neo-Nazi skinheads in Melbourne, Australia, is a film that runs on the adrenaline of hate.
From its harrowing opening scene, in which a gang of skinheads terrorizes a group of Vietnamese immigrants, through a prolonged sequence in which the Vietnamese strike back at their tormentors, the film exults at being in the thick of action that is often savagely and sadistically violent.
This being Australia, not the United States, the violence is done with fist, boot, baseball bat and tire chain; not with firearms.
But the absence of high-efficiency technological splatter doesn't make it any less bloody or intense.


Reporter's Notebook; A Ceremony Both Regal and Restful
The Imperial Palace is a remarkable oasis of calm smack in the middle of Tokyo, and this morning the steady drizzle and heavy gray sky lent the overgrown grounds a romantic and secluded feeling, particularly in the thickly wooded redoubt where the wedding of Masaka Owada and Crown Prince Naruhito took place.
Although they have become the center of one of the most minutely protected monarchies in the world, the grounds are surprisingly unkempt, a wooded ramble of maple, ginko and other trees inside a moat where white swans floated silently in this morning's rain.


Air Force General Faces Inquiry on Jab at Clinton
The White House today again found itself grappling with President Clinton's uneasy relations with the military, a result of reports that an Air Force two-star general made disparaging remarks about Mr.
Clinton in a speech last month.
The Air Force is investigating whether the officer, Maj.
Gen.
Harold N. Campbell, called Mr.
Clinton a "pot-smoking," "womanizing" and "draft-dodging" Commander in Chief, among other things, as some members of the audience later complained.


Books of The Times; Words Lightly and Seriously but Always Lovingly
Misreadings  By Umberto Eco  Translated by William Weaver. 180 pages.
A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/Harcourt Brace. $12.95 (paper).
Words to Create a World  Interviews, Essays and Reviews of Contemporary Poetry  By Daniel Hoffman  301 pages.
University of Michigan Press.
One of Somerset Maugham's admiring readers once asked him how he was able to create such artful short stories and novels.
"It's not difficult," he replied.
"You can find all the words I use in one book: the dictionary. I simply rearrange them." In "The Summing Up," he made a somewhat more serious observation about the printed word: "I would sooner read a timetable or a catalogue than nothing at all. They are much more entertaining than half the novels that are written."


Review/Dance; Balanchine's Wide Range, Classicism To Jazz
Take a company like the New York City Ballet, in which standards are already higher than the norm, and superlatives immediately come to mind.
Yet even by those standards, the City Ballet's dancers seem suddenly to have recharged themselves.
"La Source," George Balanchine's strange if exquisite meditation on the French style in ballet, was restored to its essence on Saturday afternoon by Nikolaj Hubbe, Kyra Nichols and Katrina Killian.
It was a performance imbued with greatness, matched later by that of Darci Kistler and Robert La Fosse, surpassing even their usual excellence, in the Gerswhin "Who Cares?" Judith Fugate and Lourdes Lopez were no slouches, either, and the four principals plunged deliciously into the jazzy "Clap Yo' Hands" section, danced to a recorded piano solo by George Gershwin that Balanchine dropped from the ballet shortly after its 1970 premiere.


CROATIAN FORCES FACE MUSLIM ARMY
Hundreds of Croatian civilians streamed out of Travnik, in central Bosnia, today in automobiles, tractors, carts and bicycles as Croatian militiamen fighting Bosnian Government forces shelled the picturesque town that was Bosnia's capital in the Ottoman era.
Mate Boban, leader of the Bosnian Croats, accused the Muslim-led Bosnian Government forces of executing Croatian prisoners in Travnik, but there was no independent confirmation of the allegation, which was reported today in Croatian newspapers.


Judge Orders The Release Of Haitians
A Federal judge ordered yesterday that all Haitians held in a detention camp at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base be released and that the camp -- opened two years ago in an effort to stem a flood of Haitian immigrants -- be closed immediately.
Unless the Clinton Administration files an appeal, the ruling by Judge Sterling Johnson Jr. in the United States District Court in Brooklyn will close a painful chapter in America's immigration history.


McClancy Regains Title
Behind a gritty two-hitter by Mike Soto, Monsignor McClancy High School of East Elmhurst, Queens, made its third straight trip to Yankee Stadium a rousing success yesterday, winning its second Catholic High Schools Athletic Association championship in three years.
The score was 3-0 and the loser was St.
Joseph by the Sea, a Staten Island school playing its first title game.
Soto, a senior left-hander, walked none, struck out eight and stayed cool despite three errors and a passed ball by his teammates, raising his season mark to 9-0.
The victory gave McClancy a 21-4 record and dropped St.
Joseph by the Sea, a former all-girls school, to 17-12.
In his first year at McClancy, Soto was a member of the city championship freshman team.
As a sophomore, he was on the varsity when McClancy beat Brooklyn's Xavierian at Yankee Stadium.
As a junior last year, he watched the Crusaders lose the title game to Fordham Prep.


Review/Theater: Playland; South Africa's Conflict, Boiled Down to 2 Men
"The whole world is me and you. Here! Now!," says the white man to the black man in "Playland," the new drama written and directed by Athol Fugard.
"Forgive me or kill me. That's the only choice you've got."
With those few sentences, Mr.
Fugard not only delivers the crux of his play at the Manhattan Theater Club Stage II but also sums up the crisis in South Africa now that apartheid is finally crumbling.
In "Playland," as in so much of his canon, this great writer boils down his country's tragedy to the simplest theatrical essentials: a couple of actors, a barren setting, a single confrontation, one act.
It's a welcome return to solid artistic ground for Mr.
Fugard after the groping of such recent efforts as "My Children! My Africa!" and "A Place With the Pigs."


Thinking by Humans and by Computers
To the Editor:
"Top Rivals Agree on Unified System for Advanced TV" (front page, May 25) describes the wonders of the merging of television and computer technologies in high definition television by saying that computer signals are transmitted as ones and zeroes.
That description is misleading.
People should be helped to understand those technologies by being told what really takes place.
Computer signals or code are actually sent, and processed or worked on, in the form of binary digital streams of pulses or bursts of electrical or laser (light) energy interspersed with the absence of pulses, in minute positions allocated along their entire lengths.
Pulse streams can be pictured as magnetic tapes moving in space.
That streams are made up only of pulses and the absence of pulses makes them binary, in contrast to electric current, which has only continuous pulses and no spaces.
That every standard arrangement of pulses and spaces has a number equivalent makes them digital.


Kurt Weitzmann, Princeton Scholar Of Art, Dies at 89
Dr.
Kurt Weitzmann, a professor of art and archeology at Princeton University, died on Monday at the Medical Center at Princeton.
He was 89.
The cause was heart disease, the university said.


Housing Agency's Problems Deepen As U.S. Rescue Effort Proves Futile
A year ago, the Bush Administration announced at a news conference that it was taking control of this city's troubled public housing agency, the nation's fourth largest.
The Federal officials promised to transform the agency into a model of efficiency and provide a national blueprint for rehabilitating other distressed urban housing agencies.
But the rescue mission was, by all accounts, ill conceived and a failure.
And late last month the Clinton Administration quietly returned the agency's management to local authorities -- even though it was in even worse shape by many measures than it was before the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development intervened.


Behind Immigrants' Voyage, Long Reach of Chinese Gang
A Chinese gang that recently emerged as a major force in the smuggling of illegal immigrants helped organize the voyage of the tramp steamer that ran aground off Queens on Sunday with nearly 300 Chinese immigrants aboard, law-enforcement officials believe.
Federal officials said they had evidence that one organizer of the smuggling enterprise was Guo Liang Chi, also known as Ah Kay, the 28-year-old leader of the Fuk Ching gang.
Both Federal and New York officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, believe that members of the gang were to have unloaded the illegal immigrants and to have collected $30,000 from each of them for the 17,000-mile journey from the Far East.


Tokyo Not Pleased by U.S. Proposals
Japanese officials said today that they would reject proposals made by the United States regarding trade relations because the proposals included numerical targets for reduction of Japan's trade surplus and for increasing imports of specific products.
American officials, at a briefing in Washington on Monday, said that although the proposal would set numerical benchmarks, there would be no automatic retaliation against Japan if the targets were not met.
But if that was meant as a concession to Japan, it did not seem to have registered here.


Why Shouldn't a Woman Be a Princess?
To the Editor:
I take issue with Ann Quindlen's "Happily Ever" column, calling Masako Owada of Japan a "sacrificial lamb" for choosing to marry Crown Prince Naruhito.
Ms.
Quindlen pits one woman's personal choice to marry against a feminist philosophical ideal of how an intelligent and well-educated woman should live.
It seems to me that by Ms.
Quindlen's argument a woman who does not pursue a high-powered career is to be pitied and blackballed from the feminist clique for not living up to her potential.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.81
3.14
3.57
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.12
3.14
3.66
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.29
3.30
3.79
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.72
5.69
6.96
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.91
6.87
7.87
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.84
7.80
8.80
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.88
5.88
6.61
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


New York's Needless Budget Quarrels
Forced to cut more from New York City's budget, the Mayor and City Council are still squabbling, deadlocked over the shape of $300 million in cuts and two difficult initiatives.
There are solutions to both if Council Speaker Peter Vallone means what he says and really wants to cooperate with Mayor David Dinkins rather than use the budget to win political battles.
Medical care for the poor.
With New York desperately short of primary care facilities for poor families, the Dinkins administration wisely proposes to create at least 30 health clinics.
But the Council is holding the plan hostage to a turf war over who controls the money.


Some Pros With Low-Fat Dessert Tricks Up Their Sleeves
HERE is the burning culinary question of 1993: Can low-fat versions of traditional desserts ever taste as good as the buttery, sweet, creamy rich versions so many people love and long for?
Dozens of professional cooks have been wrestling with the question for several years now.
In the last few months, four noted sweet tooths have written low-fat-dessert cookbooks, confident that they have found the magic combination to make substitute ingredients taste just as good as butter, cream and chocolate.


I.B.M. Sale Sets Corporate Record
A $1.8 billion bond sale by the International Business Machines Corporation yesterday set a record for an investment-grade corporate issue, according to the underwriters.
Strong demand for the bonds of the beleaguered computer giant allowed the underwriters, led by Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, to increase the size of the issue from its original $1.5 billion amount.
I.B.M. set the previous record for an investment-grade corporate sale with a $1.65 billion issue last year.


Dinkins-Council Talks Halt, Then Resume
Talks between Mayor David N. Dinkins and the City Council over the city's $31.4 billion budget resumed yesterday afternoon, but the two sides remained apart on at least three crucial issues.
Council leaders and the Mayor continued to disagree over whether to create a new agency for the homeless, whether the Council should have a say in a new quasi-public corporation to build health clinics, and how to cut $300 million more from the spending plan to make up for a shortfall in state and Federal aid.


Nominee Rejection Costs Club An Event
An all-white yacht club's refusal to admit a black dentist for membership has caused national sailing officials to withdraw a major youth championship regatta scheduled to begin June 18 at the Florida Yacht Club in Jacksonville, Fla.
The membership rejection, which has drawn criticism from the United States Navy as well as Jacksonville city officials, has put the spotlight on a sport still known for its long-standing image of elitism.


Behind Dinkins Budget: Recovering From Gamble
In the end, the election-year budget that Mayor David N. Dinkins hoped would demonstrate his managerial mettle came a year too soon.
The staffs of the Mayor and the City Council were still working last night, five days into their final round of negotiations, trying to resolve the last details of the city's spending plan for the fiscal year starting next month.
But the budget's thrust is clear: it will feature about $300 million in spending cuts and a retrenchment in some services not likely to endear Mr.
Dinkins and other political leaders with voters this fall.


For Donald, A New Chance at Open
His second-place finish in the United States Open three years ago was not enough for a free ticket to this year's tournament.
So Mike Donald had to battle 141 other candidates today for 31 spots in next week's extravaganza at Baltusrol in Springfield, N.J.
The field, which included 52 PGA Tour players and six amateurs, played one round at Old Oaks Country Club and another down the road at Century Country Club.
When it was all over, Donald was the top qualifier, shooting a three-under-par 67 at the 6,503-yard Old Oaks and a three-under 68 at the 6,809-yard Century for low medalist honors at six-under 135.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR Diary:
Walking along Sixth Avenue, headed for CBS the other morning, I was confronted by a gray-haired woman in a raincoat and carrying an umbrella.
She said, "You're Frank Field and you said it was going to be a nice day and that the dark clouds would clear."
I said, "Yes, it is going to be a nice day and the dark clouds will clear."
She said, "No, they won't."
I said: "Yes, they will. Trust me."
She replied: "I'll bet you a dollar they won't. It's going to rain."
I said: "O.K. You have a bet." With that we went our respective ways.
I had forgotten all about the incident until a few days later, when I opened a letter and a dollar fell out.
There was also a note: "Enclosed find $1 for the bet we made yesterday concerning rain. I lost! I am not a deadbeat." It was signed, "The gray-headed lady you met."
I am going to send the lady a thank-you note and tell her I knew she wouldn't welsh on the bet and I am going to contribute her dollar to a charity. -- FRANK FIELD
. . .
Dear Diary:
The scene was my local video store in Greenwich Village, where I asked for a film just released on tape, a movie it seemed everyone but me had seen.
Clerk: "Howards" what?
Me: "End."
Clerk, scanning computer screen: Nope.
But we've got "Howard the Duck" and Howard Stern.
Me: No thanks. I can wait. I've waited this long. -- BILL HARTFORD
. . .
Dear Diary:
Reading about the paint-smeared fur coats that demonstrators recently wore to protest the showings of fall furs, I considered how New York attitudes had changed from those of the city I knew in childhood.
Back then, it would not have seemed possible that women would protest the wearing of fur coats, which were the sine qua non of status.
My mother, who grew up poor in the Bronx, married a guy who made lots of money and liked to show her off.
Dad always got the best and lots of it for his smart-mouth doll.
Eventually the walk-in closets were so full that the doors flew open without warning.
So some nice outdated coats and stoles found their way up to the Bronx, to my grandmother and the aunts.
My grandmother kept Mother's furs carefully. (We might be poor again and need to sell them.) She sewed threadbare sheets into protective dust-covers for them.
She wore them only on holidays, for picture-taking, or when she was bidden downtown to dine with Mother and Dad.
My grandfather was a frequently unemployed cartoonist, and those furs had been a long time in coming to her.
Grandmother was not about to give them over to the coat-check girl.
She clutched the furs tightly, and carefully folded them inside out.
She had the bearings of a duchess, but she knew the value of things.
Dad was a well-known sports figure and it embarrassed him to be seen with a woman who looked like a million but acted as if someone were going to steal her coat.
Dad told Mother, so Mother told Grandmother: "Take it easy. Act rich. Be casual. Drape the furs. Be theatrical. Think Barbara Stanwyck, Lizabeth Scott, Bette Davis."
Next monthly dinner, Dad chose Dinty Moore's, a former speakeasy in the theater district.
The maitre d'hotel led the way to my parents' table and behind them marched my unhappy, martyred little grandmother.
Her head high, her fist clutching the collar of her mink coat with great purpose, she trailed it behind her, cutting a swath through the sawdust. -- SHEILA SHIKI y MICHAELS
. . .
Dear Diary:
This morning, at the tail end of rush hour, a Manhattan-bound No. 5 train pulled into Franklin Avenue in Brooklyn.
A little dog trotted through the open door, spotted a comfortable place under a seat and settled down.
A few minutes later, the train drew to a stop at Brooklyn Bridge.
The doors opened, the dog looked up matter of factly and exited the train.
"I suppose this is where his office is," one rider said.
I say: Listen, it's a dog-eat-dog world. -- BONNIE HILLER
. . .
Place: A bookstore in a Huntington, L.I., mall.
Dramatis personae: Sales clerk and her customer.
Customer: Where would I find Dorothy Parker?
Clerk, hesitantly: Dorothy Parker?
Customer: You know, the Round Table.
Clerk: The Round Table?
Pause.
Then, triumphantly: Oh, of course!
King Arthur!
Try the history section, over there.
Dorothy, alas, was nowhere to be found. -- ELLIE FLINKER ADIEL


Khmer Rouge Seek Coalition Post
The Khmer Rouge, which boycotted elections in Cambodia last month and threatened to sabotage the balloting with violence, seem to have had a change of heart since the final votes were cast.
The Maoist-inspired rebels are not only willing to accept the results, they are now also maneuvering to join whatever government is formed.


Pietermaritzburg Journal; Mahatma's Vision, Now a Phoenix Fallen in Ashes
Exactly 100 years after a white conductor pitched an Indian lawyer off a train here, inadvertently launching one of history's great moral crusades, this provincial capital was a bit giddy with centennial fever this week.
In tribute to that ejected passenger, Mohandas K. Gandhi, the schools are busy with essay contests and the newspapers are filled with hindsight.


Man Questioned Without Lawyer Wins New Trial
The state's highest court ordered a new trial today for a man convicted of murder in New York City in a ruling that one judge warned could severely restrict the use of police informants.
The Court of Appeals ruled 5-to-1 that a confession by Kenneth West, taped by a police informant, should not have been admitted as trial evidence because Mr.
West's lawyer was not present when he talked with the informant.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on May 31, about the Securities and Exchange Commission's new proxy rules, misstated the percentage of the shares in Consolidated Freightways Inc. that are owned by members of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters.
The company's employee stock ownership plan, which includes other employees as well as members of the teamsters' union, owns 13 percent.


PANEL URGES SHIFT IN STATION'S ORBIT
The expert panel advising the White House on redesigning the space-station has called for the proposed astronaut outpost to be launched into a "world orbit" where it could be reached not only by American space shuttles but also by Russian, Japanese and Chinese rockets.
The recommendation by the White House group for a different orbit is in a draft report to the White House that has not yet released.
If kept in the final report and adopted by President Clinton, the shift would be a watershed in the history of the American space program.


COMPANY NEWS: An Instant Success?; At Polaroid, Big Hopes For a Smaller Camera
The Polaroid Corporation announced a new, smaller instant camera yesterday that is meant to develop a new market.
Company officials said the new model, called the Captiva, would be introduced with the help of a $30 million advertising campaign starting in late summer.
Robert Delahunt, senior vice president for marketing, said the company did its research among tough customers.
"We found people who did not own an instant camera and did not plan to buy one," he said.


A Bad Malpractice Idea
To the Editor:
The Clinton Administration's proposal to shift the malpractice burden from physicians to insurance companies (front page, May 21) is 180 degrees off course.
At first glance, from the physician's point of view, it seems a good idea; however, in the long run it would not reduce the cost of health care, but probably increase it.
It has been shown time after time that a trusting and close relationship between physician and patient prevents a lawsuit if a complication or problem arises.
When complaints are addressed to a faceless, large corporation with deep pockets, there will be no personal ties to prevent or moderate lawsuits.
Also, corporations do not settle claims quickly; but seem always to be involved in drawn-out and costly proceedings.


Corrections
A picture caption on Saturday with a theater review of "Sheila's Day" misidentified the actress shown.
She was Tu Nokwe.


Senate Panel Backs Military Spending the Pentagon Never Sought
A Senate committee followed the House today in approving $1.2 billion in military spending that the Pentagon had not asked for.
With no extended argument or questioning, the Appropriations Committee sent to the Senate floor a measure that also includes $400 million of the $19.3 billion in economic-stimulus spending President Clinton asked for last winter.


60-Minute Gourmet
NOT so long ago, curry was largely confined to Indian restaurants; today, it is found in all sorts of sauces, soups and even mousses and terrines.
Lentils, likewise, were considered an ethnic food, mostly found in Middle Eastern cuisine, yet today they are encountered throughout French and American cooking.
A renewed interest in dried beans has a lot to do with it, as well as health concerns.
Lentils are an excellent source of low-fat protein.
They also go well with curry.


Princeton President Addresses Graduates
Princeton University conferred 1,075 undergraduate and 611 advanced degrees yesterday at its 246th commencement held on the lawn in front of Nassau Hall in Princeton, N.J.
The valedictory was delivered by Niles A. Pierce, a mechanical and aerospace engineering major.
D.
Graham Burnett, a history major, was the salutatorian, delivering his speech in Latin as Princeton tradition requires.


New Card Deal for Major League Alumni
BROOKS ROBINSON may not stand to make as much from Nabisco as the $126,000 the Baltimore Orioles paid him back in 1976, but who knows?
If enough people send in a couple of Nabisco boxtops and a $5 bill for his autographed new baseball card, the company might be tempted to renew its limited new promotion.


Yielding, French Accept Farm Pact
France today accepted part of an agricultural agreement between Europe and the United States that it had vowed to veto, opening the way for progress in broader, and long-stalled, world trade talks.
At a meeting of European Community foreign ministers in Luxembourg, the recently installed center-right Government of Prime Minister Edouard Balladur said it would drop its objection to a major point in the deal reached in Washington in November.


Critic's Notebook; Adventures in Spoletoland: Conservative but Not Bloodless
Spoleto Festival U.S.A., held annually here, is troubled by difficult questions in its 17th year.
Has this multi-disciplinary event lost its edge, its experimental thrust?
Will it overcome internal squabbles and financial crises?
Could it survive without the guidance of its 82-year-old founder, Gian Carlo Menotti?
A single weekend's visit did not provide ready answers.
For the moment, the festival seems to be on reasonably firm musical ground; there were solid productions of two unjustly neglected operas, some attractive programs of chamber music and a brand-new children's opera by Mr.
Menotti.
Crowds were large, concessions brisk, publicity relentless.


Banks Not Ready Yet For Farewell to Blue
For a football player whose team has told him in effect that it still likes him but does not necessarily love him, Carl Banks is playing it cool.
He says he is not angry.
He says he is now free to sign with any team, but he also says he still likes the Giants and does not rule out playing for them if the price is right.
"Everything will be O.K., one way or another," Banks said yesterday in an interview.
"This is not a bitter situation. It's the way things have worked out. I still think the option is there to play for the Giants, but I don't know the price. I don't know what salary number they have in mind. I don't know if it will be acceptable to me. I'm going to explore the free-agent market. I have 28 options. I want people to understand I didn't get cut."


Theater in Review
Extended Forecast  La Mama E.T.C. 74A East Fourth Street East Village By Franz Xaver Kroetz; translated by Erica Bilder and Estelle Parsons; directed by Ms.
Bilder; assistant director, Stephen Nunns; set and lighting by Watoku Ueno; costumes by Theodora Skipitares; production manager, Virlana Tkacz; stage manager, Shigeko Suga.
WITH: Estelle Parsons.
In his plays, Franz Xaver Kroetz takes the most banal of situations and transforms them into strange and haunting theatrical cameos.
Slices of life become glimpses into private rituals of despair.
In "Extended Forecast," an elderly widow prepares to move to a home for the aged, trying to decide which of her possessions she will take with her.
This is the text of the play but not the sum of the experience.
As performed by Estelle Parsons at La Mama, the monodrama is stark, simple and poignant in its details.


Mobil Set For Venture In Caspian
The Mobil Oil Corporation and six other big international energy companies will sign a preliminary agreement today with Kazakhstan to develop what is thought to be a large oilfield in the Caspian Sea.
The agreement, which will be signed in Alma-Ata, the capital of the former Soviet republic, is for the development of a seismic exploration program.
A final agreement to commit the companies to carry out seismic work and an exploration study through 1996 is expected to be completed in the fall.


Large, Happy Crowds Greeted Opening of West Harlem Park
To the Editor:
A report of the opening of Riverbank State Park May 27 concentrated on issues other than the park story (news article, May 28).
About 20,000 people of all ages and physical capabilities from all parts of the city and beyond happily streamed into the park to celebrate and enjoy a 28-acre half-mile waterfront park that offers indoor and outdoor recreational and cultural experiences.


Kentucky Extends Pitino's Contract
RICK PITINO's contract extension calls for him to remain as head basketball coach at the University of Kentucky into the next century.
The school announced yesterday that Pitino's contract was extended through the 1999-2000 season.
"I think he made a career decision, that he wants to be a college coach, and he wants to be a college coach at Kentucky," the Kentucky athletic director, C.M.
NEWTON said after a meeting of the Kentucky Athletics Association's board of directors in Lexington.


Carl Morris, 82, Dies; Was Abstract Painter
Carl Morris, an abstract painter whose work echoed the forces and forms of nature, died on Thursday at St.
Vincent Hospital and Medical Center in Portland, Ore.
He was 82.
He had recently had gallbladder surgery.


INSIDE
Los Angeles Mayor Chosen
Richard Riordan, a conservative businessman, defeated City Councilman Michael Woo, despite a Clinton endorsement.
Page A14.
Diplomatic Logjam Broken
Officials say Walter F. Mondale will be Ambassador to Japan, while Richard C. Holbrooke, a Carter Administration aide, will go to Germany and Stephen J. Solarz to India.
Page A12.
Alabama's School Challenge
Alabama is grappling with a judge's ruling that its public schools violate state law by failing to provide an adequate education.
Page B7.
More Access to Cable Shows
After an antitrust inquiry, seven cable TV companies are to make shows more available to rivals.
Page D1.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The S.E.C. asked 30 Wall Street firms for documents in an investigation into links between political contributions and the awarding of municipal bond underwriting business.  [ Page D1. ]
The Treasury is planning to study whether money market funds and nonbank lenders should be required to follow the Community Reinvestment Act and make loans to poor areas.  [ D1. ]


Book Notes
Dead and Alive
"Embraced by the Light," Betty J. Eadie's account of how she died after a hysterectomy, rose to heaven to meet Jesus and scores of angels and then returned with a jolt to her body, initially seemed a bit far out to many members of Manhattan's decidedly cynical publishing world.
But 590,000 copies have already been printed, and the book is nearing its fifth week on the New York Times best-seller list, where it moves into the No. 6 spot on Sunday.
Not bad for a first-time author and grief counselor who received no advance and for a publisher that has printed only one book, this one.
"Everyone told us that a near-death book wouldn't sell," said the book's publisher, Marc Stephen Garrison, an entrepreneur and author of business books from Sundance, Utah.
Mr.
Garrison, who owns a tuna-fishing fleet and a travel agency, among other things, founded Gold Leaf Press specifically for Mrs.
Eadie's book.


Campus Journal; Balloons Of Protest For Powell At Harvard
Not since 1958 has a top-ranking Pentagon official been the commencement speaker at Harvard University, where students often take up banners to clash with officialdom of every kind.
On Thursday, Gen.
Colin L. Powell, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, will get a taste of this Harvard tradition: as the speaker at the university's 342d commencement, he will confront thousands of pink balloons carrying the message "Lift the Ban."


Agency Appoints Managing Director
D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles said yesterday that it had appointed a managing director for its Central and Eastern European agency network, which would expand to Romania.
Carl Nichols, who had been the D.M.B.&amp; B. European account director for Procter &amp; Gamble health and beauty care products in London, was named to the position and will be based in Budapest.
Mr.
Nichols, 37, succeeds Andy Bielanski, who left in March to become the executive vice president and general manager at Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners in New York.


Once the Toast, Now a Target, 'Silver Palate' Star Goes Solo
THEY were a team.
Jetting about in the high-altitude 80's, they invaded America's kitchens with boundless ebullience and a simple notion: homemade food could be both elegant and accessible.
Medical students, law clerks and Wall Street Turks born with baked-bean-and-beer palates and a thousand thumbs were suddenly levitating over visions of raspberry vinegar and linen-draped tables set for four.
It was salvation at the stove.
Sheila Lukins and Julee Rosso, the co-creators of the Silver Palate, the wildly successful upscale food shop in Manhattan, helped to revolutionize a generation's eating habits.
But their high-profile pairing, which resulted in cookbooks that have sold 4.5 million copies, has come to a bitter end.
The two women haven't spoken in a year.
And Ms.
Rosso, who has just published her first solo cookbook, is now the target of intense criticism from some fellow food professionals who say the 574-page low-fat tome is well-meaning, but a mess.


An Oven Speeds Cooking With Light
THERE'S a new oven on the horizon that cooks with the speed of a microwave but browns like a grill.
Its source of power?
Lightbulbs.


2 Republicans Oppose Naming Babbitt to Court
Even as the White House insisted that President Clinton had not settled on a Supreme Court nominee, some Senate Republicans today challenged the merits of appointing Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt, widely reported to be the leading contender for the seat.
White House officials said that although Mr.
Clinton was leaning toward Mr.
Babbitt, they first wanted to consider possible replacements for him at the Interior Department, where he has been popular both with environmentalists and with business leaders.


Stephen Fry Goes West And Adopts New Look: Jeeves in Cowboy Boots
Stephen Fry has sampled the American West and pronounced it good.
The British actor, best known to American audiences as Jeeves on "Masterpiece Theater" and as the title character in the recent film "Peter's Friends," has the Texas twang down pat, and during a recent interview in New York he paced his hotel room wearing a new pair of snakeskin cowboy boots.
The accent and the boots were souvenirs of his stay in Texas for a guest role as Oscar Wilde on "Ned Blessing," a nouvelle Western series that CBS plans to introduce in the fall.
Mr.
Fry has fond memories of the shoot, which took place near Austin on an authentic-looking Old West set.
"I was actually able to say, after lunch, 'Well, I guess I'll mosey down to the corral,' " he said.
"And I did, literally, mosey down to the corral."


B.V.R. Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Royal Wedding in Japan Merges the Old and New
In a Shinto ritual deep in the woods of the Imperial Palace, Crown Prince Naruhito and Masako Owada married this morning with a mix of mystical tradition and a new internationalist air for the world's oldest monarchy.
The wedding marked the fourth time in this century that a future emperor and empress had stepped into the simple wooden shrine behind the palace's high stone walls to sip sake in a national yet private gesture of union.


Sports of The Times; Petrovic's Legacy: 'Pucaj Tricu'
IN the haunting hollowness of Byrne Meadowlands Arena, the basketball court was empty.
The parquet floor was glossily revarnished.
Its border and foul lanes had been repainted a shiny blue.
But there were no baskets.
No stanchions, no backboards, no orange rims, no nets.
It was as if those baskets that defined Drazen Petrovic's life were in mourning, too.


No Gravity When the Tourists Are Looking


Presbyterians Vote To Keep Prohibition Against Gay Pastors
In a session marked by revealing personal testimony and raucous disruption, the 2.8 million-member Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) voted Monday to maintain the church's position barring sexually active, declared homosexuals from ordination or appointment as pastors.
The church's General Assembly softened the action by calling on local congregations to participate in a three-year churchwide discussion of homosexuality and its relevance to church membership and ministry.


Kewaunee Scientific Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


H.I.V. Immunity Discussed at Berlin Conference
A small number of prostitutes in Nairobi, Kenya, appear to have avoided infection with the virus that causes AIDS despite frequent unprotected sex with infected men, researchers said at an international AIDS meeting here today.
The women are of intense scientific interest to researchers, who believe that clues to why they fought off the virus, H.I.V., could lead to the development of vaccines and other therapies.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.50
2.72
3.96
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.09
3.12
3.67
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.25
3.29
3.80
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.69
5.72
6.97
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.88
6.91
7.89
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.80
7.84
8.83
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.88
5.88
6.61
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Third Wave: 1776, 1950 and 1993
It happens every 43 years, like scoreboard clockwork: The United States national soccer team knocks off England and sends segments of the British Empire into convulsions of sporting despair.
Right on schedule today, in a U.S.
Cup match, the Americans pulled off a convincing 2-0 upset over England before 37,652 fans at Foxboro Stadium.
Energized by the addition of foreign-based players Tab Ramos, Tom Dooley and Eric Wynalda, the United States went airborne twice to shock an English side that already was consumed by self-analysis.


Ousted British Official Assails Prime Minister
Just when it seemed that John Major's fortunes could hardly sink any lower, the Prime Minister was subjected today to a withering attack in Parliament from former Chancellor of the Exchequer Norman Lamont.
Two weeks ago Mr.
Major dismissed Mr.
Lamont from the Government's second most powerful post.
Today, in a 20-minute speech slipped in as a surprise, the new back-bencher got his revenge.


Review/Rock; The Deliberately Derivative, From Jellyfish
Rock can be the noise of primal passions, but it doesn't have to be simple.
From the Beatles and the Beach Boys down through Queen, Squeeze and XTC, rock has also been a medium for ingenuity and duplicity.
Ever-so-clever pop constructions, full of key and tempo and textural changes, can carry equally clever lyrics that defy the simple pleasures of their sugar-coated tunes.
Rock's most lapidary songwriters are willing to trade a show of spontaneity for a show of precision and whimsy, demonstrating just how elaborate a song can be.
Jellyfish, a band from San Francisco that performed on Friday night at the Academy, proudly joins pop's lineage of tuneful tricksters.


Huffman Koos Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Rock-A-Bye In a Rocker
SHE bought an antique child-sized rocking chair at a flea market last year, and then Cynthia Radoczy had it covered with a cowhide-print fabric and put it in her store as an accessory.
Because Ms.
Radoczy owns Space Kiddets, a children's clothing store in Manhattan known for its zany togs, her customers started asking about it.


U.S. Is Sending Planes to Bolster U.N. in Somalia
The United States has sent four heavily armed gunships to Somalia to be available for any retaliation by United Nations forces against a faction that has been blamed for the deaths of 23 peacekeepers, Administration officials said today.
Three of the AC-130H "Specter" gunships have already landed in neighboring Djibouti, giving United Nations forces new offensive power to strike at arms caches controlled by the faction headed by Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid.


Missing Man in Bombing Case Is Said to Be in Iraq
A missing figure in the World Trade Center bombing case -- a man said to have helped teach Mohammed A. Salameh to drive a van -- is in Iraq and has turned down an F.B.I. request to return, Federal investigators and a spokesman for Arab causes said yesterday.
Court papers call the missing man a "confidential informant" who told Federal agents that he had accompanied Mr.
Salameh, the first suspect arrested, to a Jersey City apartment where traces of explosive damage were later found, and had helped Mr.
Salameh, two days before the Feb. 26 blast, to learn to drive the kind of Ryder van that prosecutors say carried the bomb.


CHRONICLE
CASSANDRA DANSON has filed for divorce from the "Cheers" star TED DANSON, citing irreconcilable differences as the cause for the end of their 15-year marriage.
The petition was filed last Thursday in Superior Court in Santa Monica, Calif., The Associated Press reported yesterday.
Mr.
Danson, who is 45, and his wife, 55, have been separated since October.


Boeskys Agree On Settlement For a Divorce
Ivan F. Boesky has reached a divorce settlement with his former wife, Seema, under which he will receive a lump payment of $20 million, a house valued at $2.5 million and more than $2 million a year for life, courthouse officials said yesterday.
The amount was about half of what Mr.
Boesky was seeking.
The settlement was approved by Justice Phyllis B. Gangel-Jacob in State Supreme Court in Manhattan.
It was sealed, as is required by law in any divorce case.
Mrs.
Boesky's lawyer, Sara Gold, declined to comment on the settlement and Mr.
Boesky's lawyer, Renee Schwartz, could not be reached for comment.


Los Angeles Elects a Conservative As Mayor and Turns to a New Era
Los Angeles entered a new political era today as its conservative Mayor-elect, Richard Riordan, outlined plans to use his skills as an entrepreneur to bring the city out of its economic slump and social turmoil.
The first Republican to lead the city in a generation, Mr.
Riordan, a self-made millionaire of 63, campaigned with promises to lure more businesses and hire more police officers, sweeping aside the coalition of blacks and white liberals that had sustained the retiring Mayor, Tom Bradley, for 20 years.


Popular Mayor of Atlanta Will Not Seek Fourth Term
In what he called a "gut-wrenching but regrettably necessary decision," Mayor Maynard Jackson said today that he would not seek election this year to a fourth term.
The announcement means that for the first time in two decades Atlanta's politics will be open to new faces and names that may not be tied to the city's pivotal role in civil rights history.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed Brian Brewer, John Lombardi, Tim Karns, Alex Pena, Michael Lane, and Mike Trimarco, pitchers; Kimera Bartee, Delshon Bowman, Trovin Valdez, and Charles link, outfielders; Lincoln Martin, second baseman; Kenneth Reed, first baseman; James Foster, catcher; and Jeff Michael and ronald Shankle, shortstops.
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Signed Ed Randolph and Johnny Cardenas, catchers; Robert Krueger, Paul Crow, Casey Craig, Rafael Carmona, Brian Sosa, John Daniels, Tim Bruce, Matt Apana, Jon Updike and Kelvin Mitchell, pitchers; Chad Dunavan, Chris Dumas, Joe Berube, Joe Mathis and John Tejcek, outfielders; and Manny Patel and Roy Miller, infielders.


CHRONICLE
ANGIE DICKINSON, who is accustomed to playing glamorous roles in glamorous settings, is to make an appearance today at the New York Academy of Sciences on East 63d Street for a program titled "Closing In on Alzheimer's: a Progress Report From the Lab."
She will speak to physicians, scientists and representatives of Alzheimer's and geriatric-care organizations and the National Institute on Aging, who will also hear briefings by Dr.
Dennis Selkoe, professor of neurology at Harvard Medical School, and Dr.
Allan Roses, professor of neurology at the Duke University Medical Center.
The program is sponsored by the Dana Alliance for Brain Initiatives, an organization established in New York in November to promote research.


Regulators Sue Once-Favored S.&amp; L. Buyer
James M. Fail, once a favored buyer of failed banks and savings-and-loan institutions from the Government, is being sued by Federal regulators trying to rescind the multibillion-dollar assistance package given him in 1988.
The suit filed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, charges Mr.
Fail with fraud.
It represents the first time the Government has tried to undo any of the $50 billion in assistance it promised wealthy private investors like Mr.
Fail in 1988 when it sold or merged failed institutions in hopes of resolving the savings-and-loan crisis.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Suede  Irving Plaza
On the great carousel of pop poses, gay male androgyny has come around again with the emergence of Suede, the latest English pop sensation to venture an American tour.
This time, the self-consciousness runs thicker; Suede's music borrows liberally from elders like the Smiths, Queen, the New York Dolls and especially the early-1970's Ziggy Stardust incarnation of David Bowie.
But as it did in the 1970's glam-rock that Suede revives, androgyny means both a refusal of convention and an ultimate liberation: the chance to become pure desire, free even from sexual differences.


OEA Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Dense-Pac Microsystems (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Dean and Duchesnay Will Divorce
The ice-dance stars CHRISTOPHER DEAN and ISABELLE DUCHESNAY, married for less than two years, are seeking a divorce, Duchesnay said yesterday in Paris.
Dean and JAYNE TORVILL won the Olympic title for Britain in 1984 and four world championships.


Democracy's Doldrums
A book entitled "Giants of the Democratic World" would be exceedingly short, briefer even than "Gems of English Cookery." Nobody can recall when so many leaders have found so little public favor.
Not only are incumbents of various brands unpopular.
They are also generally smaller than life.
Europe as a whole fits the writer Jane Kramer's description of Austria: a grand opera performed by understudies.
Bill Clinton, whose 36 percent approval rating is the lowest for any President after four months, can take cold comfort from the advice of a fellow sufferer.
During a White House visit, Prime Minister Brian Mulroney of Canada urged the President to "wear unpopularity as a badge of honor." But proud defiance did not save Mr.
Mulroney, who in February stepped down as party leader as his Progressive Conservatives plunged to a 21 percent approval rating, chiefly due to economic miseries.


Comarco Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Dr. J. B. Kuper, 83, A Nuclear Physicist At Brookhaven Lab
Dr.
J.
B.
Horner Kuper, a physicist and former department chairman at Brookhaven National Laboratory on Long Island, died on Tuesday at the Glacier Hill Retirement Residence in Ann Arbor, Mich.
He was 83.
The cause was complications from a fall, his family said.


Montreal Wins Cup


What This Cab Concert Needed Was Another Horn, the Shoe Type


Plan to Protect 40,000 Acres of Pine Barrens
After years of conflict over the fate of the Long Island Pine Barrens, a bipartisan group of state legislators proposed a plan today to preserve 40,000 acres of the endangered watershed and wildlife habitat on the Island's East End.
But though it creates a mechanism for keeping the region wild, the legislation leaves unresolved the critical issue of how to pay for 8,000 acres of privately owned land in the heart of the proposed reserve.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Yanni  Gershwin Theater 222 West 51st Street Manhattan Through Sunday
When Yanni, the popular composer of New Age symphonic music, describes his esthetic philosophy, he likes to use space-age metaphors.
Late in Tuesday's opening-night show, he told the story of an astronaut on the space shuttle who gazed down at the earth and noticed that the familiar borders separating European countries on maps were invisible.
The lesson of the story, he declared, is that the divisions between people -- and by implication between musical genres -- are only "something in the mind."


Marlo Lewis Is Dead; TV Producer Was 77
Marlo Lewis, a television producer who was co-creator of "The Ed Sullivan Show," died on Tuesday at a hospital in Palm Springs, Calif.
He was 77 and lived in Rancho Mirage, Calif.
The cause was heart failure, said his sister, Monica Lewis of Beverly Hills, Calif.


Skolniks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 24


Jordan, N.B.A.'s Garbo, Speaks
It was just a routine night for Michael Jordan. He scored. He won. He talked.
Before the Bulls beat the Suns, 100-92, in Game 1 of the National Basketball Association finals tonight, Jordan broke his silence with reporters by chatting with his friend, NBC's Ahmad Rashad, for an interview that was shown at halftime.
After he led the Bulls with 31 points, Jordan marched into the interview room and, sensing that his team was in control as it goes for its third straight title, announced, "It's all about making history now."


A Talk With Bhutto: Is Her Sure Touch Slipping?
Benazir Bhutto sat in a stuffed armchair in her office in Islamabad, her eyes flaring at times in anger, her voice harsh with frustration and irritation.
Once beloved by Pakistani voters, once a darling of Washington, once Prime Minister, she has seen her political fortunes evaporate like a puddle on a scorching pavement.


TransTechnology reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Essay; The Polish Thatcher
Next to Hillary Clinton, the most powerful woman in politics today is Hanna Suchocka.
This is true despite the fact that the Government headed by the first female Prime Minister of Poland -- and the first woman to lead the nation since Queen Jadwiga in the 14th century -- was recently overturned by a single vote.
Her former Minister of Justice, whom she fired the week before for his habitual tardiness, claims he did not oversleep.
He says he left a wake-up call with the hotel operator, who rang him; he told his wife to call him from home, which she did; and he set his alarm, which duly rang.
Despite this tintinnabulation of bells, he just did not make it to the Parliament in time for the confidence vote, and the Government fell.
We all have mornings like that.


Alexis Smith, Actress, Dies at 72; Film Star Won Tony for 'Follies'
Alexis Smith, a Hollywood actress of the 1940's and 50's who later won a Tony Award as a star of the Broadway musical "Follies," died yesterday at Cedars-Sinai Hospital in Los Angeles.
She was 72 and lived in Los Angeles.
The cause was cancer, her doctors said.


Hawks Sign Blaylock to 5-Year Deal
MOOKIE BLAYLOCK is set to direct the Atlanta Hawks' offense for five more years.
The Hawks announced yesterday that Blaylock has agreed to a five-year contract, terms of which were not disclosed.
The new deal negates the option year he had under his old contract with the Nets.


METS INSIDE PITCH
JOSE GUZMAN worked seven and two-thirds innings last night, striking out seven in gaining the triumph for the Cubs. . . .
General Manager AL HARAZIN denied persistent reports of a potential trade sending BOBBY BONILLA to the Giants for first baseman WILL CLARK.
"It defies sense from every end," said Harazin, who pointed out that Clark has a no-trade clause in his contract. . . .
Manager DALLAS GREEN has sent second baseman JEFF KENT to the bench for the next three games and ordered a crash course in selectivity a the plate and instincts in the field.
Green made the move with three straight games against tough right-handers -- Guzman, TOMMY GREENE and CURT SCHILLING.
"He's a tough kid, and we all like that," Green said of Kent.
"We all respect that. But it has to be channeled." CHICO WALKER started at second last night and homered in the fifth inning. . . .
MIKE MADDUX, who yielded a two-run home run to RICK WILKINS in the seventh, has now given up nine runs in his last four and two-thirds innings of relief. . . .
Bonilla's 10-game hitting streak ended.


U.S. Asks Europe to Ban Arms-Linked Sales to Iran
The United States urged its European allies today to ban the sale of militarily useful equipment and technology to Iran.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher used the occasion of a semi-annual meeting with the European Community Foreign Ministers -- intended to focus on the war in Bosnia -- to raise the Clinton Administration's concerns about Iran's military buildup and ask for European cooperation in isolating Teheran's revolutionary Government.


Softimage Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Frantz Casseus, 77, Composer for Guitar
Frantz Casseus, a guitarist and composer, died last Thursday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 77 and lived in Manhattan.
Harriet Ribot, a friend, said the cause was heart failure.


Rudolph to Work on Behalf of Berlin's Bid
The Olympic gold-medal winner, WILMA RUDOLPH, will be working to help Germany land the 2000 Olympic Games for Berlin.
"Their chief competition is Beijing, China, and Sydney, Australia, but I think Germany would be better suited, from the significance of world peace," Rudolph said in Nashville.


Thermo Process Sys.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Termites and Veggies
Q.
Last year a termite-control team worked around our house, in an area near our vegetable patch.
Will it be safe to plant edibles like tomatoes and peppers in this area now? -- Marguerite Conlan, Lanoka Harbor, N.J.
A.
The most common commercial termite-control material in current use is a product called Dursban TC, said Richard Weir 3d, a program manager at Cornell Cooperative Extension of Nassau County, in Plainview, L.I.
The TC formula is a more powerful concentration of a pesticide that is considered safe for use by homeowners on their landscape plants.
Assuming that this is the product used around your home, there should be no problem with growing edible plants in the area, Mr.
Weir said.
This pesticide is not absorbed by roots, and in any case should have long ago disappeared from the soil.


Refugees Blocked From Getting Legal Help
The Immigration and Naturalization Service, which has pledged to send a tough signal to Asian smugglers and would-be immigrants by fighting the entry of the nearly 300 Chinese refugees who washed up on a Queens beach on Sunday, is blocking legal help to them, immigrant advocate groups and lawyers say.
At the immigration service detention center at 201 Varick Street yesterday, a sign on a bulletin board near the holding cells said that until further notice, no lawyers would be permitted to visit the refugees.
When a reporter asked to take a closer look, a guard, who would not identify himself, snatched the sign down.


Woman, 60, Charged With Killing Daughter Over Crack Use
A 60-year-old Bronx woman shot and killed her adult daughter after begging her to abandon her crack habit, the police said yesterday.
The mother, Jean Lee, of 1055 University Avenue in High Bridge, was arrested Tuesday on murder charges after she shot her daughter, Avis Swan, 42, once in the lower right abdomen, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.
The daughter died instantly in the mother's apartment in a building overrun by drug use and drug dealers.


Farrow Spurns Allen's Plea For a Truce
Fresh from her victory over Woody Allen in the fight for custody of their three children, Mia Farrow turned down an attempt by Mr.
Allen to call a truce yesterday.
Instead, she went to court again, seeking to make his defeat still more emphatic.
The estranged pair and their corps of lawyers, trailed by the usual phalanx of reporters, went to Surrogate's Court in Manhattan to begin arguing Ms.
Farrow's lawsuit to nullify Mr.
Allen's adoption of two of their children.
If Judge Renee H. Roth overturns the adoptions, it would deny Mr.
Allen any right to see Moses, 15, or Dylan, 7, leaving him only with limited contact with Satchel, 5, his biological child with Ms.
Farrow.


Economic Scene; If The Fed Tightens, The Casualties May Be Jobs -- And Clinton.
GOOD news: Some 425,000 workers were added to payrolls in April and May, the largest two-month increase in many a moon.
This bright figure, only slightly tarnished by the fact that fully half of the increase was a product of computerized revisions in Labor Department estimates, have pushed the "consensus" forecasts for the economic growth to a solid 3 percent in 1993.
But don't book that second honeymoon at the Ritz just yet.
The May increase barely brings employment back to the June 1990 peak.
And in spite of the fact that labor markets are slack and unemployment remains a demoralizing 6.9 percent, the anti-inflation wolves at the Federal Reserve are baying for blood.
If they persuade the Fed to tighten credit, there is a chance Americans will not see the better side of 6 percent joblessness before Bill Clinton is freed to pick out the carpet pattern for his Presidential library.


Nathan's Famous Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to March 28


For The Second Time, a Forecast For 1993 Ad Spending Is Lowered.
ARE there any figures falling faster than President Clinton's approval ratings?
Try Robert J. Coen's forecasts for 1993 advertising spending growth.
Mr.
Coen, in his semiannual presentation of the outlook for ad spending in this country and overseas, cut his estimates for the year a second time, and, for good measure, lowered his final figures for 1992.


Club Med Is Developing Luxury Resort in China
Club Med, a longtime symbol of the sybaritic life style, plans to open a luxury tropical resort in China, complete with an 18-hole golf course, a marina and a casino.
The year-round resort, expected to open in 1995, will be built on the island of Hainan in the China Sea off Guangdong Province in southeastern China.
A Chinese architect will soon be selected to design the resort, which will accommodate 700 people.


Cubs Show Why Mets Eye Deal for Pitcher
The Mets want to deal, and if they are able to deal big, they want to trade for quality starting pitching.
For instance, they recently tried to package shortstop Tony Fernandez and a right-handed reliever -- either Anthony Young or Jeff Innis -- to a National League club for a front-line starting pitcher, according to a baseball executive with knowledge of the club's recent talks.
The club was believed to be the Phillies, and the pitcher the Mets wanted would have been Tommy Greene, Curt Schilling, Terry Mulholland or Ben Rivera.


Croats in Bosnia Walk Out Of Talks With Government
The commander of the Bosnian Croats' militia abruptly walked out of United Nations cease-fire talks today, dashing hopes for a halt to a territorial free-for-all that has left hundreds dead in central Bosnia.
But fighting around Travnik was said to be waning after five days of skirmishes that emptied the town of Croats.
A day after taking command in a shake-up of the Bosnian Army, the former head of strategic planning, Rasim Delic, had ordered a unilateral cease-fire in the area, the Army said.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
LOW-VOLTAGE permanent outdoor lighting, prominently featured at many home centers, is easier to install, less expensive and available in a wider range of styles than full-voltage lighting.
While low-voltage lights typically do not provide bright light, they do supply adequate decorative illumination to accent architectural and garden features, bolster security and light walkways, decks and patios for safety.
Low-voltage lighting kits consist of a transformer, light fixtures and electrical cable.
The transformer, which can be plugged into any ordinary outdoor or indoor electrical outlet, lowers the standard household current from 120 volts to 12 volts.


Court Won't Merge Districts But Orders Review by State
The New Jersey Supreme Court yesterday declined to order three Bergen County school districts to merge to help achieve racial balance, but it upheld a lower-court ruling that requires the state to study the issue.
The high court's decision was significant for what it did as well as what it did not do: it chose not to rule on whether a court may order regionalization as a judicial remedy for de facto segregation.
The justices also said it was unnecessary for them to decide at this point whether the State Board of Education has the authority to require regionalization.


Home Video
With summer movies flooding theaters, studio video divisions are thinking months ahead.
Will the big titles -- a "Last Action Hero," say -- be finished with their theater runs in time to be in stores by Christmas?
Equally important, which of this summer's releases has the right stuff to carry a low price tag on tape?
Movies priced low to sell (usually about $25) are vital even to video dealers whose business is primarily based on rentals.


When Soros Speaks, World Markets Listen
Once again, George Soros is putting his mouth where his money is.
He published a letter in The Times of London yesterday saying that the German mark is bound to fall, causing Europe's mightiest currency to do just that.
Mr.
Soros has no seat on the boards of the German Bundesbank or the Federal Reserve, but central bankers might well envy his power to make currency markets rattle and quake.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a judge's decision to order the immediate release of Haitian refugees held at a detention camp in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, misstated the age of the camp in some copies.
It was set up in November 1991.
The article also misstated the affiliation of a lawyer, Michael Ratner.
He is with the Center for Constitutional Rights.


Reviews/Music; A Pianist Offering Sound And Silence
Danilo Perez's set at Bradley's on Monday night started out slowly, with the rhythm section clunking along, not quite finding its momentum.
The second tune, "Softly as in a Morning Sunrise," changed everything, and suddenly the set took off.
Mr.
Perez, a young pianist, had paired himself with the young tenor saxophonist, David Sanchez, and together they managed to articulate about every note they played.
Mr.
Perez played be-bop lines double-handed, as if to put them in quotes, then abruptly shifted to wispy single-note right-hand ideas, changing the density of his sound.
He threw in double-handed flurries, then used silence.
And his rhythmic sensibility -- funny and always surprising -- kept his improvisations moving with the suspense of a good narrative.
Everything was intense: Mr.
Perez had the band moving with him, building wave after wave of pressure, following his improvisations until he finished his sermon.


Gabriel Preil, 82, American Poet And Translator Skilled in Hebrew
Gabriel Preil, an American poet who wrote in Hebrew, which he called "the language of my heart," died on Saturday in his hotel room in Jerusalem.
He was in Israel for the publication of "A Collector of Autumns," his most recent poetry collection.
He was 82 and lived in the Bronx.
Although little known in the United States, Mr.
Preil was an important influence on younger Israeli poets, both for his poetry, which was introspective, lyrical and restrained, and for his translations into Hebrew of American poets like Robert Frost, Robinson Jeffers and Wallace Stevens.


Semtech Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Don't Burn Hackney at the Stake
The National Endowment for the Humanities suffered during the Reagan and Bush years.
Prominent academics accused it of putting ideology ahead of scholarship in awarding grants.
The council that advises on what scholarship, research and public programs merit Federal money grew less distinguished, with fewer good scholars and too many nonentities appointed for ideological reasons.
Sheldon Hackney, whom President Clinton is considering for the N.E.H. chairmanship, could improve this sorry record.
Mr.
Hackney is a distinguished historian and a past provost of Princeton.
He has been a successful president of Tulane, and now heads the University of Pennsylvania.
According to Brown University's president, Vartan Gregorian, Mr.
Hackney has "a judicious, moderate temperament." That's what the Endowment needs.


Cott Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Mental Patient Surrenders After Storming Clinic


First of the Warm Weather Stoms Drops In


Expo Reflects New Ideas on What Is Old
MYRTLE CARVALHO, a retired registered nurse-turned performing storyteller, is spinning another of her original tales, the one in which she asks a young boy who was the oldest person he knew.
" 'You mean old, like bent over with a cane?' he asked me. I said, 'Look at me. I'm 82, and my posture is better than yours.' "


DEP Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Golf Unit Suspended in Fuhr Controversy
The Transit Valley Country Club has suspended its membership committee in the wake of the committee's decision to reject the application of GRANT FUHR, the Buffalo Sabres' goalie.
In a statement released yesterday by the club's attorney, ROBERT DiVITA, Transit Valley announced that it was forming a committee to review its bylaws and constitution, specifically incorporating anti-discrimination language into them.


Don't Close Drop-In Centers for the Homeless
To the Editor:
The proposed closing of homeless drop-in centers in New York City because of budget cuts is anger-provoking and saddening.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on June 2, about plans by Telemundo Group Inc. to develop a Spanish-language news service for cable television in the United States and Latin America, misstated the number of Western news agencies with bureaus in Cuba.
Along with Reuters, several news agencies, including Agence France-Presse and Agencia EFE of Spain, have bureaus in Cuba.


Struggling Agency Loses Pathmark
The Pathmark supermarket and drugstore chain has moved its estimated $60 million account in-house from Venet Advertising in Cranford, N.J., leaving in doubt the future of the agency, which recently filed for bankruptcy court protection.
Larry Salinas, a spokesman for Pathmark, a division of the Supermarkets General Corporation in Woodbridge, N.J., confirmed a report this week in Advertising Age that the company had left Venet.
He said Pathmark had decided it would be better served by handling its own advertising, adding that a team to create and produce the ads was being formed.


Lawyer Says Ex-Officer Ready to Admit Charges
Michael Dowd, the police officer whose arrest last year led to a widespread investigation of corruption in the New York City Police Department, has agreed to plead guilty to charges that he bought and sold cocaine and that he regularly received cash payments from drug gangs, his lawyer said last night.
The agreement, coming after nearly a year of three-sided negotiations involving Federal and state prosecutors and Mr.
Dowd's lawyer, Marvin Hirsch, means that the former officer will avoid a prison term that could have stretched well beyond the year 2015.
Instead, he will face a sentence of between 12 1/3 to 15 2/3 years.


COMPANY NEWS
AMOCO CANADA PETROLEUMCO.
LTD., Calgary, Alberta, said it had signed a letter of intent to sell a number of oil and gas properties in Canada.
Terms were not disclosed.


Apple Says Its Profits Will Drop
The personal computer price war has wounded another company: Apple Computer Inc., which was once thought to be above the fray because its easy-to-use machines had no direct competitor.
The value of Apple's stock plummeted by 10.6 percent today, after the company predicted that its earnings would fall because price-cutting had eroded the company's profit margins.
The plunge followed declines in the two previous days of trading, meaning that Apple's shares have lost more than 19 percent of their market value this week.


DNA From the Age of Dinosaurs Is Found
A team of scientists says it has recovered and identified the oldest DNA ever found: genetic material from an extinct weevil that lived during the age of dinosaurs.
The achievement apparently refutes the long-held view of many biologists that DNA of so great an age, some 80 million years older than the oldest previously known DNA, would have decayed completely, leaving no trace.


Koresh, on Tape, Screams About Children
As a furious gun battle raged at the Branch Davidian cult's compound in Texas, the group's leader, David Koresh, telephoned the Waco police, screaming, "You killed some of my children."
"There is a bunch of us dead and a bunch of you guys dead now -- that's your fault," Mr.
Koresh yelled as Federal agents from the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms stormed the Branch Davidian compound outside Waco.


HRE Properties reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16  OIL EMBARGO PLANNED FOR HAITI  The United States and other United Nations Security Council members have decided to impose a mandatory worldwide ban on the supply of oil to Haiti as part of a new campaign to restore the deposed President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, to power.
A1  U.S.
TO FREE HAITIANS AT BASE  The Clinton Administration announced that it would comply with a Federal court ruling ordering the release of 158 Haitian refugees, most of whom are infected with the virus that causes AIDS.
They have been held at the American naval base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
A12


At This Price, Don't Ever Close the Curtains
AT the new Four Seasons Hotel New York, 57 East 57th Street, which will check in its first guest any day now, everyone is sure to ooh and aah over the majestic Art Deco lobby, designed by I. M. Pei, with its onyx ceiling and vertiginous stair to the reception desk.
The 367 rooms are not bad, either, especially if you get one with a view -- a good one, that is.
It's not about the luck of the draw.
The view is something you'll have to pay for.
And the better the view, the higher the price.
A moderate room, in which there's a bit of an obstructed view, is $295 a night.
A superior room, probably on a low floor (there are 47 floors with guest rooms) is $340.
A deluxe room is $390, while a deluxe room with a park view is $420.


Aspin Tells Pentagon to Find Billions More in Budget Trims
Defense Secretary Les Aspin, opposed to further cuts in military programs on the ground that readiness would be endangered, has nonetheless quietly told the armed services to prepare for as much as $20 billion more in reductions for the next fiscal year to meet Congressional requirements.
The Pentagon's problem stems from a confluence of factors: budget accounting practices, the cost of new programs, budget limitations imposed by Congress and the different priorities of Mr.
Aspin and Congress.
That adds up to a situation in which the Pentagon, after already making steep cuts beyond those that had been planned by the Bush Administration, would still exceed its $263 billion budget for the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1.


Greene Is a Big Hit As Phils' Top Pitcher
Everyone knows about the avalanche known as the Philadelphia Phillie offense that's hit the National League this season.
Too many teams have spent too much time digging out from under Philadelphia's league-leading 311 runs, 119 doubles and 58 home runs to have not noticed the bruising meted out wherever the Phillies go.
What has been greeted with a lot less notoriety, but has proved to be the undoing of just as many opponents, is the Phillies pitching.
It has been just as sharp, just as decisive, and just as commanding as anything coming off the Phillies' bats.
And no one epitomizes that sudden burst of confidence and success more than Tommy Greene.


Tied Lines
The Sprint Corporation has been portrayed as lagging behind its rivals in global alliances.
But yesterday, the country's third-largest long-distance carrier said it would integrate its facsimile and messaging services with Microsoft's office software and that it would join with Visa USA to offer discounts on long-distance calls.


ANDREOTTI AT CRUX OF MURDER INQUIRY
Magistrates investigating corruption in Italy asked the Senate today to permit a formal inquiry into evidence that Giulio Andreotti, Italy's master politician, ordered the murder of a journalist in 1979.
The magistrates' evidence was set out in a 90-page dossier asking the Senate to suspend Mr.
Andreotti's parliamentary immunity so he can be interrogated and tried.
Mr.
Andreotti is already facing charges of corruption and collusion with the Mafia.


International Yogurt Co.  (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Two Industries Offer Top Awards
The radio industry and the public relations industry presented top awards last night in New York.
Wieden &amp; Kennedy of Portland, Ore., won the $100,000 Radio Mercury Gold Award from the Radio Creative Fund at its second annual awards presentation.
Bob Moore, a copywriter at the agency, accepted the prize for "Hubble Telescope," a radio commercial for its client Nike Inc.


School Board Presses Fight With a Union
The New York City Board of Education, stalled in its efforts to win greater control over school custodians in contract talks with their union, has turned to the State Legislature to get what it wants.
Legislation that the Democratic-led Assembly passed by a slim margin today would provide principals a stronger role in evaluating and promoting custodians, a group whose singular independence has given them a "quasi-license to steal," school investigators say.


Making Dumbbells A Trifle Smarter
ONE of the most popular tools for improving upper-body strength is the dumbbell, that familiar hand weight shaped somewhat like a dog bone.
But now there is Strongput, a weight shaped like a small football helmet that allows the hand to relax while lifting -- and in doing so helps to extend endurance.
HOW DOES IT WORK?
A Strongput weight is designed so that you don't have to grip it.
Instead, you slide your hand through a padded slot in the surface of the sphere.
Your hand folds slightly around an interior cylinder that forms the core of the ball.
Your palm is partly cupped, rather than clenched.


National Home Health Care Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Japan Is Represented by an Artist It Once Rejected
The last time Yayoi Kusama displayed her art at the Venice Biennale was 1966.
Japan had refused to let her show in its official pavilion, and that was just the invitation the enfant terrible of the Japanese avant-garde needed.
She crashed the prestigious event, covering the lawn with 1,500 mirrored orbs and frolicking among them in a red leotard, getting more attention than the official exhibit.
Twenty-seven years later Ms.
Kusama, a small, slightly stooped rebel with dark eyes that are both soft and searing, is back.
But there is a big difference this time.
She has not only been invited to display her often disturbing, sexually charged works at this year's Biennale, but the exhibition will also be the first single-artist show ever mounted in the Japanese pavilion, a rare honor.


Mondale (Tokyo) Is Excited, Holbrooke (Bonn) Surprised
The Clinton Administration may have left some heavyweight candidates for top ambassadorial jobs hanging for a long time, but when it made up its mind, it acted quickly.
The phone calls began shortly after dawn on Tuesday, in an account given by someone involved in the process.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher, on his way to Andrews Air Force Base to begin a European tour, rang up Richard C. Holbrooke with a surprising offer of an ambassadorship.


Calendar: Folk Art, Quilts and Gardens
Retrospective  Studio Museum in Harlem, 144 West 125th Street; (212) 864-4500.
An exhibition of more than 100 carved and painted wood reliefs, signs and figures by the folk artist Elijah Pierce (1892 - 1984) starts Sunday and continues through Aug. 22.
On July 10 at 2 P.M., there will be a documentary about Mr.
Pierce's work, followed by a short film about black folk art.
No charge with museum admission.
Open Wednesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, 1 to 6 P.M.
Admission is $5; students and those 65 and older, $3; children under 12, $1.


Irishman to Lead GATT, With Mandate for a Pact
Peter Sutherland, an Irish lawyer with a strong record of fighting trade protectionism, was named today to be the new Director General of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, with the mandate of bringing long-stalled trade liberalization talks to an early conclusion.
Unsurprisingly, perhaps, he was at first reluctant to take the job.
Arthur Dunkel, the former Swiss diplomat whom he will succeed at GATT headquarters in Geneva on July 1, has known little but frustration over the last seven years as he tried to nudge the 111-nation organization toward a global trade package.


Afternoon of Thunder: Storms Came, Soaked and Roared On
Like an errant wave, a line of thunderstorms rolled over the New York metropolitan area late yesterday afternoon, felling trees and power lines, collapsing buildings and spawning funnel-shaped clouds.
In one New Jersey county, wind gusts of 92 miles per hour were recorded.
In another, all four walls of a home-fixtures store under construction were flattened.
And one storm-battered town, Bound Brook, N.J., declared a state of emergency.
Across the region, at least a half-dozen people were injured, most seriously.


HOPES ARE DASHED ON AIDS THERAPY
An air of enthusiasm rose over the ninth international AIDS meeting here before Dr.
Jonas Salk's team reported today on his experimental immunotherapy for people infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
But the enthusiasm, largely drummed up by a public relations blitz from the company that makes the immunotherapy, quickly disappeared as the report drew a cool reception from experts at the meeting.


Small Businesses in a Credit Pinch
Anthony Dolphin is just the kind of borrower every banker in Massachusetts is looking for.
Rodman Forter is not.
Both men manage small businesses in Massachusetts: Mr.
Dolphin, a computer hardware repair company in Springfield; Mr.
Forter, a machinery manufacturing company in Middleboro.
Both companies need credit to emerge from the financial upheaval that has gripped the state through the trying recession and its stagnant aftermath.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
PARENTS looking for a baby sitter these days quickly discover that they're in a seller's market.
Pay scales that prevailed when today's parents held the job no longer apply.
Instead of being a high school student, the sitter is more likely to be in late elementary school.
All of this has led parents to look for new and better ways of finding and keeping baby sitters.
It also means that the baby sitters available may not be ready to handle the job.
"Many of the parents I know don't want to share the names and phone numbers of the good baby sitters in the neighborhood," said Betsy Hornberger of Boca Raton, Fla., the mother of two young girls.
She counters with her own strategy.


Cyclist Shoots 2 in Harlem
A gunman on a bicycle wounded two pedestrians during a ride-by shooting in Harlem last night, the police said.
Maria Herzo, 33, was shot in the stomach, and a 2-year-old girl was hit in the right hand.
Both were described as being in stable condition at St.
Luke's Hospital.
Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti, a police spokesman, said the incident took place about 8:40 P.M. in front of 453 West 125th Street.
Witnesses said the assailant pulled a handgun, fired at the two and then pedaled into the night before bystanders could stop him, Sergeant Barlanti said.
The motive was not known.


Transmation Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


SL Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Advance Circuits (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Uncle Sam Still Wants You to Live a Lie
To the Editor:
Some murky descriptions of a "compromise" on lifting the military's ban on homosexuals have appeared in the news.
President Clinton has referred to a plan in which, "if you don't ask and you don't say and you're not forced to confront it, people should be able to serve." The particulars of a "don't ask, don't tell," proposal, supported in its various forms by Sam Nunn, Les Aspin and Barney Frank, remain vague.
What this lack of clarity likely reflects is that such plans are not fully formed.
Yet the emerging compromise may also remain poorly articulated because something in its essence defies logic.


Radiation Care Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


AT HOME WITH: Ann Landers; She Could Sign Herself 'Open-Minded in Chicago'
Anxious in Akron and Fed Up in Fresno are waiting along with 500 other put-upon neighbors and jilted suitors in a stack on a chair in her office.
She'll get to them later.
She will read their letters in the bathtub after dinner, or in bed before Koppel or on a bar stool in her kitchen at lunch, and pound out the answers on her I.B.M. electric typewriter until 2 in the morning.


Market Place; Burroughs Wellcome, Analysts Say, Is More Than Just AZT.
ALTHOUGH the Burroughs Wellcome Company will always be known for AZT, the first drug that at least temporarily reverses the deadly effects of AIDS, the company's main product is a treatment for herpes, Zovirax.
Its worldwide sales will top $1.1 billion this year, compared with AZT's $400 million.
Even so, investors, not to mention public health officials and AIDS activists, are still largely preoccupied with long-running controversies concerning AZT.
Under pressure from critics, the company has lowered the price of the drug twice and reduced the recommended doseage.
Yet the factory price of a year's supply is still a stiff $2,200.


Yanks and Abbott Dig an Early Hole
There was no ninth-inning rally for the Yankees tonight, no warm feeling as they fled Royals Stadium and traveled to Milwaukee and no reason to be proud of their effort.
There was only another early deficit, another suspect start from Jim Abbott and another night when the Yankees did not show any road flair.
For the fourth time in six games on this trip, the Yankees fell behind by at least three runs after three innings and were unable to recover for the third time as the Royals surged to a 10-3 victory.


Bolivian Assured of Presidency as Foe Concedes
Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada was guaranteed the presidency of Bolivia today when his chief rival, a former dictator, conceded defeat in Sunday's elections.
A Sanchez de Lozada presidency is certain to step up Bolivia's free-market policies, which include low inflation and privatization, efforts that he initiated in 1985 as Planning Minister.


TRO Learning (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Human Rights for Women
What to do about Bosnia?
Development?
At its world conference on human rights in Vienna, which begins today, the United Nations will wrestle with these issues.
Women's human rights are at the center of both of them.
Women's human rights?
Yes.
In New York, U.N. diplomats from a world outraged about the Balkan carnage, including the systematic rape of countless women, have argued about what to do.
And elsewhere in the U.N., diplomats are looking a year ahead toward a world conference on population and development, where women hold the key.


Treasury Prices Post Modest Rise
Treasury prices rose yesterday in light trading, accomplishing little more than making up the losses of the day before, traders said.
"There seems to be a pattern of reversing the previous day's move when we are in a thin market" and there is no new economic data to trade on, said Alan Levenson, the money market economist at UBS Securities.


Gala to Feature Dances of Protest
The New Dance Group was founded in 1932 to bring the uplifting force of dance into the lives of the workers of New York City.
One of a number of visionary dance projects of the time, it alone survived and flourished, offering inexpensive classes and rehearsal space and producing dance by choreographers whose names read like a roster of American modern dance.
Many of those choreographers will be represented in a gala retrospective tomorrow night at 7:30 at the theater at La Guardia High School, on Amsterdam Avenue at 64th Street, just west of Lincoln Center.
The program will feature signature pieces created between 1936 and 1981 by 17 men and women, which will be performed whole or in part.


Coleman Lollar; Travel Writer and Editor, 47
Coleman Lollar, a travel writer and editor, died on Tuesday night at Providence Hospital in Mobile, Ala.
He was 47 and lived in Gulf Shores, Ala.
The cause of death was lymphoma, his family said.


Fighting Sexual Harassment in Schools
RECENT reports about the level of sexual harassment in schools come as no surprise to Dr.
Nan Stein.
For 14 years, Dr.
Stein, the director of the Sexual Harassment in Schools Project at the Wellesley College Center for Research on Women, has been teaching educators and students the difference between flirting and sexual harassment, from the victim's point of view.
"Sexual harassment at school is very commonplace," Dr.
Stein said.
"It's part of the daily fabric of school life."


Trade-Law Study Sought
Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, asked an independent Federal agency today to perform a two-year review of American trade laws that restrict imports sold at unfairly low prices or with foreign Government subsidies.
The results of the study by the agency, the International Trade Commission, are likely to be disputed.


Civilian Pilots Allowed to Use Satellite Navigational System
The Federal Aviation Administration today authorized civilian pilots here and abroad to use a satellite-based navigation system that will enable them to choose direct routes without relying on navigational aids on the ground.
The system's electronic signals will also enable the airlines and private aircraft to land at 2,500 airports lacking the electronic beacons that the biggest airports use to guide airplanes in landing.


Free Software Offer Takes Its Toll in Frustrated Callers
Measured in tribulation, if not in dollars, there is no such thing as free software.
When Computer Associates International announced that it would give away one million copies of its new personal-finance software, officials thought they had more than enough telephone lines to handle the calls.
They didn't.


Petrovic Carried Torch For European Players
It was during a conversation they had late in the regular season that Danny Ainge realized Drazen Petrovic was hurt, that he had begun thinking of giving up the dream and going home.
The subject of the All-Star team selections had come up, and Petrovic could not get past the belief that he had been snubbed simply because of who he was.
"He felt that his nationality had something to do with it," said Ainge, the Suns' veteran guard.
"I think so, too."


Review/Theater; A First Lady's Fantasy Of Travel Back in Time
In "Where's Mamie?," the latest of Michael John LaChiusa's cycle of mini-musicals about First Ladies of the United States, a forlorn Mamie Eisenhower is alone in the White House, toasting herself on her birthday in 1957.
Her solitude is suddenly interrupted by news of the civil rights conflict in Little Rock, Ark., and soon she is off on a trip to the past, to wartime North Africa in an attempt to enlist her husband in support of black students.
This very fanciful 30-minute musical journey, a highlight of the Ensemble Studio Theater's Marathon of short plays, also involves Dwight D. Eisenhower and Kay Summersby, his driver during the war, and reaches far out for Marian Anderson as Mamie's traveling companion.
As Mr.
LaChiusa has demonstrated on numerous occasions, he has a fervid imagination and the will to break new musical ground.
A previous First Lady musical, "Over Texas," focused on the contrasting roles of the personal secretaries to President and Mrs.
Kennedy.


Williams Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Stanley Cup Returns to the Citadel in Montreal
Aside from a colorful coach and a first-rate goalie, the Montreal Canadiens are sort of nondescript.
They lack flashy personalities and superstars found even on lesser teams.
They have no single celebrity close to the stature of Wayne Gretzky of the Los Angeles Kings, who was last seen tonight shaking the hands of the Canadiens on the Forum ice.
Gretzky and his teammates performed that ceremonial chore because the gritty, balanced Canadiens possess that one, bright, shining object that every team in the National Hockey League seeks when it arrives at training camp in the late-summer heat of September.
They have the Stanley Cup, which they hoisted high after defeating the Kings by 4-1.


Officer Charged With Unlicensed Driving
A 28-year-old New York City police officer was arrested yesterday in Staten Island and charged with driving without a license, the police said.
He was suspended from the force after he was arrested.
The officer, John Norton, who has been assigned to the 120th Precinct in St.
George, Staten Island, for seven months, was arrested at 2 P.M. after he drove to the department's Health Services building, said a police spokesman, Sgt.
John McCluskey.
The officer's license had been suspended for allowing his auto insurance to lapse and abandoning a car, Sergeant McCluskey said.


Southeastern Public Service reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


Nurturing Black Children In an Unfriendly World
WHEN Zena Oglesby sat down with his 14-year-old son to explain the facts of life, he began with the shopping mall.
"I told him that store detectives will follow him and assume that he has no money and is a shoplifter," said Mr.
Oglesby, a social worker who lives in Los Angeles.
"I also told him what to do if he is arrested. Why should I have to worry about this? White parents don't even think about it."


Moves by President To Invigorate Staff Supported by Perot
In a distinct warming trend in a chilly relationship, Ross Perot today cited President Clinton's recent staff shakeup as a sign that Mr.
Clinton "is starting to get it together."
Mr.
Perot, in particular, had kind words for David R. Gergen, the former adviser to Republican Presidents who was hired by Mr.
Clinton last month.
"With his background and experience, he can make a big contribution," Mr.
Perot said in a conference-call interview with several reporters, which was reported by The Associated Press.


Special Devices Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Sports of The Times; Stanley Cup 'Back Home;' Wayne Gone?
THE most famous sports trophy in North America came out of hiding last night, but the most famous hockey player in the world sent clear signals that he was preparing to fade away from the ice.
Even while they were dancing in the Forum and outside on Rue Ste.
Catherine to celebrate the Canadiens' 24th Stanley Cup, Wayne Gretzky himself revealed that he might have played his last minute of hockey in the Kings' 4-1 loss.


Turks in Berlin Call 1-Hour Strike To Urge Action on Arson Attacks
As attacks against foreigners continue, Turkish leaders in Berlin have announced plans for a one-hour strike on Friday.
"This action is an appeal from Turkish business people to politicians, urging them to take truly effective measures against terror and racism," said Kenan Kolat, one of the organizers.
"Politics treats the attacks on foreigners as a series of isolated acts, but it is a problem of the entire society."


Ukraine Has Reason to Distrust Russians
To the Editor:
Let us hope "Lighten Up on Ukraine" by Bruce G. Blair (Op-Ed, June 1) will encourage some State Department policy makers to be more sensitive to the concerns of Ukraine and other non-Russian countries about Russia.


Allen Follows Montana to the Chiefs
First JOE MONTANA.
NowMARCUS ALLEN.
If Kansas City's backfield isn't the best in the National Football League, it's the most honored.
Allen, No. 12 on the N.F.L. career rushing list, signed three one-year contracts with Kansas City yesterday and acknowledged that one major lure of the Chiefs was playing with Montana.
The three-time Super Bowl most valuable player left San Francisco for Kansas City six weeks ago.


Harter Is Interested in Cavs
Dick Harter, a Knicks assistant coach, said he would be interested in the Cleveland Cavaliers coaching job if contacted.
Harter said he had not talked with the Cavaliers yet, but he has known Wayne Embry, the Cavaliers' general manager, for many years.
It has been reported that Cleveland is interested in speaking with Harter.
Lenny Wilkens, the former Cleveland coach, resigned last month, then became the Atlanta Hawks' coach.
Cotton Fitzsimmons, a longtime National Basketball Association. coach, and Paul Silas, the Nets' assistant coach, have also been mentioned as candidates in Cleveland.


METRO DIGEST
NEW JERSEY CAMPAIGN BEGINS
A day after winning the Republican gubernatorial primary, Christine Todd Whitman began her general election race by breaking bread with her Republican rivals at a "unity brunch" and revamping her campaign staff, putting her brother in charge.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  SMUGGLING SUSPECT RETURNED TO U.S.
Despite deportation as an illegal alien who had committed a felony, the man authorities say is a major smuggler of Chinese immigrants re-entered the United States illegally and was arrested and convicted of illegal entry.
Yet, he was allowed to remain in the country in a legal limbo as an applicant for political asylum.
A1.


The Race for Drumthwacket
Christine Todd Whitman nearly unseated Senator Bill Bradley two years ago by attacking New Jersey's Governor, Jim Florio, on taxes.
Having won the Republican gubernatorial primary this week with more attacks on Mr.
Florio, she has proved her strength at campaigning.
She now has five months to prove her worth for office, in a contest where the heat is already rising.
Following the Republican victory over a Democratic incumbent in the Texas Senate race last week, the race for Drumthwacket -- the governor's residence in Princeton -- shapes up as the next significant measurement of Democratic strength.
New Jersey's will be the only major statewide vote in November where an incumbent seeks re-election.
By chance, he's a Democrat whose public approval ratings are down near President Clinton's.


Alias Research Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Washington Talk; What's Delaying Choice Of High Court Nominee
When Justice William J. Brennan Jr. announced his retirement from the Supreme Court, President George Bush took three days to name David H. Souter to fill his seat.
One year later, he took four days to say he wanted Clarence Thomas to replace Thurgood Marshall.
By contrast, President Clinton's search for a Supreme Court Justice has taken almost three months -- far longer than any President in more than 25 years.
Day after day, week after week, the President or his aides have said they were on the verge of an announcement, only to pull back.
White House officials today assured reporters again that the nomination was imminent -- certain to come by Saturday.


CHRONICLE
It takes a measure of flexibility to cater a dinner for 1,200 people.
BRIAN FINNERAN, the Waldorf-Astoria's assistant director of catering, thought everything was in order on Tuesday evening for the guests at a benefit for the One to One Partnership, an organization that provides mentors for disadvantaged youths around the country.
But then, he said yesterday: "CICELY TYSON arrived, and she had to have a baked potato. It is difficult to produce a baked potato on command, but we went back to the kitchen and rustled one up."


Dow Turns Up Slightly in Mixed Trading
Stocks were narrowly mixed yesterday, but the Dow Jones industrial average rose for the first time in three trading sessions, though only by 1.39, to 3,511.93.
Traders said it was a quiet and cautious day, with little positive information with which to mount any serious rally.
Concern over corporate profits and inflation held market gains to a minimum, they said.


No Headline
"The possibility of cloning dinosaurs is very remote. Probably impossible. But we have now at least shown that DNA from the age of dinosaurs actually has survived." -- Dr.
RAUL J. CANO, of California Polytechnic State University.  [ A1:4. ]


Reviews/Music; Barber, Berlioz and a Cellist's Concerto
The New York Philharmonic, hurtling toward the end of its 150th-anniversary season, reached into its scrapbook of historical connections for its program last Thursday.
Victor Herbert's Second Cello Concerto and Samuel Barber's Second Essay for Orchestra had their world premieres at Philharmonic concerts in 1894 and 1942, and the orchestra gave Berlioz's Symphonie Fantastique its first American performance in 1866, 36 years after its world premiere in Paris.
James DePreist conducted the orchestra with mixed but generally pleasing results.
His account of the Barber, though on the brisk side, was a picture of lucidity.
Details that are usually obscured -- fleeting brass effects, inner wind lines -- were spotlighted without being given an unnatural prominence.
And the solo woodwind lines that weave through the essay, and also the Berlioz, were shapely and characterful and did double duty in elucidating the essay's charms and reminding listeners of one of the Philharmonic's strengths.


Lyman Anderson, 86, A Magazine Illustrator
Lyman M. Anderson, a retired illustrator for leading national magazines and advertising clients, died on May 30 at a hospital in Bridgeport, Conn.
He was 86 and lived in Fairfield.
The Saturday Evening Post, Cosmopolitan and Good Housekeeping were among the magazines he worked for.
His advertising clients included General Electric, Pan American World Airway, Pepsi and Procter &amp; Gamble.


Liberals Fight Clinton Plan To Ease Tax on Companies
For many large companies, the best news about President Clinton's economic package is a little-known, frighteningly complex provision that would ease requirements for companies to pay a minimum tax when their profits fall to zero.
But the bad news for these companies is that Senator Bill Bradley, the New Jersey Democrat, and some liberals are making a last-ditch effort to scuttle this provision, which, according to Congressional estimates, would cut corporate tax payments by $8.9 billion over the next five years.


America, the Nonsexist
To the Editor:
Your report of Wellesley's commencement exercises (May 29, some editions) tells us Wellesley students, when singing "America the Beautiful," crown America's good with "sisterhood," as opposed to the "brotherhood" Katherine Lee Bates wrote.
Readers might be interested to know how Macalester College, a co-educational school addresses the issue:
America! America!


Repossession Auction reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Campbell to Get Old Job Back
Mike Keenan, the Rangers' new coach, said today that Colin Campbell should be back with the team next season as an assistant coach, a role Campbell lost last January when Roger Neilson was fired as head coach.


COMPAQ TO OFFER HAND-HELD COMPUTER NEXT YEAR
The Compaq Computer Corporation said yesterday that it would join the rush to sell hand-held computers, a market crowded with announcements but no products yet.
The Compaq model, which weighs less than two pounds, will go on sale in the first half of 1994 and will be priced from $1,000 to $2,000, said Lorie L. Strong, vice president for portable and software marketing.
The Houston-based company will aim its product at the business market, unlike some rivals, who call their machines "personal digital assistants" intended for the consumer market.


Tirana Journal; 'Hallelujah' Is Heard in the Arch-Atheist's Temple
If Enver Hoxha, Albania's dictator for more than 40 years, is turning in his monumental grave on a hillside above this capital, it would not be surprising.
On the steps of the spectacular marble-and-glass structure resembling a winged pyramid that was built to honor the man who made Albania the only country that outlawed religion, men and women who said they came from the Foursquare Gospel Church of Los Angeles were laying hands on shattered limbs, blind eyes and aching bodies the other day, and with many a "Praise the Lord!" and "Hallelujah!" prayed for healing.


Twins' Movie-Making Vision: Fighting Violence With Violence
Few films begin and end with such unsparing brutality as "Menace II Society."
"We wanted to show the realities of violence, we wanted to make a movie with a strong antiviolent theme and not like one of those Hollywood movies where hundreds of people die and everybody laughs and cheers," said Albert Hughes, the 21-year-old who directed this movie with his twin brother, Allen.


PC Division Account In Review at I.B.M.
I.B.M. has placed in review the estimated $80 million United States and European account of its personal computer division, now handled by Lintas New York in this country and by its parent, Lintas Worldwide, and GGK in Europe.
The review had been expected because the International Business Machines Corporation is decentralizing some operations.
The review is being conducted by the I.B.M.
Personal Computer Company, which markets products like the PS/2, PS/1 and PS Valuepoint.


Fed Approves Acquisitions by Bank of Boston
The Federal Reserve Board allowed the Bank of Boston Corporation yesterday to buy two New England banks, even though three Fed governors publicly objected to the approval of one acquisition.
The board had initially voted June 1 to reject Bank of Boston's bid to acquire the Multibank Financial Corporation, a chain of local banks based in Dedham, Mass., with $2.36 billion in assets.
But the board reconsidered the proposal after the Bank of Boston, which has $32 billion in assets, agreed to raise $170 million in new capital.
Revised Application Opposed
Three Federal Reserve governors, David W. Mullins Jr., Edward W. Kelley Jr. and Lawrence Lindsey, abstained from the vote on the Multibank acquisition.
They later released a sharply worded dissent saying that the Bank of Boston should not have been allowed to modify its capital plan after the application was submitted.


If It's Sunday, It Must Be Azinger
Paul Azinger still isn't completely over the emotions of the miracle bunker shot that won him the Memorial Tournament last Sunday, but on the eve of the first round of the Buick Classic, he could at least say that he no longer feels bad for Payne Stewart.
A few hours after Azinger had holed the 25-foot sand shot at the 72d green and gone from a stroke behind Stewart to a stroke ahead in a matter of seconds, he was still feeling melancholy about administering such a bitter defeat to his best friend on the PGA Tour.
Then he opened his locker.


A Quest for Freedom Falls Short; Alien-Smuggling Suspect Eluded Immigration Net
Deported as an illegal alien and a felon, a man who the authorities say is a major smuggler of Chinese immigrants sneaked back into the United States, was arrested and then used a common ploy to stay in the country: He applied for political asylum.
The man, Guo Liang Chi, 27, is believed to have participated in the smuggling attempt that ended early Sunday, when a rusty freighter ran aground off the Queens shore with nearly 300 Chinese aboard.
The authorities say Mr.
Guo heads the Fuk Ching gang, which has forced payments from thousands of Chinese immigrants after they were brought illegally to the United States.


RECALL IS ORDERED FOR WORM PROBES
The Federal Government has announced the recall of an electronic device used by fishermen to shock worms to bring them to the surface of the ground for use as bait, saying similar devices had caused the deaths of more than 30 people since 1973.
The Consumer Product Safety Commission formally ordered the recall on June 1 of about 83,000 of the devices, which run an electric current through the ground and send out vibrations that shock worms.


Review/Dance; Valmont and the Sly Marquise Are Back to Their Old Tricks
What is it about the libertine excess of 18th-century France that so fascinates the creative artists of our time?
Part of the answer may be found in "Les Liaisons Dangereuses," a clever and unsettling ballet that American Ballet Theater performed for the first time on Tuesday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.
As expected, the choreographer, Christian Holder, has come up with his own treatment of "Les Liaisons Dangereuses," a now celebrated novel that Pierre-Ambroise-Francois Choderlos de Laclos published in France in 1782.
What is more surprising is the experimental manner -- rooted more in mime than in a dance pulse -- with which Mr.
Holder approaches this tale of corrupt aristocrats playing games by their own rules of sexual license.


Egghead Software (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 3


Black Caucus Threatens Revolt on Clinton Budget
Black Democrats in the House of Representatives today put off a meeting with President Clinton and threatened to defeat his budget package if his compromises with the Senate included retreats on Medicare, the earned income-tax credit, child hunger programs and summer jobs for youths.
It was the sharpest episode in a quarrelsome day among House Democrats, who are angry at the Senate and worried about Mr.
Clinton, but not sure how much they can do about either.
In frustration, they spent much of this morning fighting among themselves.


U.N. COUNCIL PLANS TO ORDER FULL BAN ON OIL FOR HAITI
The United States and other United Nations Security Council members have decided to impose a mandatory worldwide ban on the supply of oil to Haiti as part of a new campaign to restore to power the deposed President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Plans for enforcing the blockade, which also applies to arms supplies, have not been worked out yet, diplomats said today.
But the resolution imposing the ban, which is expected to be approved formally next week, will be adopted under Article 7 of the United Nations Charter, which allows the Council to enforce its orders.


All for Fido and Whiskers (Even a Bath)
IF you cringe at handknitted sweaters for dogs that start at $65, raise your eyebrows at bejeweled collar-and-leash sets ($100 and up) and can't see the point of stocking six varieties of cat food or five kinds of dog biscuits, then read no further.
Your blood pressure will thank you.
On the other hand, if you're looking for a beauty shop for Fido or Whiskers that has hydraulic grooming tables and a soaking tub, then Karens for People and Pets might be up your alley.
The store, at 1195 Lexington Avenue (between 81st and 82d Street) for 18 years, has been expanded from 400 to 1,600 square feet by its owners, Karen and Peter Sonntag.
The airy-looking space was designed by Jerry Caldari of Bromley Caldari Architects in New York.


Suffolk Lawmakers Pass Public Financing Bill for Campaigns
At the urging of supporters of Ross Perot, the Suffolk County legislature early today passed a bill calling for public financing of county election campaigns.
If the measure is signed by the County Executive and approved in a referendum this fall, Suffolk would become the first county in the state to have public financing of campaigns.
New York City and 23 states have such laws.


How Christian Coalition Endorsed Candidates
To the Editor:
In "Christian Coalition Only Guided Voters" (letter, May 28), Ralph E. Reed Jr., executive director of that organization, states on the subject of endorsements of school board candidates, "Neither the Christian Coalition nor any of the 2,000 churches that received our voter guides endorsed any candidate or slate of candidates."


McIlvaine Leaves Padres; Thoughts Turn to Mets
Joe McIlvaine resigned as general manager of the San Diego Padres yesterday, then said he was going to do something he hasn't done since 1974: take some time off.
But, McIlvaine said last night, a team might be able to convince him to cut short a planned four-month hiatus made possible by a Padres contract that will run through October.
Which leads to the question of whether McIlvaine, one of the chief engineers of the winning Mets teams of the 1980's, could find his way back to his former club.


Vincent Copeland, 77, Is Dead; Led Anti-War Protests in 1960's
Vincent B. Copeland, a co-founder of the Workers World Party, former labor officer and a leader of protests against the Vietnam War, died on Monday at his home in Hoboken, N.J.
He was 77.
He had multiple illnesses, his family said.


At Tupperware, Rethinking the Bowl, Perfecting the Burp
IF only life were like Tupperware.
Even now, half a century after a Massachusetts inventor named Earl Tupper made the world safe for deviled eggs and rotund lettuces, Tupperware is a vision of perfection.
Think of your most incriminating kitchen secrets (fossilized eggplant casserole, anyone?).
Now think of Tupperware.


U.S. Wants to Keep Menus Honest on Nutrition Claims
The Food and Drug Administration is expected to announce new rules on Thursday to require all restaurants to back up any nutrition claims on their menus.
The proposal would undo a compromise the agency reached with the White House in the waning days of the Bush Administration in order to persuade Mr.
Bush to sign the Nutrition Labeling and Education Act, which requires virtually every packaged food to be labeled with its nutritional content.


Quiksilver Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Health Insurance Ruling To Hit Small Employers
The Federal Government's crackdown this week on employers who limit or deny health insurance for employees with AIDS or other expensive illnesses will mainly affect small businesses and union-management welfare funds with small budgets.
Some small employers may even drop all health coverage to avoid paying more to cover costly illnesses.
But most companies with more than 100 employees will not be affected because they spread the risk of catastrophic medical costs across a large group.


Super Food Services Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 8


Software Developer's Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Only Thing Roy Can't Stop Is Praise for His Goaltending
The image did not flash on the scoreboard until after the game, until after the Montreal Canadiens had won their 24th Stanley Cup.
The little cartoon man trudged into a phone booth, puffed up his chest, and -- poof! -- the big Superman crest exploded onto the screen that hangs over the center of the Forum ice.
SuperPatrick screamed the words across the top of the picture, a tribute to the man chiefly responsible for the celebration that took place in Montreal tonight.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Bear Stearns Cos., New York, is offering $200 million of 6.5 percent notes due in 2000 at 99.928 to yield 6.513 percent through Bear, Stearns &amp; Co.
The noncallable notes are rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service and A by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
*
Dresser Industries, Dallas, an energy concern, is offering $300 million in notes due in 2000 at 100 to yield 6.25 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The noncallable issue is rated A-1 by Moody's, A- by S.&amp; P. and A+ by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Vicorp Restaurants Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 9


Books of The Times; The Art of Going Gentle Into That Good Night
Days of Grace  A Memoir  By Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad.
Illustrated. 317 pages.
Alfred A. Knopf. $24.
In the penultimate chapter of "Days of Grace: A Memoir," Arthur Ashe describes a time he spent in the hospital, which turned out to be shortly before his death from AIDS-related pneumonia on Feb. 6, 1993.


Art Work Is (Yes, Really) Garbage
Mierle Laderman Ukeles is staring at a 200-foot-long mound of decomposing leaves.
"This is sculpture already," she says.
Michelangelo had his ceiling.
Frank Lloyd Wright had his falling water.
Ms.
Ukeles has her garbage.


Tours: Bridges and Neighborhoods
Over the River New York Transit Museum, Boerum Place and Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn Heights; (718) 330-5839.
The museum is sponsoring a walking tour of the Manhattan and Williamsburg bridges on Saturday, from 10 A.M. to 2 P.M.
Fee is $10; $8, members.
A walk on the Triboro Bridge will be offered on Aug. 7, from 11 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Fee, including transportation and lunch, is $25; $21, members.
Reservations are required for all tours.


P. S. McLean, 77, A Retired Educator For Dental Hygiene
Patricia Stanton McLean, a retired educator and leader in the dental-hygienist profession, died on Tuesday at the Westchester County Medical Center.
She was 77 and lived in Pleasantville, N.Y.
The cause of death was heart disease, her family said.


Critic's Notebook; Getting to Know Mrs. Clinton in Both Her Hats
So thoroughly identified is Hillary Rodham Clinton with the Administration's health-care plan that her appearance tonight on NBC, her first acceptance of such a network invitation since she became First Lady, signals a new stage in a lowering political battle as well as in the image-refurbishing of a still undefined First Lady.
As bits of the health plan have been exposed, Mrs.
Clinton, cloistered with her health-care acolytes, has been seen by most Americans only as a flash on the evening news.
A few weeks ago, however, she permitted several magazines and newspapers a peek behind her veil in preparation for the unveiling of the big plan, a process that is beginning to seem like an overlong strip tease, with the climactic take-it-off moment still months away.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
A new energy tax on transportation fuel, including truck diesel fuel, jet kerosene and high-test gasoline, is being considered by senators and by the Clinton Administration.
The tax, proposed by Senator John Breaux, a Louisiana Democrat, would replace the President's heat tax with what is effectively a sales tax of 7.3 cents per gallon of fuel.  [ Page A1. ]
Some liberal senators are trying to scuttle a tax provision in President Clinton's economic package that would cut corporate tax payments by $8.9 billion over the next five years.  [ D1. ]


Review/Pop; A Subtler Sting Cuts Loose in a Smaller Hall
"It's cozy in here," Sting said as he looked around the airless Paramount on Tuesday night, and for a performer who has been on the arena circuit, it probably was.
Sting was smart to return to mid-size theaters like the 5,605-seat Paramount for his current tour (although he's also opening some stadium shows for the Grateful Dead), because the music he's making now moves too fast and too subtly for most arena concerts.
He writes and sings pop songs, but in concert they're laced with jazzy improvisation, transforming them between the lines of catchy choruses and rolling grooves.
For all of Sting's associations with causes, and the earnest moping of many of his lyrics, he has rarely been a preachy performer in concert.
And on Tuesday, Sting the musician was triumphant.
While Sting's bands, including the Police, have never been content to play songs by rote, his current group takes on all challenges, from odd meters and harmonic substitutions to the openness and understatement of a ballad.
Sting's own bass was both foundation and fulcrum for a nimble four-piece band including Dominic Miller on guitar, David Sancious on keyboards and Vinnie Colaiuta on drums.
They don't have the jazz pedigrees of his first post-Police group, but they mesh gleefully and they know which gambits belong where.


U.S. Experts Say 'Safe Havens' Won't Help Much
American intelligence officials have told the White House that the plan to create "safe havens" for the besieged Muslims in Bosnia would do little in the long run beyond creating six impoverished refugee compounds with limited law and order and no economic future, a senior Clinton Administration intelligence analyst said today.
And the official said there is little hope of restoring a single Bosnian state along the lines of the plan developed by Lord Owen and Cyrus R. Vance.
He added that the most likely outcome is the partition of the country into Muslim, Serbian and Croatian areas.


Bridge
Many players from the New York metropolitan area posted high North American scores in the Epson Worldwide Bridge contest last week.
Among them were: Friday East-West: Robin Kay and Aaron Silverstein, 10th with 68 at Culbertson, Manhattan.
Saturday North-South: Ronnie Kutic and Berl Sternberg, 5th with 71 percent at the Bridge Deck, Scarsdale, N.Y.; Joan Pollenz and Lisa Yellis, 7th with 69 percent at the Vanderbilt, Lake Success L.I.; Mel Colchamiro and Janet Schiff, 8th with 69 percent at Grand, Massapequa L.I.
Saturday East-West: J.J.
Adamo and Sandy Burns, 5th with 69 percent at West Hill, Englewood, N.J., and Jane Heilbron and Joan Mendell, 7th with 68 percent at the Bridge Deck, Hartsdale, N.Y.
Michael Rosenberg and Zia Mahmood, playing at Honors Club in Manhattan, had 68 percent Friday night, the top North-South score in New York City.
On the diagramed deal they outwitted the official analysts.
They pushed to six no-trump, with a natural sequence that included a strongly invitational raise from three no-trump to five no-trump.


Built-In Captions for Television
Amid the hubbub at last week's Consumer Electronics Show of exotic products like Panasonic's prototype of a $1,000 wristwatch telephone, displays of a new television feature expected to help 100 million viewers attracted relatively little attention.
The low-profile innovation is a microchip that enables viewers to see subtitles.
Federal legislation passed in 1990 requires the chip to be included in every television set made after July 1 for sale in the United States.


Dycom Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


NEGOTIATORS TRY TO REOPEN TALKS
The United Nations peace mediator, Lord Owen, embarked here today on another round of talks to repair a Balkan peace effort that he says has gone badly off track, threatening among other things to draw Croatia more directly into the fray.
Amid setbacks to Bosnian Croats at the hands of Muslim forces in Bosnia and Herzegovina, as well as growing tension over parts of southeastern Croatia under the control of Serbian irregulars, Lord Owen and Thorvald Stoltenberg of Norway began the first of three days of meetings that will culminate in talks Saturday in Geneva between President Alija Izetbegovic of Bosnia, a Muslim, and Mate Boban, leader of the Bosnian Croats.


Designs That Set a Standard
THE big names of the era are all there: Charles Eames and Frank Lloyd Wright, Paul Frankl and George Nakashima, Isamu Noguchi and Donald Deskey.
These designers set the tone and produced the pieces that put American furniture on the international map in the first half of this century.
Today at 2 P.M. at Sotheby's, 1334 York Avenue (at 72d Street), 284 lots of pieces from this period will be put on the auction block as part of a sale of 20th-century decorative arts.


INSIDE
More Cuts at the Pentagon
The Defense Secretary has told the services to prepare for further spending reductions totaling billions of dollars in next year's budget.
Page A22.
Wet, Gusty and Damaging
Thunderstorms rolled over the New York metropolitan area, felling trees and power lines and spawning funnel-shaped clouds.
Page B9.
Trying to Control Custodians
The New York City Board of Education has turned to the State Legislature in its efforts to win greater control over school custodians.
Page B1.
Bulls Beat Suns in Opener
The Chicago Bulls beat the Phoenix Suns, 100-92, in the opening game of the National Basketball Association championship series.
Page B13.


Administration Rethinking Mental-Health Coverage
Concerns about cost have forced the Administration to reconsider its initial plan to provide open-ended, comprehensive insurance coverage for treatment of mental disorders under President Clinton's health program.
The cost and scope of mental health benefits have become a subject of impassioned debate inside the Government and have generated some tension between Tipper Gore and Hillary Rodham Clinton, Administration officials say.


CLINTON NOW SEEMS PREPARED TO DROP ANY WIDE FUEL TAX
Barely a day after giving up his demand for a $71.5 billion tax on the heat content of energy sources, President Clinton seemed close today to retreating from his fallback position as well: that any substitute for that tax must cover the gamut of fuels, from oil to electricity to natural gas.
Instead, Senate and Administration officials said, Mr.
Clinton's aides were looking closely at a proposal by Senator John B. Breaux, Democrat Louisiana, to replace the heat tax with a $40 billion tax on gasoline and other transportation fuels and $30 billion in Medicare cuts through the fiscal year 1998.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Qualifier Upsets Navratilova on Grass  Kristine Radford of Australia, a 23-year-old qualifier ranked 170th in the world, shocked top-seeded Martina Navratilova, 2-6, 6-4, 6-3, in a third-round match yesterday at the Edgbaston grass-court tournament in Birmingham, England.
Navratilova looked to be on her way to a comfortable victory when she won seven straight games to take the first set and lead by 2-0 in the second.
But Radford leveled the set at 3-3, then won the set four games later on a Navratilova double fault.
Radford broke serve to lead by 5-3 in the third set and won on her second match point when Navratilova netted a forehand return of serve. (AP) Sampras Is Defeated: Pete Sampras played as if he preferred to be somewhere else rather than at London's Queens Club yesterday.
Now he has the time to go there.
The world's top-ranked player suffered a 5-7, 7-5, 6-4 loss to Grant Stafford of South Africa in the second round.
Stafford is ranked 110th in the world.
"There are times when you miss home a little bit," said Sampras, who has been away from Tampa, Fla., for five weeks.
"And this is one of those times." But Sampras said he would stay in London to prepare for Wimbledon, which starts on June 21. (AP)


A Whistle-Blowing Nuclear Worker Gains
An administrative law judge for the United States Labor Department found today that managers at the Oak Ridge National Laboratory had retaliated against a technician there by creating a hostile work environment after he raised concerns about radiation exposure on the job.
The finding by the judge, Theodor von Brand, upheld a decision issued last year by the Labor Department's district director in Nashville and appealed by the technician's employer, Martin Marietta Energy Systems, which manages the Oak Ridge center for the Energy Department.


Meyer (Fred) Inc. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to May 22


Molecular Biosystems reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Budget Talks With Mayor In a Standoff
Four days after the City Charter deadline for adopting a new budget, talks between the City Council and the Dinkins administration degenerated yesterday into a schoolyard standoff.
The two sides spent the day finger-pointing and saber-rattling, but failed to make progress on the three main issues dividing them.
The Council Speaker said the standoff was the Mayor's fault for leaving City Hall the other night when, in the Speaker's view, a deal was at hand.
But the Mayor's staff said the Council had derailed the deal by insisting on last-minute concessions that the Mayor could not accept.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about a legal battle for control of the Pacific Lumber Company misstated the relationship between Charles E. Hurwitz, chairman of Pacific's parent, Maxxam Inc., and the Executive Life Insurance Company, a California insurer that supplied annuities for Pacific Lumber's pension plan.
Mr.
Hurwitz did not control Executive Life.
The article also omitted attribution for allegations that the United Savings Association bought junk bonds from Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. in return for Drexel's financing of acquisitions.
That assertion was made in a lawsuit by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation against Michael R. Milken, Drexel's junk-bond specialist.
Because Mr.
Milken and Drexel Burnham settled the suit for $1.3 billion, no court ruled on the F.D.I.C. allegations.


U.S. to Release 158 Haitian Detainees
The Clinton Administration said today that it would comply with a Federal court ruling and release 158 Haitian political refugees, most of them infected with the virus that causes AIDS, who have been held at the American naval base in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
The decision means the detainees will be admitted into the United States in the next few days, with most of them expected to head to south Florida.


Uncle Sam Still Wants You to Live a Lie; Don't Give Up
To the Editor:
As a lesbian convinced of the importance of living a life of integrity, I strongly disagree with the "don't ask, don't tell," philosophy on the ban of gays and lesbians in the military.


Suns' Main Stars Off and Stumbling
Charles Barkley, his jump shot oblique, frustrated even his grandmother tonight.
Johnnie Mickens flew here all the way from Leeds, Ala., wished her grandson luck and then saw him dent the rim 16 times in the Phoenix Suns' loss to the Chicago Bulls in Game 1 of the championship series.
Interviewed late in the game by NBC, while a benched Barkley wore a towel on his head, Mickens said her grandson needs to rebound more fiercely and plant himself in the lane.


Nassau Proposes Schedule For Remaking Legislature
Nassau County officials today proposed a three-year timetable for the creation of a new legislative body to replace the Board of Supervisors.
Responding to a Federal judge's ruling that the weighted voting system used by the board is unconstitutional, the county said in a memorandum to Judge Arthur D. Spatt of Federal District Court that it wants a 17-member charter commission to conduct a wholesale re-evaluation of "every aspect of county government."


Fighting Defamation Isn't Like Spying
To the Editor:
From 1968 to 1975, I was director of European affairs for the Anti-Defamation League.
It was with keen interest that I read the two May 28 Op-Ed articles headlined "The A.D.L. Under Fire," particularly intrigued that the critical article by Dennis King and Chip Berlet appeared in the positive form of a Star of David, while Abraham Foxman's official view appeared in its negative image.


In Connecticut, Gun Ban Just Wouldn't Die
David S. Weaver, a lobbyist from Handgun Control Inc. who marched the halls of Connecticut's Capitol preaching the virtues of a ban on the sale of assault weapons, in the end likened the issue to "a bad cough that just wouldn't go away."
Others who watched the gun bill stagger from near-defeat to near-defeat, leading up to Tuesday night's hairbreadth victory in the Senate, said the medical analogy was apt.
Connecticut's law, only the third in the nation after New Jersey and California, was seen today more as a symbol of tenacity than triumph.
It wouldn't go away.


Whitman and Florio Attack As New Jersey Battle Begins
The morning after winning the Republican gubernatorial primary, Christine Todd Whitman began her general election race today by breaking bread with her Republican rivals at a "unity brunch" and revamping her campaign staff, putting her brother in charge.
And she went after the man whose job she wants, Gov.
Jim Florio, accusing him of playing politics by flirting with tax cuts in an election year.


National Media Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


May D. H. Martenet, Novelist, Is Dead at 85
May Davies Hopkins Martenet, a novelist and short-story writer, died on Sunday at the Westminster-Canterbury retirement home in Virginia Beach, Va., where she had lived since 1985.
She was 85 and had been a longtime resident of Manhattan.
The cause was complications stemming from lung cancer, said her son-in-law, William Van Orden Gnichtel.


Will Mr. Marino Help the Park?
Every year, it seems, Ralph Marino gets the opportunity to be a hero to millions of New York State residents who care about the environment.
And every year the majority leader of the Republican-controlled Senate takes a pass.
Now, in the waning days of the present legislative session, he has still another chance.
At issue is Gov.
Mario Cuomo's proposal to create a permanent trust fund for land preservation, watershed protection, waste treatment and recycling.
The Assembly has already approved similar legislation sponsored by Speaker Saul Weprin.
If Mr.
Marino tells his Senate colleagues to go along, the trust fund is certain to become law.


Bowne &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Out of the Blue, Space Telescope Sees 'Naked' Stars
Astronomers examining pictures from the Hubble Space Telescope have caught sight of stars in a stunning state of undress, stripped of their dense cloak of gases and exposed to their cores.
"These objects represent a totally new population of very blue stars," said Dr.
Guido De Marchi, a Hubble astronomer who announced the discovery here today at a meeting of the American Astronomical Society.


After First Game Against Suns, It's Advantage, Bulls
It took the Chicago Bulls one game to take the homecourt advantage from the Phoenix Suns.
Playing with the poise and confidence that has allowed them to win back-to-back championships, the Bulls stunned the Suns by taking a 20-point second-quarter lead.
The Suns rallied, but they never caught up.
Meanwhile, their best player, Charles Barkley, was harassed into a 9-of-25 shooting night, bothered by the defense of Horace Grant and Chicago's taller front line.


Saudi Gift Sets Up Islamic Law Center
Harvard Law School has received $5 million from King Fahd of Saudi Arabia to establish what is expected to become the nation's most extensive program for the study of Islamic law.
The gift, announced today, is to endow a chair in Islamic law and to support student fellowships, visiting scholars and professors, conferences and a library collection -- all dedicated to the study of the Islamic legal system.
The Saudi Government put no restrictions on the gift, said Frank E. Vogel, an assistant professor of Islamic legal studies at Harvard Law School.


Abroad at Home; Racism Lives
Is it time for the Federal Government to ease up on enforcing the right to vote in areas of the country that have a history of discrimination against black voters?
That question lurked behind the fight over Lani Guinier's nomination as Assistant Attorney General.
Some of her opponents -- not most, but some who mattered -- would answer yes.


METRO DIGEST
FLORIO BANS BLIND TRUSTS
Governor Florio has issued an executive order to eliminate the use of blind trusts by key state employees and prohibit companies owned by these workers from doing business with government. .
The rationale is in part political, as Mr.
Florio tries to distance himself from an inquiry into a company owned a former aide.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  PEACE CORPS JOB FOR BELLAMY?
President Clinton is expected to nominate Carol Bellamy, former president of New York's City Council, as director of the Peace Corps, Administration officials say.
Ms.
Bellamy is an investment banker for Bear Stearns.
A16.


It's Not Too Late for Clinton to Get It Right; Alternative Budget
To the Editor:
With all due respect, you seem to miss the point of the alternative budget plan I introduced with Senators John C. Danforth of Missouri, William S. Cohen of Maine and J. Bennett Johnston of Louisiana.
"A Deal on the Economic Plan" (editorial, June 3) and other editorials level the charge that it was just oil state senators out to protect that industry.


Ruling Scuttles Plan to Collect Taxes on Reservation Sales
New York State's highest court outlawed a state plan today that was intended to help the state collect taxes on the sale of gasoline and cigarettes by Indian retailers to non-Indian customers.
The unanimous decision killed a State Department of Taxation plan intended to do two things: collect as much as $100 million in unpaid taxes and force up prices on Indian reservations, where sales by tax-free stores to non-Indians are booming.


Review/Film; Waking Up To a Change: He Is a She
"Orlando" was shown as part of the New Directors/New Film Series.
Following are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on March 19, 1993.
The film opens today at the Angelika Film Center, 18 West Houston Street, NoHo, and the Lincoln Plaza Cinemas, Broadway between 62d and 63d Streets, Manhattan.
Taking Virginia Woolf's bountiful and witty 1928 novel, "Orlando," which is as much about words, writing and the dogged pursuit of fine literature as about a number of other things, Sally Potter has made a grand new movie that is as much a richly informed appreciation of the novel as it is a free adaptation.


Port Agency Will Resume Set-Asides
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey yesterday resumed its program of earmarking a large share of its purchasing budget for businesses owned by minorities or women.
The budget includes nearly a billion dollars a year in contracts for construction, equipment and services.
The authority, the biggest private contractor in the New York City region, took the action at yesterday's monthly meeting of its Board of Commissioners after its own studies found proof that minority and woman-owned businesses did not get a fair share of its contracts.


China's Population Concerns the World
To the Editor:
As Chinese scientists committed to research and training in population and health in the world's most populated country, we are seriously concerned by pressure to withdraw international assistance to China's family planning and research programs.
China has made an unprecedented effort in the last two decades to control rapid population growth in a country that has to feed 22 percent of the world's population on 7 percent of the world's arable land under relatively poor economic and environmental conditions.
The Chinese family planning program has faced great difficulties and challenges, and the Chinese people, especially Chinese peasants, have made great personal sacrifice for the collective interest of the country, which is considered as the greatest virtue in our culture.


Mets Go From 5 Runs Up to 21 1/2 Games Behind
The cruelest part of the home run was that it refused to come down.
On and on it carried.
Shea Stadium, long ago conditioned to calamity, was forced to wait for the final crash.
There was no sound, though, for the baseball wound up too far gone to even be tracked.
It cleared bleachers and outer walls and simply vanished.
The Mets were gone soon after, their 5-0 lead twisted into a 7-6 defeat to the Phillies.


General Host Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 23


Deposed Head of Empire Is Criticized for Severance
The New York State Insurance Superintendent said yesterday that Albert A. Cardone, the deposed head of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, has severance agreements that could cost the financially troubled company $2 million.
In a letter to the company's board, the superintendent, Salvatore A. Curiale, urged Empire not to pay.


It's Not Too Late for Clinton to Get It Right
To the Editor:
Re "A History of Gergenism" (editorial, June 2) and "The Constant Hearts" by A. M. Rosenthal (column, June 1): Americans of my generation, children of the Depression years, who grew up during World War II and were very active and centrist Democrats, voted for President Clinton because we believed he was an intelligent and practical professional politician who had learned from his McGovern activist days and his governorsip of Arkansas that we as a nation are people of the center.
Many of us had voted for Ronald Reagan and George Bush in 1988 because we did not agree with the ideology of the Democratic Party or feel represented by its shrill, often faddish culture.
We voted for President Clinton.
I am at a loss to understand how this intelligent man could have misunderstood the "centrist" message he conveyed during the campaign and made a first priority of the sexual roles of military personnel; then the firing of the travel bureau of the White House in what appeared to be a failure of due process, and then getting a haircut in a plane on a runway while holding up traffic.


Middle of the Road; Clinton's Policy on Trade, It Turns Out, Has Similarities to the Bush Approach
As a symbol of how President Clinton's newly announced Japanese trade policy is similar to President George Bush's, consider Harold A. Poling, the strong-minded chairman and chief executive of the Ford Motor Company, who accompanied Mr.
Bush to Tokyo last year for trade negotiations that proved to be a political disaster
On Friday, Mr.
Poling will be coming to Washington to join another round of talks with Japan, this time for President Clinton.
But while his business companions last year were other Big Three chairmen, they will be replaced on Friday by the chief executive of a far broader group of companies -- Motorola, Apple Computer, Tenneco Automotive and American International Group, the insurance giant.


Governor and N.Y.R.A. to Air Dispute
The dispute between Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the people who operate horse racing in New York State took a new turn yesterday when the Governor invited the 23 trustees of the New York Racing Association to meet with him next week to explore the issues between them.
But the Governor's tax chief, meanwhile, kept the dispute alive by demanding that the racing association immediately pay its past-due tax bill of $1.9 million.
The tax commissioner, James W. Wetzler, said in a strong letter that the state would not wait for the racing association to pay the bill at the present rate of $200,000 a week.
The bill originally totalled $4 million, but the association made a lump payment of $2 million two weeks ago.


Pepsi Takes a Seat on Moscow Fast-Food Express
Pepsico Inc. went underground today, opening its first mobile food stand in Moscow's Metro to sell Pepsi-Cola, New York hot dogs and Taco Bell burritos in one of the world's busiest and largest subway systems.
The gleaming snack bar in the Park Kultury Metro station is part of an exclusive contract with Moscow City Metropolitan, the city's subway, to sell food and drinks to some of the nine million people who pass through the system's 140 elegant, vaulted-ceilinged stations each day.


No Headline
"The more often you ask young children to think about something, the easier it becomes for them to make something up that they think is a memory." -- DR.
STEPHEN CECI, a psychologist at Cornell University.  [ A23:3. ]


Corrections
An article yesterday about the divorce settlement between Ivan and Seema Boesky misstated the payment he will receive.
The amount -- annual, not monthly -- is $180,000.


People
*
Paul Hammersley was named to the new position of senior vice president and head of client services and new business at the Lowe Group North America, New York.
He was previously a group director at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, London. *
James J. Spanfeller was named associate publisher for advertising at Inc. magazine, New York, succeeding Kristin Norrgard, now publisher at Working Woman magazine.
Mr.
Spanfeller was previously senior vice president and associate publisher at Playboy magazine, New York.


Professional Dental Technologies Inc. (ECM) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Awaiting the Inflation Numbers
This could be a disturbing day for Ed Labenski, the president of IDS Fixed-Income Advisors.
A surprisingly large jump in the May Producer Price Index, which is to be released today, could undermine his recent strategy of betting on low inflation and stable to declining interest rates.
Mr.
Labenski is one of the money managers who has not lost the belief that inflation is heading lower.
The surge in inflation in the first four months of the year -- with the Consumer Price Index rising at a 4.3 percent annual rate -- has already forced many other managers to switch their strategies, giving up hope for lower inflation this year and expecting that interest rates will be stable to higher.


Top Effie Prize Goes To Apple Campaign
Advertising awards for effectiveness and creativity were presented last night in New York.
Apple Computer Inc. of Cupertino, Calif., and BBDO Los Angeles shared the top prize in the 25th Annual Effie Awards, given by the New York chapter of the American Marketing Association in recognition of effectiveness in advertising.
The two won the Grand Effie for a campaign that introduced Apple's popular Power Book laptop computer, which in four months grew to account for 20 percent of all sales of portable computers.
In addition, they shared a Gold Effie in the computer category.


Gergen to Quit Club, White House Reports
Three days after David R. Gergen, a Presidential counselor, vowed to retain his membership in the secretive all-male Bohemian Club, the White House today said that he planned to resign.
Dee Dee Myers, the White House press secretary, insisted that Mr.
Gergen's decision had nothing to do with the uproar this week over his membership.
She said that "in keeping with White House tradition," he was resigning from every board, commission and social organization to which he belonged.


COMPANY BRIEFS
COLLIERS INTERNATIONAL, Boston, the real estate services firm, said its Colliers Jardine affiliate is part of a group that received approval to develop a $905 million deep-sea port in Vung Tau, Vietnam.
B.
F.
GOODRICH, Akron, Ohio, has completed the purchase of the Cleveland Pneumatic Company, which makes landing gear, for $200 million in cash from Abex Inc. of Hampton, N.H.


Scientists Honored At Rockefeller U.
Rockefeller University awarded 19 doctoral degrees yesterday at the school's 35th commencement exercises, which were held in the Caspary auditorium on the campus on York Avenue in Manhattan.


There Goes the Street, There Goes the Team
Racism has its franchises, too.
For the first half of the 20th century, major league baseball teams stayed put.
From 1950 to 1970, 10 of the 16 original clubs relocated, mostly to other cities, and the determining factor in the move seemed to have been the tilting of the neighborhood around the ball park from white to black.
The statistics that support this theory were presented yesterday to the fifth Cooperstown Symposium on Baseball and the American Culture by Professors Alan Sager and Arthur Culbert of the Boston University Schools of Public Health and Medicine.
"We'd been studying urban hospitals," said Sager, "and we found that race was the biggest predictor of hospital relocations and closings. People are remarkably sanguine about such wholesale hospital closings although they are personal catastrophes. Baseball teams moving may not be so catastrophic, but they certainly offer dramatic episodes of this important phenomenon."


Continuum Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Acklands Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Services for Petrovic
A memorial service for Drazen Petrovic will be held in Manhattan at 7:30 P.M. on Monday at the Croatian Roman Catholic Church, 502 West 41st Street.
Petrovic, who was a 28-year-old guard for the New Jersey Nets, died in a car accident in Germany last Monday.


Sagunto Journal; Architects? They Could Be Thrown to the Lions
Over the centuries, as it lost sculpted columns and stone blocks to newer construction sites, the Roman theater in Sagunto slowly took on the appearance of a ruin.
But, though badly scarred, its fine semicircular auditorium survived to remind people of 2,000 years of history.
Today, the theater still stands on a hillside below a Moorish castle overlooking Sagunto, but it is no longer recognizable.
Rows of stone seats that were once crumbling have been hidden by polished white limestone, while the traditional view of the auditorium has been blocked by a huge new stage front.


Review/Dance; A Display of Pyrotechnics By New Leads in 'Etudes'
Harald Lander's "Etudes" works its way up through classroom and concert ballet to a display of pyrotechnics that is heart-stopping in its speed and drive.
It is a ballet for those who wait breathlessly for the "Rose Adagio" balances in "The Sleeping Beauty" or the 32 fouettes in "Swan Lake." But a cast of three new leads in "Etudes," presented by American Ballet Theater on Wednesday afternoon at the Metropolitan Opera House, brought a warmth and luster to the dance.
One expects technical expertise and sensitivity to style from Susan Jaffe and she delivered it here.
The soft curve of her body and, in particular, the angling of her head and shoulders in the ballet's white section recalled that this is a work by a choreographer schooled in the Danish style.
And Ms.
Jaffe's sunny radiance and authority lent an extra measure of graciousness to the ballerina role.
Charles Askegard's long legs and feet did astonishing things to his beats, in a role debut as the Danish cavalier.
Mr.
Askegard also stood out for the elegant lyricism of his arms, an ebullient attack and partnering that was as exquisitely attuned as ever to his ballerina.


As Iran Chief Faces Vote Today, West's Doubts Rise
When President Hashemi Rafsanjani first took office in 1989, some diplomats greeted him as a moderating force in a country dominated by radical Islamic clerics.
Just over a year ago, some Western envoys hailed the ouster of some parliamentary hard-liners as a victory for the President and a turning point in Iran's relations with the West.
But as Mr.
Rafsanjani heads into an election on Friday that he seems virtually assured of winning, diplomats are increasingly skeptical that he will use his second four-year term to cut off Iran's support for shadowy groups threatening other governments in the region.


Review/Art; Jewish Museum as Sum of Its Past
Although there are kinks to be worked out, and several galleries that are only partly installed, the Jewish Museum, which will reopen its doors on Sunday, clearly intends to live up to its name as never before.
For the first time in its 89-year history, it has stretching room: its newly refurbished and seamlessly expanded home, the Gothic-style former Warburg mansion on upper Fifth Avenue, now houses twice as much gallery space as it did before.
There's some unevenness among the three inaugural exhibitions: "From the Inside Out: Eight Contemporary Artists," an overly tame group show of contemporary art; "Collecting for the 21st Century: Recent Acquisitions and Promised Gifts," a wide-ranging display of recent acquisitions, and "Culture and Continuity: The Jewish Journey," an epic presentation of objects from the museum's permanent collection, whose final sections will not be completely installed until later this summer.
But together these shows affirm that the museum is expanding and deepening its focus on Jewish culture and history in ways that promise to have immense value for Jews and non-Jews alike.


Times Co. Acquiring Boston Globe for $1.1 Billion
The Boston Globe, one of the few large American newspapers that remain under family control, is to be sold to The New York Times Company under a $1.1 billion merger agreement approved yesterday by the boards of both companies.
The deal provides that The Globe will retain its management and editorial autonomy.
Yet it would add to the decades-long centralization of American communications, under which many independently owned news organizations have been sold or closed down.
It would also considerably expand the role of the Times Company and its controlling family, the Sulzbergers, in the country's media.
Purchase Price a Record
The purchase price, to be paid largely in the stock of The New York Times Company, is the highest ever for an American newspaper, securities analysts said this week as rumors of the proposed deal spread in Boston and on Wall Street.


Two Downwind Holes Bring Kite to Earth
Weeks ago, Tom Kite was an immovable object.
Now he is once again golf's irresistible force.
Unlike recent United States Open champions who found the trophy a psychological burden, Kite has played some of his best golf since winning at Pebble Beach 12 months ago.
And in a matter of weeks, Kite has gone from being incapacitated by herniated disks to approaching top form for his Open defense next week at Baltusrol in Springfield, N.J.


The Art Market
Value of Contracts
The Sonnabend Gallery's much-talked-about lawsuit against the artist Peter Halley and the art dealer Larry Gagosian and his Gagosian Gallery was settled out of court last week.
After all the attention the case has received, the yearlong matter ended with something of a whimper.
"My only regret after all this is that the issue of gallery-artist obligations still has not been better defined," said Mr.
Halley.
Mr.
Gagosian said he was happy the case was over.
"It was unpleasant," he said, "and I'm glad it's behind us now."


David Langer, 42, Partner in Law Firm
David Langer, a partner in a Manhattan law firm and a civic leader, died on Saturday at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 42 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was brain cancer, his family said.


Brown's Boat Is Diverse
At the world junior championships three years ago in Vienna, the veteran coach from Philadelphia, Ted Nash, came upon a young man named Igor Boraska rowing for a Yugoslav crew.
Boraska, a 6-foot-3-inch, 190-pound Croat from Split, was such an impressive oarsman that Nash suggested he might consider college rowing in America.
Write some letters and ask for applications, said Nash.
Boraska did.


Market Place; Chicago Board is developing a system to trade in trash.
THE rise of environmentalism changed those who used to be known as junk and scrap dealers into "recyclers," but it did not give them an up-to-date marketplace.
Now, a not-for-profit group dedicated to encouraging recycling and the Chicago Board of Trade, the nation's oldest agricultural commodities exchange, are about to attempt to impose some order.
The group, the Resource Advisory Council of the National Recycling Coalition, is made up of representatives of industry, environmental and civic organizations and was created under a grant from the Environmental Protection Agency to study barriers to recycling.
It has recruited the Board of Trade to develop standardized, electronic methods for trading glass, plastics, paper and other goods.
The aim is to give brokers and dealers better prices, fixed rules for settling disputes and more uniform standards than have existed to date.


U.S. Says It Will Send 300 Troops To Balkan Republic to Limit Strife
The United States announced today that it would send 300 peacekeeping troops to Macedonia in about a week to help contain the Bosnian war.
The gesture responds to Europe's desire for more American involvement in the region and exposes American soldiers to minimal risk.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher depicted the offer as a "deterrent force" that would have "both symbolic and tangible" value.
But the decision raised questions about why they were needed and whether their presence might encourage rather than deter a Serbian attack on Macedonia, a former Yugoslav republic that has so far avoided involvement in the Balkan war.


Wickman Blocks Out Bikers and Brewers
The distractions could have destroyed Bob Wickman and transformed the first start in his home state into a disaster.
There were 24 tickets to secure, the threat of a renewed beanball war between two teams that despise each other, the return of Don Mattingly, two more Yankee injuries and, just in case that was not enough, 6,000 Harley-Davidson motorcycle enthusiasts in town for a convention and cheering the Brewers.
Enough to cloud his mind? Apparently not.


Art in Review
'An American Vision: Vintage F.S.A. Photographs, 1935-1943'
Howard Greenberg Gallery  120 Wooster Street (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through June 19
The work of the photographers attached to the Farm Security Administration during the Depression remains a landmark in the history of documentary photography.
Formed to provide publicity for the New Deal agency, the photographic unit, under the often heavy-handed direction of Roy Stryker, gradually expanded its focus to encompass many aspects of American society.


Merger Proposed to Create Largest U.S. Hospital Chain
Galen Health Care Inc. and the Columbia Hospital Corporation said yesterday that they would merge, creating the nation's largest for-profit hospital chain.
Analysts said the merger, a tax-free stock swap valued at about $4.1 billion, including $1 billion in Galen debt, would be virtually an acquisition by Columbia, which is based in Fort Worth.


RUSSIANS SEEKING ARMS PACT CHANGE
Concerned about instability along Russia's southern frontier, Russian military officials have told the Clinton Administration that they would like to revise the treaty limiting conventional forces in Europe so they can put more forces in the region.
The Russian request was conveyed to Defense Secretary Les Aspin by Gen.
Pavel E. Grachev, the Russian Defense Minister, when they met this week in Germany.
But a senior Administration official said Washington was not interested in reopening the treaty, fearing that such a move might lead to a general unraveling of the accord.


Why Not Draft Lawyers for Public Service?
To the Editor:
Dr.
Richard C. Reynolds has a great idea in "Make Health Reform Work. Draft Doctors" (Op-Ed, June 1).
Why not take those professionals who have to take nasty courses in college like organic chemistry, who spend four years and more than $100,000 in medical school, who give up years of their youth in specialized training and 80-hour-a-week internships, and punish them even more?
Surely, doctors won't mind forfeiting a year or two of income while their friends and acquaintances in other professions continue to buy homes, save money for their children's education and secure their future.


Space Station's Reliance On Shuttle Is Questioned
A White House advisory committee says that the new options for a scaled-back space station depend too much on the space shuttle and that NASA should use unmanned rockets to carry the heaviest parts.
In a report delivered to the White House today, the independent panel said it was too risky to depend upon the shuttle as the sole launching vehicle.
It recommended using a rocket like the Russian Proton, European Ariane 5, or American Titan 4.


Intertrans Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Restaurant Critic Is Named
The appointment of Ruth Reichl as restaurant critic of The New York Times was announced yesterday by Warren Hoge, assistant managing editor for cultural news and style coverage.
Ms.
Reichl has been the restaurant critic for The Los Angeles Times since 1984 and its food editor, in addition, since 1990.
She succeeds Bryan Miller, 41, who has requested a reporting assignment with the paper's style staff after nine years as critic.


Helen Woodard, 92, Bone-Disease Expert
Dr.
Helen Quincy Woodard, an authority on bone disease, died at her home in Hartsdale, N.Y., on Sunday.
She was 92.
Dr.
Woodard was a biochemist at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan, which she joined after receiving her Ph.D. in chemistry from Columbia University in 1925.
She did groundbreaking work in understanding and identifying cancers induced by environmental radiation.


Review/Music; A Neglected Cole Porter Show With an Indestructible Song
Cole Porter's "Gay Divorce" appeared on Broadway in 1932, had a London production in 1933 and a movie version in 1934.
"Night and Day," its principal song, has become the common property of street-corner hummers and shower-bath tenors: a near-indestructible artifact salvaged from an otherwise neglected show.
Porter's comic stew of wisecracking Americans and vague Britons ran for 248 performances in New York, closing presumably because people stopped wanting to see it.
There is something both sad and invigorating about this adherence to supply and demand.
For in order to understand the show's irresistible energy, one must first examine its need to succeed.
"Gay Divorce" bursts with the desire to sell tickets and make audiences happy.
In contrast is the current world of subsidized opera where audiences pay only a fraction of the bills and public and private begging make up the rest.


Barge Catches Fire Under Bayonne Bridge


McGwire Flunks Heel Checkup
As if last place wasn't bad enough, the Oakland Athletics have been dealt another blow.
Slugger MARK McGWIRE may be out for at least another three weeks with a heel injury.
McGwire, who went on the disabled list May 14, had a cast removed from his left foot Wednesday, but his bruised heel showed little improvement.
"There's still soreness when he puts pressure on it, still that knife-like feeling when he pushes off," trainer BARRY WEINBERG said.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
The Boston Globe is to be sold to The New York Times Co. under a $1.1 billion merger agreement approved by the boards of both companies.  [ Page A1. ]  In the more than a century since its founding, The Globe has helped shape the identity of Boston and played a part in the life of the nation as well.  [ D18. ]
Galen Health Care and Columbia Hospital will merge in a $4 billion deal that creates the nation's largest hospital chain.  [ D1. ]


Bill Baker, 58, Is Dead; Master of Tribal Songs
Bill Baker, the lead singer and music adviser for the American Indian Dance Theater, died on Tuesday in Minot, N.D.
He was 58.
The cause was a heart attack, said Les Schecter, his press representative.


Salomon to Pay $54.5 Million
Salomon Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to pay $54.5 million to settle lawsuits filed by holders of the company's stock and bonds as a result of its misdeeds at Treasury auctions in 1989 through 1991.
If the settlement is approved in Federal court, the only remaining claims resulting from the Treasury auction scandal would be a handful of suits, including one class action claim, filed by investors in Treasury securities who said they had suffered losses.
Lawyers familiar with the cases said they expected the settlement in those cases would cost less than the suits brought by the investors in Salomon securities.


It's Pee Wee's Brooklyn Adventure
Mark Reese has "hung around" a father and retired shortstop named Pee Wee for 36 years down home in Louisville, Ky.
The filmmaker grew up with tales of daddy and the Duke, Jackie and Gil, Campy and Newk: the entire course catalogue of the Brooklyn Dodgers from the early 1940's to the late 1950's.
About a year ago, Reese detoured from producing a film about Cooperstown and the Baseball Hall of Fame to one solely about his father, "Pee Wee Reese: The Quiet Ambassador," a project that will grow into individual films about Roy Campanella, Duke Snider, Jackie Robinson, Sandy Koufax and Don Drysdale.


Tied to Bonds
The likelihood of a Federal tax increase has spurred demand for tax-exempt municipal bonds, particularly those whose interest and principal payments are insured.
Ambac Inc., a muni insurer, has benefited from that demand.
Yesterday, Merrill Lynch analysts gave Ambac their highest "buy" rating, and the stock rose.


Review/Theater; Reviving an Intimate Musical With Romantic Intentions
THE first time I ever walked out of a Broadway show was to see "She Loves Me" a second time.
It was Christmas week of 1963, and "She Loves Me," a sensitive flower among hard-edged comic blockbusters like "A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum" and "How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying," was surely a goner with the New Year.
It was now or never.
I bolted out of the 2 o'clock matinee of another flop (remember "Jennie," anyone?) to take one last look at "She Loves Me" at 3.
Though I didn't know much about anything else in 1963, time has borne out my youthful infatuation with "She Loves Me." The proof is at the Roundabout Theater Company, where this musical has finally received the exquisite revival of its fans' dreams and where surely new fans will soon be made by the legion.
An intimate work with nothing on its sophisticated mind other than romance, "She Loves Me" is no less an anomaly on Broadway today than it was 30 years ago.
Given how the world has aged since then, audiences may be hungrier than ever for this summons to a continuously melodic evening of sheer enchantment and complete escape.


Gergen to Quit Club, White House Reports
Three days after David R. Gergen, a Presidential counselor, vowed to retain his membership in the secretive all-male Bohemian Club, the White House today said that he planned to resign.
Dee Dee Myers, the White House press secretary, insisted that Mr.
Gergen's decision had nothing to do with the uproar this week over his membership.
She said that "in keeping with White House tradition," he was resigning from every board, commission and social organization to which he belonged.


Russia Seeks Leeway
Contending that an agreement on conventional forces in Europe is not letting it respond to new threats to its border security on the south, Russia has told the Clinton Administration that it wants to revise the treaty.
Officials said Washington was not interested in reopening the issue.
Article, page A5.


Accounts
*
Applied Microsystems Corp., Redmond, Wash., to Floathe Johnson Associates, Kirkland, Wash., to handle its account, previously at Elgin Syferd/DDB Needham, Seattle.
Billings were estimated at $3 million. *
Morrison Restaurants Inc., Mobile, Ala., to the Joey Reiman Agency, Atlanta, to handle the 250 restaurants in Morrison's Ruby Tuesday Group.
The incumbent, Ericson Marketing Communications, Nashville, will continue to handle advertising for Morrison's cafeterias.
Billings are estimated at $5 million.


Yankees Get Their Captain Back
Don Mattingly is the Yankee captain, he occupies the coveted third spot in the batting order and teammates speak glowingly of his work habits.
He returned to the lineup tonight for the first time since May 13, trying to help revive a team that had lost four of six games on this road trip without him.
Although Mattingly's return from a strained rib-cage muscle was treated with excitement by Manager Buck Showalter, Mattingly treated it indifferently.


Miscellany
*
The Publishers Information Bureau, New York, said magazine advertising pages in May increased 1.3 percent from May 1992, to 14,966.7 pages.
For the first five months of 1993, pages increased 3 percent, to 67,798.3.


Progress Reported in Olympia &amp; York Case
Cyrus R. Vance, the mediator in the struggle for control of the United States assets of the Olympia &amp; York real estate empire of Canada, reported to a Federal bankruptcy judge yesterday that progress had been made on the cross-border dispute between creditors.
It appeared that some concessions had been won by the creditors of the United States branch, who have been fighting to limit the powers of the accountant named by a Canadian court to administer the assets of the Canadian parent, Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd.
But some details apparently remained to be resolved, and Mr.
Vance told all parties in the case not to talk publicly about the matter.


Todd Shipyards reports earnings for Year to March 28


Shareholder Sues Utility
Merle Thorpe, Jr., a longtime shareholder of Citizens Utilities, broke with the company yesterday and sued its directors for approving an unusually generous pay package for Leonard Tow, the company's chairman and chief executive.
The suit, which accuses the directors of breaching their fiduciary duty for not standing up to Mr.
Tow, was filed in Delaware Chancery Court, joining four others that were filed last month by plaintiffs' attorneys.


Easing Out the F.B.I. Chief
The Administration wants the F.B.I.
Director, William S. Sessions, to step down and is negotiating when and how, officials said.
Page A18.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.92
3.80
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.10
3.09
3.63
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.24
3.25
3.77
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.69
5.69
6.94
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.87
6.88
7.87
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.80
7.80
8.81
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.88
5.88
6.61
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Calls for Aristide's Return to Haiti Sounded at Religious Celebration


A Gas Tax Isn't Broad Enough
President Clinton's B.T.U. tax is dead, killed by rising opposition in Congress.
But the Clinton budget plan can still survive if Administration supporters in the Senate pursue a simpler energy tax that will do what the B.T.U. tax couldn't -- raise tens of billions without triggering crippling opposition by American manufacturers.
A flawed alternative comes from Senator John Breaux, Democrat of Louisiana, who proposes to tax transportation fuels rather than all forms of energy.
The Breaux tax, which is gaining support in the Senate Finance Committee, would fall primarily on gasoline for cars and trucks.
And a gas tax, no matter what it's called, is unlikely to pass Congress because it strikes disproportionately at the West and rural areas where people drive long distances.


U.N. to Weigh Options on Bosnia Border Monitors
The Security Council unanimously adopted a resolution today asking Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali to prepare a report on "options for the possible deployment of international observers" to verify that Serbia is keeping its promise to cut off military aid to the Bosnian Serbs.
But the Council's decision remains an empty gesture that is unlikely to bring any action soon, because President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia has refused to allow such monitors into his republic.


We Listened, and Justice Marshall Talked
To the Editor:
"In Marshall Papers Case, Library Abuses Trust" (letters, June 3) and "Library of Congress -- or School for Scandal" (Op-Ed, May 27) claim the Library of Congress betrayed the intent of Justice Thurgood Marshall by opening his papers soon after his death last January.
Unfair, untrue.


CHRONICLE
She is a Federal district judge, one of the youngest in New York State, and she was almost the United States Attorney General.
Now, 28 years after graduating from Connecticut College, KIMBA WOOD has become a member of Phi Beta Kappa.
The honor was bestowed upon her on Wednesday evening at a cocktail party for graduates of the New London, Conn., college.
The party was at the New York apartment of JOANNE TOOR CUMMINGS, class of 1950, who told Judge Wood, "When you graduated from Connecticut College, something was forgotten."


LAWSUIT BY PRIEST CHARGES SEX ABUSE
A parish priest and two other men who say they were sexually abused by priests when they were children today sued Roman Catholic Church leaders under the Federal Racketeering Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act.
The suit in Federal District Court in neighboring Camden, N.J., is the first time the RICO statue has been invoked against church officials or in a sexual abuse case, according to legal experts.
The Rev.
Gary R. Hayes, one of the plaintiffs, is also the first priest to sue church officials for childhood sexual abuse by another.


Review/Photography; The Camera as a Weapon to Assault Modern Ills
It may seem a bit behind the curve, but the International Center of Photography has discovered the 1980's.
That, at least, is the impression one gets from "Commodity Image," the sprawling, preachy muddle of a show at the center's midtown branch through July 18.
"Commodity Image" is based on the idea, widespread among artists and critics in the 80's, that images in advertising and the mass media not only influence people's opinions, but also determine the way they behave and think.
Thus, it features work by Cindy Sherman, Laurie Simmons, Richard Prince, Louise Lawler and other artists, labeled post-modernist or appropriationist, who came to prominence in the 1980's with work that implicitly criticized the distortions of the mass media.
Also included are pictures by photographers like Barbara Norfleet, JoAnn Verburg, John Pfahl and Lee Friedlander, who are not usually considered in this context.


Lopez Plans Update of His Work at VW
Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua will meet the press in Hanover, Germany, and in Madrid on Monday, but he said he would not announce plans for a new Volkswagen A.G. assembly plant in the Basque region of Spain, as was widely speculated.
Instead, Mr.
Lopez said in a telephone interview today that he would review his progress as the head of production and purchasing, and as an efficiency expert, since he arrived at Volkswagen from the General Motors Corporation in March.


On My Mind; Pull Up the Gangplank
By nightfall that day, American immigration officials had made passengers off the Golden Venture feel right at home, as if they were still in China.
They put them in handcuffs, sent them to distant prisons and made sure they did not see any lawyers.
That is U.S. policy: Make an example of the ship's hungry and sodden human cargo for fleeing Communist China without the right papers and for still daring to think of asylum.
Show them what's what around here, so the wretched of the world do not get any ideas America is still always open-armed to them.


AIDS LINK TO V.D. BECOMES CLEARER
Researchers at the ninth international meeting on AIDS said here today that they had a better understanding of why people with other sexually transmitted diseases are at much higher risk of being infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
Several experts said greater efforts against all sexually transmitted diseases would help curtail the spread of H.I.V.
They pointed to the example of Sweden, where both sexually transmitted disease and reported H.I.V. infections are very low.


It's Not Too Late for Clinton to Get It Right; Persistent Slant
To the Editor:
Among my friends, and increasingly for me, a concern has been growing that The New York Times has in some sense sold out.
To whom?
I cannot say; indeed, I have no idea.
But we have all become increasingly shocked and troubled by the flagrant editorializing on your front page and in particular by what seems to have developed into a "get Clinton" obsession in your editorials and columns.


Sounds Around Town
Musical Maturity
Aztec Camera, Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-7880.
A decade ago, when he was still too young to drink legally in a club, Aztec Camera's singer and songwriter, Roddy Frame, cornered a little piece of the pop market.
A kind of post-punk Van Morrison, he combined a poetic sensitivity, a soulful voice, melancholy melodies and too much innocence in songs that burst with folkish exuberance; on the 1983 album "High Land, Hard Rain," his words tumbled out as if he couldn't believe how much he had to tell.
These days Mr.
Frame has mellowed a bit, and the arrangements on his fifth album, "Dreamland" (Sire)produced by Ryuichi Sakamoto, are smooth and sophisticated, tending toward synthesizers more than acoustic guitars; his voice is a little deeper and more resonant.
Yet his romanticism is still gloriously intact, and onstage he is the kind of performer who willingly gives himself away.
Tonight he is accompanied by just guitar and piano.
Shows start at 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets are $15.


Plan Seeks To Rebuild Downtown Of the Bronx
Gambling that an infusion of public money will reverse 25 years of decline, state, city and Bronx officials announced yesterday an ambitious plan to rebuild the Bronx's downtown.
They said the plan was aimed at encouraging private investment in the borough and keeping the Yankees in the Bronx.
The officials, announcing a proposal developed through Borough President Fernando Ferrer's office, admitted they had no guarantees on financing.
Rather, they said, the plan was intended as a framework for rebuilding the area around four huge public projects in the next decade at an estimated cost of $1 billion.


Rescue Team, Earn New Contract
JOHN LUCAS, who took over as San Antonio coach early last season and led the Spurs to a second-place finish in the National Basketball Association's Midwest Division, signed a four-year contract yesterday.
Terms of the pact were not disclosed.


Medical Group Battles to Be Heard Over Others on Health-Care Change
When the 435 delegates to the American Medical Association's governing congress arrive here Sunday for their annual summer meeting, the first speaker on the agenda will be Hillary Rodham Clinton.
The doctors will be listening closely for hints on who among them -- if anyone -- the Clinton Administration has been heeding as it develops its proposal for overhauling the nation's health-care system.
Until recently, there would not have been any question.
The medical association was the undisputed, all-powerful voice of medicine in Washington, and no major overhaul had much chance of succeeding without its cooperation.


Diner's Journal
Indies
Indies is part of the new wave of Caribbean-style restaurants washing over Manhattan.
Its pre-opening publicity described it as a West Indies restaurant and nightclub with a tropical rain forest decor, including "four active waterfalls surrounded by tropical plants and foliage, shell-shaped sconces, hemp-wrapped railings, slow-moving ceiling fans and an outrageous sound system."
The main dining room of Indies is colorful and cheerful, although the giant bandstand takes up about a fourth of the space.
The so-called waterfalls look like something you would see at a shopping mall, a series of pink cement pools fed by foot-long turquoise sluices.
Upstairs has a bar and more tables.


Koch Backs Badillo for Comptroller on 'Fusion' Ticket
Former Mayor Edward I. Koch yesterday endorsed a fellow Democrat, Herman Badillo, for New York City comptroller, saying it would not "upset" him if this helped the Republican "fusion" ticket.
Mr.
Koch, who had announced his support for Mr.
Badillo as a mayoral candidate before Mr.
Badillo dropped out of that race, said that he did not know who he would endorse for mayor now but that he expected to make a decision by September.
Mr.
Koch has hinted at the possibility of an endorsement of the Republican candidate, Rudolph W. Giuliani, against the Democratic incumbent, David N. Dinkins, and yesterday he did little to dispel that notion.
A Multiparty Alliance
Asked by reporters during a news conference on the steps of City Hall whether he would be helping the Giuliani camp by standing behind Mr.
Badillo, Mr.
Koch answered, "If it happens, I'm not going to be upset."


It's Not Too Late for Clinton to Get It Right; On to New Hampshire
To the Editor:
It is startling to watch with what glee the Republicans are trekking to New Hampshire, convinced that their efforts to tar Bill Clinton as a "tax and spend liberal" will bring dividends in 1996.
The ink wasn't dry on the election results before Jack Kemp hit the mashed-potato circuit.


Japan Opens Door Wider to Foreign Press
Breaking down a longtime barrier to the flow of information abroad, Japan's newspaper editors voted today to allow foreign journalists to join the exclusive press clubs that have jealously guarded access to Government officials and important corporate and financial data.
The action came as a number of non-Japanese news organizations were threatening to make a trade issue of the press club system.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE BASEBALL  Wichita State Advances to Title Game  Freshman Casey Blake drove in five runs to lead Wichita State to a 10-4 victory over Oklahoma State yesterday and a berth in the championship game of the College World Series in Omaha.
Tomorrow, seventh-seeded Wichita State (58-16) will be in its fourth championship game in six trips to the Division I baseball championships.
The Shockers will play the winner of today's game between fifth-seeded Louisiana State (51-17-1) and fourth-seeded Long Beach State (46-18).
The Shockers, who beat Oklahoma State 12-7 with a late rally in their regular-season meeting this year, took the lead early this time.
Walks to Joey Adams, Richie Taylor and Darren Dreifort, his an intentional one with two out, set up Joey Jackson's two-run double in the third.
Blake then drove in two with a single and Adam McCollough followed a single by Tommy Tilma with another single to drive in a fifth run off Cowboys starter Jake Benz (9-2).
Joe Wallace doubled and Ernesto Rivera drove him home with a single in the bottom of the inning, but Wichita State matched that when Jackson walked with the bases loaded in the fourth. (AP) TENNIS  3 Big Names Move to Quarterfinals  Three former Wimbledon champions, Stefan Edberg of Sweden and Germans Boris Becker and Michael Stich, all advanced to the quarterfinals with victories yesterday at the Queen's Club grass-court championships in London.
The second-seeded Edberg turned back a fierce third-set challenge from No. 15-seeded American Richey Reneberg to win by 7-6 (7-3), 3-6, 6-2.
Edberg defeated Reneberg for the sixth time in seven meetings but did not gain control until he came back from 40-0 to break serve and take a 3-1 lead in the final set.
Becker defeated the 14th-seeded Frenchman, Guillaume Raoux, by 6-4, 6-4, in 80 minutes.
Stich marched past 12th-seeded David Wheaton of the United States, 6-4, 6-3.
In another match, Grant Stafford, Wednesday's upset winner over top-ranked Pete Sampras, ended his run with a 6-4, 6-3 loss to No. 16 Marc Goellner. (AP) Shriver Rallies to Win: The former champion Pam Shriver found some of her former magic yesterday, recovering from a breakdown in the final set to defeat Mana Endo of Japan, 4-6, 7-6 (7-5), 6-4, at the women's grass-court championships at Edgbaston, England.
Shriver, seeded No. 7, won the event from 1984-87.
She fell behind by 3-1 in the third but fought back to win on her first match point when Endo netted a backhand.
"I'm grateful I dug this match out," Shriver said.
"This is the kind of player on grass I would have chewed up and spat out a few years ago." Second-seeded South African Amanda Coetzer joined Martina Navratilova on the sidelines after losing by 7-6 (7-1), 6-2 to Chanda Rubin, seeded 15th.
Nathalie Tauziat of France is now the top-ranked player in the event.
The third-seeded Tauziat progressed to the quarterfinals with a 6-3, 6-4 victory over Claire Wegink of the Netherlands. (AP)


Intersolv reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Rose Cancels Cooperstown Visit
PETE ROSE has canceled a trip to Cooperstown, N.Y., home of baseball's Hall of Fame, after he received criticism that the trip would steal the spotlight from REGGIE JACKSON, who is due to be inducted on Aug. 1.
Rose, baseball's career leader in hits, was banned from baseball for life in 1989 for having gambled on major league games and is ineligible for induction into the Hall of Fame.


Landfill Operators Plead Guilty To Taking State Property on L.I.
Two landfill operators pleaded guilty today to appropriating 25 acres of state land at the edge of the Pilgrim Psychiatric Center in Brentwood and turning it into a sand mine and dump for construction and demolition debris.
The illegal operation continued for more than a decade despite fines and the operators' promises to stop.
Authorities estimated that almost $1 million worth of sand and gravel was stolen.


U.S. and North Koreans Press Nuclear Talks
The United States and North Korea failed again last night to resolve a dispute over Pyongyang's nuclear weapons program, but representatives of the two countries were to meet today in a last-ditch effort to reach agreement on the issue.
With North Korea's withdrawal from the treaty to halt the spread of nuclear weapons to take effect tomorrow, American officials said they may have no alternative but to turn to the United Nations for help in compelling Pyongyang to rejoin the accord and open its nuclear sites for inspection.


A Bitter Past Sweetens The Cup for Demers
For the longest time, Jacques Demers was unwanted.
There was the summer he sat in his house in Farmington Hills, Mich., and watched Cubs games on television, raked leaves in the yard, and tried not to think about the coming hockey season.
There were all those wistful nights when he sat in a radio booth in Quebec and gave commentary on some other coach and his hockey team.
There were the endless days when the telephone just didn't ring.
He was afraid, then, even to dream of this moment.
Dropped by the Detroit Red Wings in 1990, treated like an outcast by National Hockey League general managers, Demers didn't know whether he'd ever get another chance to coach.
And he certainly didn't think he would someday have this job: Coach of his hometown Montreal Canadiens, the most storied franchise in National Hockey League history, a team that he led to an unparalleled 24th Stanley Cup in his first year as head coach.


MOYNIHAN HOLDING WELL-TIMED PARTY
A week before the Senate Finance Committee began reworking President Clinton's economic package, supporters of Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan mailed invitations to lobbyists for a fund-raising event that reminded them of the New York Democrat's enhanced influence as chairman of the panel.
No laws were broken by Mr.
Moynihan or by his campaign organization, and his aides noted that the Senator did not know who was invited nor who was responding to the invitation to an event that will be held a month after the committee completes its work.


Belmont Stewards Suspend Migliore
Belmont Park stewards have suspended RICHARD MIGLIORE for seven calendar days for careless riding aboard Game Wager in Monday's second race.
The suspension, handed down Wednesday, will begin Saturday and keep Migliore idle through June 18. (AP)


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  MEXICO CAPTURES SUSPECT  After an intense manhunt, Mexican police announced the capture of one of Mexico's most powerful cocaine traffickers and said he would be charged in connection with killing a Roman Catholic Cardinal.
A1  MACEDONIA TO GET U.S.
TROOPS  The United States said it would send 300 peacekeeping troops to Macedonia to help contain the Bosnian war.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher depicted the offer as a "deterrent force." A1


TSI Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Review/Film; Screen Stars With Teeth To Spare
STEVEN SPIELBERG'S "Jurassic Park" is a true movie milestone, presenting awe- and fear-inspiring sights never before seen on the screen.
The more spectacular of these involve the fierce, lifelike dinosaurs that stalk through the film with astounding ease.
Much scarier, however, are those aspects of "Jurassic Park" that establish it as the overnight flagship of a brand-new entertainment empire.
Even while capturing the imagination of its audience, this film lays the groundwork for the theme-park rides, sequels and souvenirs that insure the "Jurassic Park" experience will live on.
And on.
And on.
The timing of this cinematic marketing coup could not be better, since an entire generation of children has fallen in love with dinosaurs, transforming the fossils of yesteryear into the totems of today.
On the other hand, "Jurassic Park" has its planning problems, since this PG-13-rated film is clearly too frightening for the young viewers who could have best appreciated its magic, and who will most easily be drawn in by its marketing arm.
Parents and guardians, take note: children who think of Tyrannosaurus rex as a huge hunk of friendly, prehistoric exotica will not want to see a T. rex bite a lawyer in half.


Police Officer Pleads Guilty in Case That Spotlighted Corruption
More than a year after his arrest, former Police Officer Michael Dowd pleaded guilty yesterday to the crimes that made him a symbol of corruption in the New York City Police Department.
But in a tense, emotional session in Federal District Court in Manhattan, Judge Kimba M. Wood said that she might toughen the plea bargain agreement made between Mr.
Dowd and prosecutors, and perhaps sentence him to more prison time than had been agreed upon.
He could not withdraw the plea.


Review/Theater; A Territorial Struggle of Lost and Found Souls
In Shem Bitterman's "Ten Below," at the WPA Theater, Kevin Conway plays the most woebegone of homeless people.
He is a piece of human refuse, desperately willing himself into nonexistence.
As he speaks, Mr.
Conway reveals a spark of former magnetism.
Behind the filthy exterior, his eyes have a fierce intensity and his voice growls with native cunning.
The actor has a most commanding presence onstage, and, in contrast to many of his peers, he seems firmly committed to working Off Broadway.
His role in "Ten Below" is closely related to the title character in "The Caretaker." As in the Pinter play, a stranger (in this case, Anthony Edwards as a seemingly staid do-gooder) brings a vagrant back to his seedy home and welcomes him as a guest.
Instead of insinuating itself into our emotions or disarming us with jolts of black comedy, as in Pinter, Mr.
Bitterman's play becomes a waiting and delaying game.


Japan's Chief Economist Sees Signs of Recovery
Japan's chief economist, in a step toward declaring an end to the nation's worst recession in two decades, said today that the economy would deteriorate no further and that signs of recovery were coming into view.
"The economy has generally hit bottom," Hajime Funada, director general of the Economic Planning Agency, told a Cabinet meeting today.
His remarks came as the agency submitted a monthly report on the economy that while far from ebullient had a somewhat more positive tone than in recent months.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Gabriel Preil, an American poet and translator skilled in Hebrew who died on Saturday at 82, omitted a survivor.
He is Mr.
Preil's brother, Joseph Kushner of Brooklyn.


Discharge of Lesbian Urged by Navy Panel
A Navy board recommended today that a reserve officer be honorably discharged for being a lesbian, despite her lawyers' argument that the action violated a Federal judge's ruling made last winter.
Lieut.
Zoe Dunning, a 29-year-old reserve supply officer, announced her homosexuality at a rally in January because, she said, she expected President Clinton to lift the military's ban on homosexuals.
She said after the decision today: "It's difficult to be put on trial for who you are. My service record had no input."


A Name and a Date For Letterman Show
David Letterman cannot take the title "Late Night" with him when he moves to CBS this summer because it belongs to NBC.
But he will be doing the next best thing, CBS announced yesterday.
He will call his new program "Late Show."
The show will have its premiere on Aug. 30, the network said, and will run Mondays through Fridays from 11:35 P.M. to 12:35 A.M.


Meca Software (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31





German-Led Group Backed In Los Angeles Rail-Car Bid
A team of military contractors led by a German rail-car maker was recommended today for a $205 million contract to build 72 rail cars for this city's new mass transit system.
The rail-car contract is likely to prove another test of whether weapons makers can successfully transfer their skills to civilian uses.
It also reflects a heightened awareness by transit officials to buy from American companies.
Transit officials were forced to cancel a contract that had been awarded to the Sumitomo Corporation amid a backlash over selecting a foreign owned company.


Restaurants
On soft spring evenings La Metairie sparkles like a seductive beacon in the heart of the West Village, its white-trimmed windows swung open to reveal candlelight, white walls with wooden beams and cheerful Provencal colors.
La Metairie may well be the most romantic restaurant downtown, and better yet, you don't need to be an Onassis heir to enjoy it.
La Metairie (the name means small cooperative farm) once held the distinction of being one of the smallest white-tablecloth restaurants in Manhattan, with fewer than two dozen seats in one barnlike room.
In 1991 the owner, Sylvain Fareri, renovated an adjacent grocery store and more than doubled the seating while maintaining the enchanting Provencal farmhouse look.
Stuccolike white walls have dark wood trim and hold farm utensils; firewood is stacked on overhead ledges; banquettes and chairs are covered with sunny Provencal fabrics, and candlelight gives it all an enchanting glow.
No wonder you see so many couples holding hands there.


Cleaning up After the Storm


Can't Hear Whistle Blowing, Can You?
Michael Jordan may or may not have lost $1.2 million betting on golf, but the bottom-line figure for David Stern and the rest of the National Basketball Association yesterday was 16.8.
That's what Game 1 of the league finals drew as a rating for the network Wednesday night, the commissioner was happy to announce.
If only Michael Jordan's gambling explanations rated that high.


Review/Cabaret; Mary Rodgers's Songs In a Patchwork on Romance
The songs of Mary Rodgers, except for two or three from the 1959 show "Once Upon a Mattress," are virtually unknown beyond a coterie of music-theater aficionados.
But "Hey, Love," a compact and very smart new cabaret revue at Eighty-Eight's (228 West 10th Street, Greenwich Village), could widen that audience if it was successfully expanded into an Off Broadway show.
"Hey, Love," which was conceived and directed by Richard Maltby Jr., weaves 18 of Ms.
Rodgers's songs into a tautly witty psychological and musical patchwork about love and its discontents.
Two men (J. Mark McVey and Thom Sesma) and one woman (Donna Murphy) portray hypercritical urban malcontents who engage in romantic power games with each other while dreaming of fairy-tale endings.
The three performers, who have strong voices, imbue the scenarios Mr.
Maltby has built around them with a real charge of romantic energy.
Ms.
Murphy, who is particularly impressive, goes from smoldering to bratty to pensive without missing a beat.


Art in Review
Alan Shields
Paula Cooper Gallery  149 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through Wednesday
Visiting a show of Alan Shields's work in the early 1970's was a little like camping out in paradise.
His tie-dyed cloth hangings, with their bursts of soft vegetable colors, their mandalalike patterns and their delicate beadwork, were a kind of joyous hippie dream come true.
Often free-hanging, they blurred the distinction between painting and sculpture, high art and low, and turned the dour minimalist grid into a malleable open-work design.


Record Low Dropout Rate Is Met With Skepticism
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez yesterday reported the lowest dropout rate ever recorded in New York City, a rate far lower than that reported by virtually all other large urban school systems in the country.
It was the fourth consecutive year of declining dropout rates, and Mr.
Fernandez, who leaves office at the end of the month, attributed the success largely to changes he introduced during his stormy three-and-a-half-year tenure as Chancellor.


Scott Barrie Is Dead; Designer, 52, Made Jersey Matte Dresses
Scott Barrie, an American designer known for sexy matte jersey dresses in the 1960's and 70's, died on Tuesday at the Alessandria Hospital in Alessandria, Italy, outside Milan.
He was 52 and had lived in Italy for 11 years.
The cause of death was brain cancer, said his sister, Christine Walker.


Art in Review
Annette Messager
Josh Baer Gallery  476 Broome Street  SoHo  Through June 26
Dark images of mobs carrying the heads of aristocrats on poles are summoned up by Annette Messager's most ambitious work here, "Les Piques" (The Pikes).
The piece includes 183 thin metal rods, from three to eight feet long, which lean against two walls of the gallery.
Impaled on about half the rods are stuffed cloth forms that suggest parts of dolls; the other poles carry drawings, done in crayon or colored pencil and sealed in glass.


2 SIDES IN BOSNIA SIGN A CEASE-FIRE
The commanders of the mostly Muslim Bosnian Army and the main Croatian militia in Bosnia signed a cease-fire today aimed at immediatedly ending clashes in central Bosnia, United Nations officials here said.
The agreement, signed by the Army commander, Rasim Delic, and the commander of the Croatian Defense Council, Milivoj Petkovic, called for a cease-fire at 2 P.M., the officials said after a meeting in the Croat-controlled town of Kiseljak.
The agreement reaffirms a similar agreement signed on May 12, the officials said.


Hint to Fed On Rates Is Louder
A day before the release of a closely watched report on inflation, the White House subtly turned up the pressure today on the Federal Reserve not to raise short-term interest rates, suggesting that inflationary pressures remain weak.
After announcing that President Clinton met Wednesday night with the Federal Reserve's chairman, the White House press secretary, Dee Dee Myers, sent the central bank a clear message, saying that Administration officials "believe there is no real inflationary pressure in the economy."


TRANSACTIONS
Auto racing
INTERNATIONAL AUTOMOBILE FEDERATION -- Elected Max Mosley president; Cesar Torres deputy president of the World Motor Sports Council, and Paul Verkuil deputy president of the Council for Tourism and Automobiles, effective October 1.
Football  National Football League
MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Signed Issiac Holt, cornerback. Waived Amir Rasul, running back.
NEW YORK JETS -- Signed David Ware, offensive tackle, and Richie Anderson, running back.
SAN DIEGO CHARGERS -- Signed John Carney, placekicker.
TAMPA BAY BUCCANEERS -- Signed Van Waiters, linebacker. Arena Football League
ALBALY NHREBIRDS -- Signed Mark Valvo, offensive and defensive lineman.
CHARLOTTE RAGE -- Signed Larry Jones, offensive and defensive lineman.
Placed ilMy Marsh, wide receiver-defensive back, and Junior Jackson, running back-linebacker, on injurel ruqerve.
CINCINNATI ROCKERS -- Acquired Gary Mullen, wide receiver-defensive back, from the Detroit Drive for future considerations.
Signed John Clark, running back-linebacker.
Placed Lamar Davis, offensive-defensive lineman.
CLEVELAND THUNDERBOLTS -- Signed Eddie Polly, wide receiver-defensive back.
Activated Marvin Mattox, wide receiver-defensive back.
Suspended Zack Dumas, wide receiver-defensive back.
Placed Bill Schafer, wide receiver-defensive back, on waivers.
DETROIT DRIVE -- Signed James Goode, offensive-defensive lineman.
Suspended John Corker, offensive-defensive lineman.
ORLANDO PREDATORS -- Activated Chris Ford, wide recekvms-dedefrive back, and Curt Mull, offensive/dmgensive lineman.
Placed Henry Brown, offensive-defensive lineman, on injured reserve.
Horse racing
BIRMINGHAM RACE COURSE -- Suspended Chuck Costanzo, jockey, for the remainder of this year's thoroughbred meet for betting on a greyhound race.
Soccer  Continental Indoor Soccer League
SAN DIEGO SOCKERS -- Signed Bobby Harmon and Dan Kelly, midfielders, ent Raul Gelvezon, forward.


Shares of 3M Plummet on Sales Report
Shares of the Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company plunged today after the company said slower-than-expected domestic sales growth would cause it to miss Wall Street's projections for the second quarter.
3M shares fell $10, to $105.75, in heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
The 8.6 percent decline accounted for much of the drop in the Dow Jones industrial average, in which 3M is one of 30 stocks.


Florio Bars Blind Trusts for State's Top Officials
Gov.
Jim Florio issued an executive order today that will eliminate the use of blind trusts by top state employees.
The order is intended to stop New Jersey officials from using blind trusts to shield assets that would otherwise be subject to conflict-of-interest scrutiny.
The order would also prohibit companies owned by the workers -- senior officials of the executive branch and others appointed by the Governor -- from doing business with government at any level, from Federal to local.


Village Super Market reports earnings for 13wks to April 17


Germany And Brazil Battle to Stalemate
Brazil was Brazil for the first half, dashing and deceptive on the way to a three-goal lead.
Germany was Germany for the second, persistent and efficient in its meticulous comeback.
The result today at steamy Robert F. Kennedy Stadium was a 3-3 tie in the U.S.
Cup tournament, a stylistic stalemate between two national soccer teams that could very well meet next summer in the final of the 1994 World Cup.


O'Brien Set Back by Infection
DAN O'BRIEN, the world-record holder in the decathlon, has a prostate infection that could hamper his performance at the USA-Mobil Outdoor Track and Field Championships at Eugene, Ore., next week.
His coach, MIKE KELLER, said yesterday by telephone that O'Brien missed five days of workouts and would not get back onto the track at the University of Oregon until Tuesday, the opening of the decathlon competition.


Rabin, in Arab Interview, Offers U.S. Role in Vote
In the first interview given by an Israeli leader to a Palestinian newspaper, Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin was quoted today as saying members of the United States Congress may monitor future elections that would be held under Palestinian self-rule in Israeli-occupied territories.
Mr.
Rabin also said Arabs in East Jerusalem might be allowed to vote in those elections, a significant statement in that Israel usually draws clear distinctions between Jerusalem and the territories, having declared it to be the country's unified capital.
But even if given the vote, Jerusalem residents would not be able to run for office, he said.


On Stage, and Off
'Sunset Boulevard' Postponement
A bizarre technical snafu has forced Andrew Lloyd Webber to cancel several previews of "Sunset Boulevard" in London and postpone the openingof the musical from June 29 until July 12.
According to a statement issued yesterday by Mr.
Lloyd Webber, the production was two weeks behind schedule because newly installed hydraulic valves, necessary for moving scenery around on stage, were faulty.
A New York press representative for the show, Peter Brown, explained further that the valves, which are radio operated, proved "susceptible to interference from every cellular phone in London." Unable to find the problem, the suppliers simply had to remove the new valves and put the old ones back.
The work has kept the cast from rehearsing on stage.


NEW U.S. PROGRAM OF STUDENT LOANS CLEARS KEY PANEL
The Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee today approved a modified version of President Clinton's proposal to put the Federal Government in the business of lending money directly to college students.
The plan, which is now almost certain to be enacted in some form, is intended to cut costs both to students and to the Government, which now acts as a guarantor of student loans made by private financial institutions.


Dow Falls by 20.21 as 3M Shares Tumble
A big plunge in shares of Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing, one of the 30 stocks in the Dow Jones industrial average, sent the blue-chip index lower yesterday.
Without 3M's decline the market was fairly flat, analystss said.
The Dow industrials finished down 20.21 points, to 3,491.72.


Art in Review
Orshi Drozdik
Tom Cugliani Gallery  40 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through June 26
Orshi Drozdik's installation is based on some of the most frequently encountered themes of current art -- the vulnerability of the body, the duplicity of science, desire as an existential state -- but still manages to make something suggestive of them.


Nigeria Court Ruling Delays Presidential Election
Nigeria's first multiparty presidential elections in nearly a decade were put in jeopardy tonight after a senior court ordered the military Government not to conduct the balloting scheduled for Saturday.
The decision by the high court in Abuja, the new capital, appeared to have been decided largely on procedural grounds.
A lawsuit to suspend the elections had been brought by the Association for a Better Nigeria, a group of private citizens which had sponsored a campaign calling for the country's military leader, Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida, to remain in office for at least another four years.


Juan Downey, 53, A Pioneer Of Video as a Medium for Art
Juan Downey, a well-known video artist whose work helped establish his medium as a serious art form, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 53 and also had a home in Patchogue, L.I.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Marilys.


Dollar Hits New Low Vs. the Yen
The dollar hit a new low against the yen yesterday even as the manager of the nation's currency market dealings stressed the need for stability.
Administration officials have been talking the dollar down against the yen this year to promote exports and discourage imports, in hopes of narrowing the vast trade deficit with Japan.
William J. McDonough, manager of the Federal Reserve System's open market account, set a contrasting tone at a quarterly briefing yesterday, stating the Government's intent to avoid a headlong selloff.


Arthur Bullowa, 83, Longtime Collector And Patron of Arts
Arthur M. Bullowa, a Manhattan lawyer who was an art collector and patron of the arts, died on Tuesday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in Manhattan.
He was 83.
He had had a long illness, said David Praeger, the executor of his estate.


Jobs Shuffled at Chrysler
The Chrysler Corporation said today that it was juggling the responsibilities of three of its top officers.
Chrysler reassigned Joseph E. Cappy, 59, to become vice president of technologies and rental car operations.
Mr.
Cappy has been vice president for international operations at Chrysler since 1990.
Previously, Gary C. Valade, the company's new chief financial officer, supervised the rental car companies.


With Barkley, Grant Has a Tiger by the Tail
Horace Grant, the median strip between Charles Barkley and the basket, was still in one piece today.
Assigned on Wednesday night to shadow Barkley, with absolutely no help, Grant never took his goggled eyes off of the Phoenix Suns' Goliath and was able to obstruct 16 of Barkley's spinning shots.
This afternoon, Grant did not know whether to gloat or run for cover.
The Chicago Bulls, with Barkley out of their hair, turned Game 1 of this National Basketball Association championship series into a casual 100-92 victory, although a conglomerate of Bulls players have since tortured Grant with stormy predictions for Friday's Game 2.


The diversity of gay men and lesbians is highlighted in a subway pitch for tolerance.
CAN tolerance be sold like soap or soup?
And if it can, can it be sold in -- of all places -- the subway?
An advocacy organization for gay men and lesbians is betting a fair amount of its annual budget that the answer to both questions is yes.
Beginning Monday, a campaign intended to promote the "fair, accurate and inclusive representation" of gay men and lesbians will appear amid the typically prosaic advertising posters found in New York City subway cars.


Death Toll Rises to More Than 500 in Liberian Massacre


Young Toughs of Fuk Ching Gang Mourn 4
The four coffins lay open.
Fifteen young men in loose-fitting double-breasted black suits, black ties and wrap-around sunglasses walked past them in silence, some bowing slightly.
The men in the coffins were young, too, and dressed identically in black suits, except for one with a favorite Yankees baseball cap placed on his head.
They were all members of the Fuk Ching, law-enforcement officials said, a Chinatown gang linked to the smuggling of illegal aliens, including those aboard the ship that ran aground in Queens early Sunday.


Purepac Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Chemi-Trol Chemical Co. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Tracks of Mystery Disease Lead to New Form of Virus
As the death of a young Navajo woman dashed hopes that an epidemic of a flu-like illness had begun to abate in the Southwest, Federal health officials said yesterday that a new or previously unrecognized strain of virus may have caused the mysterious outbreak.
The woman, a 22-year-old from Gallup, N.M., died Wednesday night after being flown by helicopter to a hospital in Albuquerque for emergency treatment.
Another recent death in the region was also attributed yesterday to the disease, bringing the tentative death toll to 14.


CHRONICLE
Being on stage hardly makes ITZHAK PERLMAN nervous, but he was a touch apprehensive about his debut as a theatrical actor.
"I have made little sort of appearances on television shows, but I have never acted live on stage before," he said yesterday, talking about his co-starring role in a children's play to be performed twice today at Lincoln Center as part of a series called "Celebrations."
The play, "Claire's Broom Detective Agency: The Mystery of the Missing Violin," tells the story of a renowned violinist, Abraham Strauss-Stokowsky (played by Mr. Perlman, who else?).
"In the middle of a rehearsal, my fiddle disappears and Detective Claire is in charge of finding it," he said.


Issue of Indian Sovereignty Behind Gambling Case
At the eastern edge of the Everglades, busloads of bingo players pour in nightly from nearby Miami to the cavernous Miccosukee Indian Bingo Hall here.
Armed with good luck trinkets like snapshots of grandchildren or voodoo dolls, they silently mark their cards and munch on cheese fries as they play.
But the calm, almost mechanical quality of the game is misleading.
Having defied a Federal judge, the tiny tribe that owns the gambling hall is embroiled in a bitter legal battle based on a constitutional challenge to the doctrine of Indian sovereignty as well as a contract dispute.


7 Suspended
Seven players involved in Sunday's brawl between the Seattle Mariners and the Baltimore Orioles received a total of 27 days in suspensions yesterday from the American League president, Bobby Brown.
Four Mariners were suspended -- Chris Bosio for five games; Norm Charlton for four, and Mackey Sasser and Bill Haselman for three games each.


Answers Still Needed On Crown Heights
To the Editor:
"Crown Heights Was Not Iasi" by Joyce Purnick (Editorial Notebook, June 3) stated of the events that took place in Brooklyn in the summer of 1991: "Police protection was inadequate, to put it mildly. Why?"
It is clear that irrespective of investigations undertaken by the Federal and state governments and a private lawsuit, that the New York City Council has the responsibility to look into the horrendous attack on the Jewish residents of Crown Heights.


Friedman Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Senate Panel Making Painful Progress on Budget
Slowly and painfully, the elements of a Senate compromise on President Clinton's package of tax increases and spending cuts began to fall into place today.
They include a comparatively small tax on motor fuels, a partial rollback of Mr.
Clinton's plan to raise Social Security taxes and a patchwork of spending cuts in Medicare, food stamps and other benefit programs.
But while the outlines of an agreement among the Senate Finance Committee's 11 fractious Democrats were clear, details remained muddy, and officials said no final accord had been worked out.


Haiti: End the Charade
After 20 months of dithering, Washington finally seems to have summoned the political will to apply serious pressure for the restoration of democracy in Haiti.
The United States, Canada, Venezuela and France are preparing to ask the U.N.
Security Council to slap a worldwide ban on oil shipments to Haiti, backed up by Chapter 7 of the U.N.
Charter, which authorizes the use of military force.
The oil embargo would reinforce a toothless Western Hemisphere economic embargo.
And it would be accompanied by a new round of political negotiations timed to exploit Tuesday's resignation of Marc Bazin, the military's figurehead Prime Minister.


Frank J. Donner Is Dead at 82; A Lawyer in Civil Liberties Cases
Frank J. Donner, a civil liberties lawyer who was an expert on the use of government surveillance and informers to discourage political dissent, died yesterday at a hospice in Branford, Conn.
He was 82 and lived in Hamden, Conn.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


I Can't Believe I Went to the Prom
I know that many people, especially New Agers, have much more transcendental, significant realizations, but I still can't believe that I went to the prom.
I thought that the prom only happened in a place called Teen World, where girls my age budget their time between pep squad, fawning over pictures of Doogie Howser and being upstanding citizens.
I learned about Teen World from magazines, movies and sit-coms.
It is a realm where skimpy clothes, a body to wear them and a boy to appreciate both are the holy trinity.
To have different priorities is virtually unheard of.
Luckily, in Teen World, girls who look darn near anorexic always seem tremendously happy.
They also seem to be free from the street harassment that wearing, say, the low-cut body suit that YM magazine recommends as date wear this month tends to incur.
And in Teen World, there is never a contradiction between a near-reverent focus on boys and a subtle but equally intense emphasis on the sanctity of virginity.


At the Bar; An all-star New York lawyer disputes the idea that he's become a White House bumbler.
Early in the afternoon of June 3, as the candidacy of Lani Guinier disintegrated and the search for a Supreme Court Justice intensified, Bernard Nussbaum slipped out of the White House counsel's office.
He had an appointment in New York, and he was determined to keep it.
Months earlier, before names like Zoe, Kimba and Lani were to be bandied about as often as Oprah, the Federal Bar Council of New York made plans to honor Mr.
Nussbaum, its past president.
When the event rolled around, the 56-year-old lawyer received the usual lawyerly doo-dad -- this time, an antique British wig box -- but also something far more precious: a loving hometown respite from the finger-pointing, second-guessing, and character-assassinating he was enduring in Washington.


The Spoken Word
PSYCHOANALYTIC DISCUSSION, Karen Horney Clinic Building Auditorium, 329 East 62d Street.
A screening of Jean-Luc Godard's film "Une Femme Mariee" ("A Married Woman") directed by Jean-Luc Godard, followed by a discussion.
Tonight at 7:30.
Admission: $7; $4 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 838-8044.
POETRY READING, Biblio's Bookstore and Cafe, 317 Church Street, TriBeCa.
Todd Colby and Jill Rapaport read from their work.
Sunday at 5.
Admission: $3.
Information: (212) 334-6990.


Groundwater Technology Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Judge in Boston Is Called Likely For High Court
After a week in which speculation swung from one candidate to another, White House officials said today that Stephen G. Breyer, a Federal appeals court judge from Boston, had emerged as President Clinton's most likely nominee for the Supreme Court.
Judge Breyer, who has been hospitalized since a bicycle accident last week, is scheduled to fly to Washington on Friday after his release to have lunch with Mr.
Clinton.
Several officials said the President hoped to make an announcement of a replacement for Justice Byron R. White, who is retiring, in the next two days.


Wake of Gang Members Draws a Parade in Chinatown


Review/Architecture; Jewish Museum Renovation: A Celebration of Gothic Style
WHAT did Kevin Roche set out to do?
How well did he do it?
Was it worth doing?
If Mr.
Roche's design for the Jewish Museum's new expansion brings to mind Goethe's standard formula for critical appraisal, that may be because the design itself is somewhat formulaic.
It is an appealing formula, and Mr.
Roche carries it off with devotion and skill.
The building does not lack conviction.
But it does lack depth.
This Sunday's long-awaited reopening of the museum after two and a half years of renovations brings to fulfillment an ambitious plan, conceived in 1989, to give the Jewish Museum a home worthy of its mission.
With a permanent collection of more than 27,000 objects -- ranging from archeological artifacts to contemporary paintings -- this is the major American museum devoted to Jewish culture and history.
The museum has grown in stages since its founding in 1904, when it was provisionally housed in the library of the Jewish Theological Seminary.
Since 1947, it has occupied the former Warburg Mansion on Fifth Avenue at 92d Street.
The choice of Mr.
Roche, an internationally celebrated architect whose achievements include the master plan for additions to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, insured that the museum would assume an even grander presence on Museum Mile.


Wanted: Contributors in Search of Immortality
Call it an answer to the yearning for immortality: for a price, universities and colleges will carve the name of a generous benefactor in limestone on an imposing building.
Too costly?
The donor can opt for a piece of the building -- a student lounge, a science laboratory, a library, even a photography darkroom -- dedicated in perpetuity with a bronze plaque.
The practice of marketing buildings and other campus landmarks is hardly new, but it is reaching new dimensions.
Squeezed between faltering government support and rising expenses, private universities and colleges are pursuing potential donors as never before, with lists of "naming opportunities" ranging from research institutes to plastic seats in an athletic stadium.


TV Weekend; Her Wish to Serve God And to Feed Her Ego
The six-hour "Brides of Christ," to be presented on the Arts &amp; Entertainment Network for three consecutive nights, beginning Sunday at 8 P.M., is about Roman Catholic nuns in Australia in the 1960's.
This is not, be assured, your traditional nuns' story told in hushed tones and hinting of mystery.
In fact, referring to adult themes, A &amp; E warns that "viewer discretion is advised." Not really, but the concern is significant.
The story, devised by Penny Chapman, opens in Sydney in 1945 as young Diane is receiving her first communion and very solemnly listening to the sermon about a "war against Satan" always needing new soldiers and sisters.
"If you miss God's call," the bishop says, "you will be damned." Jump to 1962.
Now a college graduate, engaged to be married and no longer a virgin, Diane (Josephine Byrnes) decides she has the call.
Going to the convent that produces teachers for Santo Spiritu, a school for girls, she tells Mother Ambrose (Sandy Gore), "I want to feed my ego and I want to serve God."


Mashburn Goes Public, Stock Soars
Jamal Mashburn seemed a little overwhelmed yesterday.
There he was, a 20-year-old standing on a schoolyard court on the Upper West Side.
Behind him, a brand-new cherry-red Ferrari, fans, cameras, police officers, microphones, and a throng of kids mobbing him for his signature.
"You know you're popular when somebody asks you for an autograph in New York City," said the soft-spoken Harlem native who figures to be among the top three picks in the June 30th National Basketball Association draft.
"I guess I'm a public figure now."


Ex-Cowboy Holt Signs With Dolphins
Cornerback ISSIAC HOLT, a starter the past three seasons for the Dallas Cowboys, signed as a free agent yesterday with the Miami Dolphins.


MEXICANS CAPTURE DRUG CARTEL CHIEF IN PRELATE'S DEATH
After an intense manhunt, federal police officials today announced the capture of one of Mexico's most powerful drug traffickers, whom they described as the target of a shootout last month in which a Roman Catholic cardinal was killed.
Government officials said the man arrested, Joaquin Guzman Loera, was seized by the Guatemalan authorities before dawn on Wednesday just south of the Mexican border, along with five of his closest associates.


V Band Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Sounds Around Town
The Freshmen on Tour
Four Freshmen, Fat Tuesday's, 190 Third Avenue at 17th Street, (212) 533-7900.
The Four Freshmen, the group of singing instrumentalists discovered by Stan Kenton in Dayton, Ohio, in 1950, are going strong after 43 years.
Except for Bob Flanigan, the group's leader, who at 66 still sings and plays trombone, the group is now made up of relative youngsters.
But the presence of Mr.
Flanigan assures that such old Freshmen favorites as "It's a Blue World" and "Day In, Day Out" are still performed with the group's original harmonic flair, even though there has been a fifth Freshman for several years.
At Fat Tuesday's, which has been a regular stop on Freshmen tours for more than 10 years, they will go on tonight and tomorrow night at 8, 10 and midnight; on Sunday at 8 and 10 P.M.
There is a $20 music charge and a $10 minimum.
A Blossom Dearie Series
Blossom Dearie, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Chelsea, (212) 244-3005.
Blossom Dearie, the singer and pianist whose voice is an astonishing mixture of little-girl innocence and dark throatiness, has been playing twilight performances at the Ballroom off and on since 1984.
Originally they were a winter series, but now she has become a summertime attraction, playing Fridays and Saturdays at 6:30 P.M.
Her repertory is a very special mixture of sophisticated wit and nimble rhythm created partly by such old hands as Cole Porter and Noel Coward but leaning more toward contemporary songwriters: Dave Frishberg, John Wallowitch and Miss Dearie herself.
Accompanied by the bassist Ray Kilday, she plays a single extended set at 6:30 P.M. today and tomorrow.
There is a $15 music charge and a two-drink minimum.


Cambodian Rulers Reject Election Results
The Government, rejecting election results that show its political party the loser in last month's elections, warned today that some provinces would try to secede from Cambodia rather than come under the control of the royalist opposition party that won at the polls.
The leader of the huge United Nations peacekeeping operation in Cambodia, Yasushi Akashi, said at a news conference that "dissidents" within the government were angry over the election results and were "demonstrating their unhappiness by moving for the establishment of some kind of autonomous region in the east and northeastern part of Cambodia."


Kasler Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Folding an Era: Imagine Castro-less Convertibles
NO one, but no one, demonstrates a sofa bed like Bernadette Castro.
She approaches the task with such confidence in the product, such keen appreciation for its patented "feather lift" mechanism.
"It goes up and over," she says, standing in the middle of the Castro Convertible showroom, tugging at the mechanism and effortlessly coaxing a bed frame and mattress out of a couch.
"You just take it and pop it straight up."


Home Shopping Network Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that close soon: Closing This Weekend  "SOMEONE WHO'LL WATCH OVER ME," Booth Theater, 222 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
A drama by Frank McGuinness about three men being held captive in Beirut.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $40 to $45.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"AVENUE X," Playwrights Horizons, New Theater Wing Studio, 416 West 42d Street, Clinton.
An a cappella musical by John Jiler and Ray Leslee, set in the early 1960's, about two young singers who try to take an interracial act to the old Fox Theater in Brooklyn.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $5.
Information: (212) 279-4200.


Art in Review
'Alberto Giacometti: Sculpture'  Gagosian Gallery 980 Madison Avenue (at 77th Street) Manhattan Through June 19
Few artists made postwar existential angst as credibly manifest as Alberto Giacometti.
His recipe included aspects of Cycladic and Egyptian art -- notably frontality and simplification -- mixed with an agitated, ingeniously varied surface and a sense of the individual that was strictly modern.


First Lady Tries to Placate Doctors
Hillary Rodham Clinton offered an olive branch to doctors today by suggesting that they were not mainly to blame for high health-care costs.
Speaking at the celebration of the 100th anniversary of the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Mrs.
Clinton backed away from her recent sharp attack on what she called price gouging in the medical system.
Today she said the national health crisis had been caused by a combination of factors, including the lack of individual responsibility for preventive care.


New York in Line to Direct the Peace Corps
President Clinton is expected to nominate Carol Bellamy, former president of New York's City Council, as director of the Peace Corps, Administration officials said today.
Ms.
Bellamy, now an investment banker for Bear Stearns, was unavailable for comment, but Maureen Connelly, her spokeswoman, said: "She's had discussions about the directorship of the Peace Corps but cannot comment further."


Review/Dance; Offbeat Visions in Premieres by Two Companies
David Dorfman Dance and Shapiro and Smith Dance, two companies that can be counted upon for intelligent as well as inventive choreography, opened the Altogether Different season on Monday night with a stimulating program at the Joyce Theater.
Eight modern-dance organizations are participating in this series, which continues through June 19, and each performance features two groups.


Sunbathing in the Square


LDI Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


For Children
Metrotech Center
Jay Street at Myrtle Avenue  Downtown Brooklyn  Recommended ages: 4 and up
The Metrotech Center is a $1 billion complex that has changed the Brooklyn skyline, with its Chase Manhattan logo now glowing at night, and is meant to represent the borough's renaissance.
Children who like to keep track of the city's goings-on and see some unusual art at the same time might want to visit Metrotech.


Mastercard and Midtown: City Hall Wins in New Tack
In a decision that company officials say turned more on New York City's intangible assets than on simple economics, Mastercard International will keep its headquarters in mid-Manhattan rather than move to Westchester County.
For the city, Mastercard's decision to move from its current Manhattan headquarters into nine floors of the old Burlington House on the Avenue of the Americas means holding onto 450 jobs, and if Mastercard's own growth projections hold true, getting another 750 within the next 12 years.


Charles Tuttle, 78, A Dealer in Books On U.S.-Asian Ties
Charles E. Tuttle, chairman of the antiquarian and book publishing companies that bear his name in Boston, Rutland, Vt., and Tokyo, died Wednesday in Rutland, his hometown.
He was 78.
He died in his sleep after a short illness, said the Charles E. Tuttle Company Inc.


Books of The Times; Reality Infused With Intimations of the Divine
Sister Water
By Nancy Willard
255 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $21.
In her enchanting first novel, "Things Invisible to See" (1985), the poet and children's author Nancy Willard conjured up a magical world in which the mundane and the metaphysical merged and overlapped.
Here, the dead played baseball with the living, vacuum cleaners picked up gold jewelry and gold fillings, and emissaries from the spirit world introduced human beings to a realm of things invisible to see.
As in a child's book of fairy tales, transactions between the real and the fantastic occurred with almost offhand nonchalance, not as manifestations of an irrational cosmos, but as intimations of a divinely ordered realm in which change and metamorphosis are part of the redemptive cycle of life.


Sports of The Times; Amid Ashes In Bullpen, Gooden Glows
HALF an hour after Dwight Gooden raised his record to 7-4 last Monday night for a Mets team that has won only 19 games, Al Harazin walked into Dallas Green's office.
"Gooden tomorrow, Gooden Wednesday, Saberhagen Thursday," the Mets general manager said, smiling.
"Then Gooden Friday, Gooden Saturday . . . "'


Yonkers Defends Actions in Housing Desegregation Case
The City of Yonkers tried to show in Federal District Court yesterday that it has had a change of heart and is moving aggressively to create subsidized housing for more than 700 poor or middle-income families in largely white neighborhoods.
At the same time, though, it blamed a court-appointed official for the city's failure so far to move a single family into any apartment.
The trial, before Judge Leonard B. Sand in lower Manhattan, opened yet another phase in a desegregation case that has dragged on for 13 years.


Israel Looks Like the Winner
Although Middle East peace talks are scheduled to resume on Monday, the Arab-Israeli conflict is really over.
Victory is Israel's to clinch -- or squander.
And America is in a position to tip the balance one way or the other.
For decades, the Arabs oscillated between finding an ally other than the U.S. and working to erode U.S. support for Israel by replacing it as a strategic ally.
Egypt recognized the futility of the first strategy in the early 1970's.
The rest of the Arab world reached that conclusion at the end of the cold war.


Reaganomics, With a Mexican Accent
The growing opposition in Congress to the North American Free Trade Agreement may save the Administration from its own confusion.
The President has ignored the contradiction between his ambitious program for domestic revitalization and his support for a much freer flow of capital and labor between the United States and Mexico.
The trade agreement and continuing high levels of immigration from Mexico can derail his vision of a high-investment, high-wage, high-tech America.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
American General Corp., Houston, an insurance holding company, is offering $150 million of 5 percent notes due in 1996 at 99.884 to yield 5.042 percent through Goldman, Sachs.
The noncallable notes are rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service, A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and AA- by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Administration Decides F.B.I. Chief Must Leave, Officials Say
Five months after a scalding report on his conduct, the Clinton Administration has concluded that William S. Sessions should step down as Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and has begun negotiations with his lawyers to ease him from office, Government officials said today.
In conversations this week, Justice Department officials and lawyers for Mr.
Sessions have weighed his narrowing options, five and a half years into a 10-year term as Director.


Topics of The Times; Candor Please, Mr. Gergen
David Gergen, the new White House counselor, is quitting his new club, the all-male, exclusive Bohemian Club in California.
He thus demonstrates for President Clinton what he proved to Presidents Nixon, Reagan and Bush: that fast action can keep a day's embarrassment from becoming a running story.
It was only Monday, his first day on the job, that Mr.
Gergen said flatly, "I have no intentions to resign" from the club.
That prompted press inquiries about White House policy on the subject.
Hadn't Webster Hubbell, newly confirmed Associate Attorney General, just quit a Little Rock country club after helping to enlist its first black member?
So how could Mr.
Gergen so eagerly join a club that has yet to enlist its first woman and has only token minority membership?
Would the White House allow that?


Powell Receives a Rousing Greeting at Harvard
Instead of the threatened noisy protests against the military's ban on homosexuals, Gen.
Colin L. Powell, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, drew a rousing ovation today from Harvard University students, faculty and alumni at commencement ceremonies here.
Many of the Harvard graduates took issue with General Powell as a symbol of the military's opposition to homosexuals serving openly in the ranks, but it was generally a quiet protest.
Hundreds of students held placards or pink balloons emblazoned with "Lift the Ban" that bobbed lazily in the tree-shaded Harvard Yard during a morning ceremony.
Scores of students and some faculty members turned their backs on the general when he received an honorary degree of law.


Topics of The Times; Forcing Money on the Military
The Senate Appropriations Committee followed the House's lead this week and approved $1.2 billion in additional spending for the Pentagon.
The money will be used for relief efforts in Somalia, health insurance for military families, the repair of storm-damaged Marine bases, air operations over Iraq and aid to the Kurds -- worthy causes all.
The odd thing is that the Pentagon didn't ask for the money.
To pay for these causes, it was prepared to reprogram funds it didn't need, like $274 million to buy executive jets for the top brass and V.I.P.'s.


William McCagg, 62, East European Expert
William O. McCagg Jr., a historian and educator who specialized in Central and Eastern Europe, died on Tuesday at home in Stonington, Conn.
He was 62 and also had a home in Manhattan.
The cause was colon cancer, his family said.


The New Guard: Bulls' Armstrong Makes His Point
B.
J.
Armstrong no longer has to prove he belongs in the Chicago Bulls' starting lineup.
He has convinced his teammates, his coach, and his opponents.
The latest example was Game 1 of the National Basketball Association finals.
Most people expected the Suns' Kevin Johnson to outplay Armstrong.
In fact, point guard was a position where the Suns' expected to have a decided advantage.


A Newspaper Whose Independent Streak Helps Boston Define Its Image
It claims to have been the first big newspaper in the country to call for an American withdrawal from Vietnam.
During the agonies of Boston's school integration struggle in the 1970's, someone fired shots at its headquarters in Dorchester.
In the Brahmins' Boston of the late 1800's, it battled hospital rules that barred Roman Catholic priests, even if their task was to administer the last rites to their Irish immigrant parishioners.
In the more than a century since its founding, The Boston Globe -- usually self-consciously responsible, sometimes flamboyantly liberal -- has helped shape the identity of Boston and played a part in the life of the nation.


Richfood Holdings Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for 16wks to May 1


Tough Talk on Trade By U.S. Envoy to Japan
With the United States and Japan heading into a period of unusually bitter exchanges on economic issues, the American Ambassador here described Japan's efforts to depict itself as a free trader as "propaganda." He said it would only stiffen the Clinton Administration's resolve to use market share targets to open Japan to imports.
"I admire the chutzpah that this P.R. campaign represents, and in some respects I welcome that the Japanese are touting themselves as the champions of free trade," the Ambassador, Michael Armacost, said in an interview today.
"It goes without saying that those who wish to enjoy that reputation will be held accountable to a higher standard of conduct." Reflection on Difficult Times
Mr.
Armacost, a highly regarded career diplomat, is expected to wind up a four-year tour here this summer, and to be replaced by former Vice President Walter F. Mondale.
Reflecting on the difficult times he has spent in Japan, he said he was pleased at how well the two nations had managed the array of tough security and political issues that had followed the end of the cold war.


Sprouse-Reitz Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 27


Boeing Sees 600-Seat Jets in Future
The Boeing Company said yesterday that preliminary marketing studies indicated that the world's airlines could need 400 to 500 so-called Very Large Commercial Transport planes during the first decade of the next century.
The feasibility of the plane, known as the VLCT, was being studied by Boeing and four European companies.
The plane would carry about 600 passengers, compared with 421 in the Boeing 747-400 jumbo jet.


INSIDE
4 Chinese Freed by U.S.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service released four of the Chinese who were aboard the freighter that ran aground off Queens.
Page B1.
The deposed head of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield is said to have severance agreements totaling $2 million.
Page B4.
Bellamy for Peace Corps
President Clinton is expected to nominate Carol Bellamy, the former New York City Council President, as head of the Peace Corps.
Page A16.
Epidemic Tied to New Virus
A new or previously unrecognized virus is believed to be the cause of a mysterious epidemic of a flu-like illness in the Southwest.
Page A14.


Arthur Alexander, Singer, Dies at 53; Influence on Rock
Arthur Alexander, a Southern soul singer whose recordings influenced the Rolling Stones, the Beatles, Bob Dylan and Elvis Presley, died on Wednesday in Nashville.
He was 53.
His manager, Danny Kahn, said the cause was respiratory and heart failure.


Paternity Suit Just Another Crisis in Rhode Island
Democrats and Republicans alike today dismissed an unfolding scandal over a paternity suit against Gov.
Bruce Sundlun of Rhode Island as a titillating but temporary problem.
The suit was filed by a 17-year-old Michigan girl whose mother was involved with the 73-year old Democratic Governor for several years in the 1970's, after his second marriage.


U.S. Releases 4 of the Chinese Seized From Ship
The Immigration and Naturalization Service yesterday released four of the nearly 300 Chinese aliens seized after a freighter ran aground off a Queens beach on Sunday and said it would consider releasing others on a case-by-case basis pending hearings on their claims for asylum.
The move represented a turnaround by the agency, which had said earlier this week that it would keep all the aliens in detention as an example to other would-be immigrants and their smugglers.


Thomas Ammann, Modern Art Dealer And a Collector, 43
Thomas Ammann, a dealer in Impressionist and modern art and a major collector of contemporary art, died on Wednesday at the Bircher-Benner Clinic in Zurich.
He was 43.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Studies Reveal Suggestibility Of Very Young as Witnesses
The testimony of small children has usually been considered truthful unless proved otherwise.
Over the past decade such testimony has led to convictions in many child-abuse cases, and the younger the child, the less likely psychologists have thought it was that information could have been fabricated.
But now a series of recent studies has turned this conventional wisdom on its head.
Researchers have found new evidence that persistent questioning can lead young children to describe elaborate accounts of events that never occurred, even when at first they denied them.


Corrections
An article in some copies on Wednesday about Christine Todd Whitman, the Republican nominee for governor in New Jersey, misstated the term served by her husband's grandfather, Charles S. Whitman Sr., as Governor of New York.
It was 1915 through 1918.


U.S. and Japan Open Talks On New Trade Framework
American and Japanese officials began discussions today on a new framework for bilateral economic relations but, as expected, they did not reach an agreement, the officials said.
"The meeting was primarily an opportunity for a mutual exchange of views on economic issues," said Bowman Cutter, the deputy assistant to the President for economic affairs.
"It was a useful meeting -- it was not intended to arrive at an agreement and it did not."


Aides in Cambodia Province Say It Is Seceding
Officials in the southeastern Cambodian province of Svay Rieng told the United Nations today that the province was seceding from Cambodia and warned the United Nations peacekeepers in the province that they must withdraw immediately or face attack.
The threat was made as demonstrators smashed the windows of United Nations vehicles and offices in the province and destroyed the local headquarters of the royalist opposition party, which won last month's elections.
There were no reports of injuries.


Reputed Gang Leader Held
A reputed leader of the Fuk Ching gang was arrested in a Chinatown restaurant yesterday during a banquet after a funeral for four members of the gang who were killed in a shootout in New Jersey, the police said.
The gang has been linked by law-enforcement officials to the smuggling of illegal aliens aboard the Golden Venture, which ran aground off Queens early Sunday with nearly 300 Chinese aliens aboard.
The reputed leader, identified by the police as Shia Chen, 41, was arrested inside the Triple Eight Restaurant at 88 East Broadway, the police said.


New Delhi Journal; And Now, Killer Buses: It's Just Too, Too Much
It was hot here the other day, 114 degrees and no breeze.
The capital's entire electricity system failed, water was unavailable to millions of residents and mayhem consumed the roadways.
For the first time, there is a feeling of collapse here, the sense that this capital city -- once a way station for Mogul armies, later an exhibition of British town planning by Sir Edwin Lutyens -- is finally being overwhelmed by people and traffic and the final crumbling of fragile and inadequate public services.


Chinese Immigrants Tell of Darwinian Voyage
As Chen Fuxing tells it, the Golden Venture's odyssey to America was a trial of desperation and fear.
The lack of food, water, light and space broke the 300 travelers down and a kind of Darwinian order took shape.
The weaker ones, who typically got the last scraps of a daily meal of rice and water, would argue and beg for more, with disputes erupting into brawls among the passengers.
People fell sick, but without any medicine others would feel helpless and leave them alone.
Mr.
Chen's voyage to America began nearly two years ago.
He set out from a rural village in southeastern China, where busy meant a 10-hour day on the family's rice farm.
He trekked through the mountains of Myanmar and Thailand, slept in an airless cabin the size of a small bathroom with three other people on one ship, and eventually became a virtual prisoner on the Golden Venture, which the authorities say was used to transport Chinese immigrants who paid as much as $35,000 each for the voyage to America.
Unwelcome Darkness
Mr.
Chen, a 30-year-old farmer and sometime factory worker, saw a darkness on the freighter that he never connected with his quest for America.
"A lot of fighting was going on," he said, and shook his head.
"I think it changed many people, being on that ship."


Raymond Parker, Catskills Hotelier And Rancher, 79
Raymond Parker, who made the Concord Resort Hotel the biggest resort in the Catskills and one of the world's largest, died on Thursday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 79 and lived in Kiamesha Lake, N.Y.
He had a short illness, his family said.


U.S. Attacks Somali Clan Chief To Support U.N. Peacekeepers
American and allied forces delivered a punishing blow tonight against a Somali leader in Mogadishu who has been blamed for ordering the deadly ambush of United Nations peacekeepers last weekend, senior United States military officials said.
American officials said the purpose of the air and ground attack in the Somali capital was to destroy the arms stores and radio station that constitute the power base of the leader, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid.
The officials said they also hoped to capture General Aidid and four of his lieutenants.


Dole Wants Inquiry on Handling Of the White House Travel Office
Bob Dole, the Senate Republican leader, asked the Democratic majority today for an inquiry into whether there had been manipulation of Federal law-enforcement agencies in the White House travel office affair.
In a letter to Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., chairman of the Judiciary Committee, Mr.
Dole said Congress had "chosen to stand on the sidelines" as "disturbing revelations" came to light about the Administration's handling of the matter.


Suns' Dumas Arrives By a Circuitous Route
As warm as it is here in the Valley of the Sun, and the temperature broke 100 degrees again today, life was much hotter a year ago for Richard Dumas.
In Miami, with a minor league outfit called the Tropics, Dumas accepted the glare of playing for a team of admitted substance abusers, most of whom were attempting to get back to the basketball big time.
In Dumas's case, he was trying to get to where he'd almost been, on the roster of the Phoenix Suns.
Drafted in the second round out of Oklahoma State in 1991, Dumas didn't survive training camp, but not because he wasn't good enough.
Plagued by a substance problem that had developed in college, Dumas voluntarily left the Suns to seek treatment, landing at John Lucas's rehabilitation center in Houston, before joining the Tropics -- owned and coached by Lucas -- the following spring.


3 Orioles to Appeal Suspensions
Orioles players DAVID SEGUI, RICK SUTCLIFFE and ALAN MILLS, suspended for their part in a brawl Sunday against California, are appealing their suspensions.
The players are eligible to play until the appeals have been heard.
Segui was suspended for three games, Sutcliffe for five games and Mills for four. (AP)


Review/Pop; A Jazz Violinist Who Plays With a Classical Precision
The world would be a much happier place if we all could age as gracefully as Stephane Grappelli.
The French jazz violinist, whose 85th birthday was belatedly celebrated at Carnegie Hall on Wednesday evening, might be described as the jazz world's answer to Pablo Casals.
At a time in life when the hardiest performers begin to slow down, he combines the technical agility of a much younger musician with the refinement and far-sighted musicality of a seasoned artist who has honed his style to essentials.
That style, despite its use of popular songs as a springboard for improvisational flights, is really classical in its attention to pitch, tonal coloration and rhythmic flow.
Taking a song like "Night and Day" or "Honeysuckle Rose," Mr.
Grappelli aspires to the same musical clarity and balance that a classical performer would bring to unaccompanied Bach.


Raise the Cigarette Tax
To the Editor:
Re: "Experts Wavering on Steep Rise in Cigarette Tax" (news article, June 7): Although the costs of smoking to the American economy have been estimated at more than $100 billion a year -- more than $4 for every pack sold! -- some argue smokers shouldn't be asked to pay more through higher cigarette taxes because their early deaths save some pension and Social Security costs.


Farm Union Ordered to Pay $3 Million to Grower
An Arizona jury has awarded nearly $3 million in damages to a produce grower in a suit charging that the United Farm Workers used illegal tactics in a boycott of the company's lettuce.
The Thursday verdict is likely to deal a severe blow to a union still recovering from the death of its dynamic founder and leader, Cesar Chavez.
It took the Yuma County Superior Court jury less than a day to return the verdict in favor of Bruce Church Inc., an agribusiness concern with large land holdings in California and Arizona.
The suit alleged that the union illegally threatened grocery chains that sold the company's lettuce.
The suit said the chains were told they would be linked to child abuse, pesticide contamination and sexual harassment.


Review/Philharmonic; Untangling the Stories Within Stories of the Mahler Fifth
It's often remarked that Mahler constructed his symphonies like novels.
In later years, he abandoned familiar musical forms and extra-musical programs, fashioning a private narrative from all-consuming polyphonic conflict.
Each movement of his revolutionary Fifth Symphony is nearly a novella in itself: songlike characters struggle against a relentless developmental ebb and flow.
The Fifth still presents such challenges for orchestra and conductor that performances seldom succeed at every stage of the argument.
Thursday night at Avery Fisher Hall, Leonard Slatkin directed the New York Philharmonic in a rendition that began well and finished superbly.
But in the central movements, something went awry: The inner thread of the story was lost, and the clamor of secondary voices took over.
It was a working draft of a strong interpretation, with large areas remaining to be filled in.


Executive Changes
AETNA LIFE AND CASUALTY CO., Hartford, named Thomas M. O'Neill president and chief executive of its domestic and international investment advisory board.
AMALGATRUST CO., Chicago, a subsidiary of Amalgamated Bank of Chicago, appointed Robert J. Schank president and chief operating officer.
ASANTE TECHNOLOGIES, San Jose, Calif., named Ralph Dormitzer president and chief executive.
BANK ONE CLEVELAND N.A., an affiliate of Banc One Corp., named Patrick M. Prout president and chief operating officer.
DOUBLEDAY BOOK AND MUSIC CLUB, New York, a unit of Bertelsmann Inc., promoted Markus Wilhelm, the senior vice president of marketing, to president.


Money Fund Assets Are Up
The total assets of the nation's 633 retail money market mutual funds increased $1.84 billion, to $390.75 billion, for the week ended Wednesday, according to the Investment Company Institute.
The assets of the 397 taxable retail money market funds rose $895.6 million, to $308.39 billion, while the assets of the 236 retail tax-exempt funds increased $941.9 million, to $82.36 billion.


Classical Music in Review
Quintet of the Americas Americas Society 680 Park Avenue


Bunning Issues a 'Bribe Alert'
Major league baseball is using hard-to-get tickets to next month's All-Star Game to try to bribe the members of Congress who are reviewing baseball's antitrust exemption, former major league pitcher JIM BUNNING says.
Bunning, now a Republican Congressman from Kentucky, sent out a "bribe alert" this week to House and Senate members regarding the league's offer to sell lawmakers tickets to the game, to be played on July 13 at Camden Yards in Baltimore.
"Legislation to repeal the antitrust exemption is starting to move in Congress now," he wrote.
"And major league baseball is trying to curry favor with members."


Zila Inc. (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


The Bulls Have Phoenix Singing the Chicago Blues
The Chicago Bulls are in control.
The Phoenix Suns are in deep trouble.
The Bulls won their second consecutive game in Phoenix tonight, 111-108, and are only two victories away from their third consecutive National Basketball Association championship.
Not only do the Bulls lead the four-of-seven-game series two games to none, but the next three games are scheduled for Chicago Stadium, beginning with Game 3 on Sunday night.
The Bulls have no intention of returning to Phoenix until next season.


A Fernandez Legacy to City Schools
When New York City Schools Chancellor Joseph Fernandez came to town three and a half years ago, he staked his reputation on giving teachers and parents more influence over what actually happens inside the schools.
Now, as he prepares to leave, a Board of Education study shows that Mr.
Fernandez was on the right track.
Many education reform efforts have been aimed at breaking the top-down model that imposes instructional guidelines and other rules devised by a distant bureaucracy.
Mr.
Fernandez has long been an important spokesman for a concept called school-based management.


Observer; Terror In the Sunlight
While dozing in The Wall Street Journal the other day, I suddenly felt the hair rising on the back of my neck the way it does when I walk into the darkened parlor and see a long-dead relative poring over my Oxford English Dictionary's small-print edition with a magnifying glass.
The difference was that this sinister Wall Street Journal moment occurred while I was on the back porch in full afternoon sun whereas parlor sightings of long-dead relatives always occur late on misty evenings when the empty martini pitcher is still fresh with the smell of the juniper berry.


An Elegant Wedding, Victorian Style, For Less
Sue Walsh O'Donnell, 23, of Centereach, L.I., dreamed of a Victorian-style wedding that was special and memorable.
What she didn't want was to put her family in hock to provide it.
Careful shopping, creativity, and some extra effort made both goals come true on May 16.
"Ever since the wedding, people have been calling to compliment us," said Mrs.
O'Donnell.
"Everything was perfect. I don't feel that I compromised on a thing."


Croatia Buries a National Hero
Grief permeated the gloomy afternoon air today and spilled into this capital city's streets along with tens of thousands of mourning fans, who streamed uphill in a procession to say one final goodbye to Drazen Petrovic.
"It's like the sky -- cloudy, murky and sad," Mario Corba, a 19-year-old waiter, said, describing the mood in a cafe along the road leading toward the cemetery.
"Everyone in here has been talking about the accident. How could it have happened and why him?"


Economic Trouble and Nuclear Dispute Deepen Ukraine's Sense of Insecurity
After 18 months of independence, Ukraine is bogged down in uncertainty about its nuclear status and is caught in a severe economic downturn as strikes spread across its industrial and coal-mining regions.
And with the political leadership in disarray, these troubles have only increased Ukraine's innate feelings of insecurity, which lie at the root of the Parliament's continuing reluctance to approve the strategic arms agreement, known as Start I, that was worked out in 1991 by the Soviet Union and the United States.


A Brief Silence Costs the Knicks
The Knicks were fined $25,000 by the league yesterday for failing to make their players available to the news media before Game 6 of the Eastern Conference finals against the Chicago Bulls.
In the June 4 game, the Bulls beat the Knicks, 96-88, at Chicago, clinching the four-of-seven-game series with their fourth straight victory after losing the first two games.


Bridgford Foods (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  NEW YORK YANKEES -- Placed Mike Gallego, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Dave Silvestri, infielder, from Columbus of the International League.
National League


Aurora Environmental reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


World Bond Buying Takes Skilled Manager
The 56 world bond funds can own issues anywhere, and they bet on global movements in currency and interest rates.
The winners for the last 12 months hedged currencies extensively during the European currency crisis last fall and then reversed strategies in 1993 as they moved into the European bond markets.


Bonds Rally on Good News on Prices
There was a sigh of relief from bond traders and investors yesterday after the Government's report that the Producer Price Index was unchanged in May.
After last week's report of a surprisingly strong jump in employment in May and with consumer prices rising so far this year at a 4.3 percent annual rate, another large jump in this key inflation indicator would have sent Treasury prices reeling and yields higher.


Pentagon Is Ready With a Plan For a Leaner, Versatile Military
Senior Pentagon officials on Saturday will give Defense Secretary Les Aspin their vision of a post-cold-war military: smaller, reshaped to respond to regional conflicts and relying on fewer but more versatile new weapons systems, Defense Department officials said today.
The proposed reductions and changes in strategy are included in a comprehensive review meant to lay out a road map for the Pentagon through 1999.
That review of military budgets, programs and strategies was conducted over several months to meet President Clinton's commitment to cut $88 billion more from the Defense Department's budget through that year than what President George Bush had planned.


Dow Advances by 13.29, But Is Off 40.13 in Week
Helped by a sense of relief that inflation had eased, stocks advanced modestly yesterday, but gains were restrained.
The Dow Jones industrial average advanced 13.29 points, closing at 3,505.01.
For the week, however, the Dow lost 40.13 points.


For Wealthier Clients, Funds Add Some Frills
IT'S as if Wal-Mart opened up a department selling the latest creations of Chanel, Armani and Valentino.
The low- and no-load mutual fund groups are striving to attract larger investors with the pampering more common from financial planners and brokers.
For investing as little as $50,000, customers often get a personal adviser who will schmooze, keep track of their holdings, recommend changes and, with permission, carry them out.


Review/Theater; 3 Lusty Sailors Adrift In a 1940's New York
New York City has never seemed more like a wondrous toy than in the 1944 Broadway musical "On the Town," which follows three sailors on 24-hour leave as they comb the city in search of Miss Turnstiles, a subway poster girl.
The show, which first teamed Leonard Bernstein with the lyricists and book writers Betty Comden and Adolph Green, originated as a musical-comedy elaboration of the Bernstein-Robbins ballet "Fancy Free." Challenging to mount because of the complexity of its music and dance, the show is one long burst of intoxicating exuberance.
And in its mostly wonderful revival at the Goodspeed Opera House, in East Haddam, Conn., it comes to life as a brassy, sexy cartoon portrait of 1940's New York.


G.M. Puts Closings Into Bargaining Stance
The General Motors Corporation could close or sell some parts-making subsidiaries unless it gains concessions on wages from the United Automobile Workers in contract talks, a top company executive said today, sketching out the company's bargaining stance before the contract talks begin on June 23.
Since those subsidiaries, which make products like bearings and axles, generally compete against companies that are not organized by the U.A.W., G.M. pays up to 50 percent more in wages than its competitors, driving up its costs of production, said the official, who outlined some G.M. bargaining goals for reporters on the condition that he not be identified.


Review/Dance; Honoring A Trouper With a Lot Left to Say
A choreographer usually speaks best through his or her dance works.
But Agnes de Mille also has an exceptional way with both the written and spoken word.
Not surprisingly, her many talents cropped up at the tribute that American Ballet Theater offered the 83-year-old choreographer on Monday night at the Metropolitan Opera House.
The evening's triple bill consisted entirely of de Mille works -- "Rodeo" and "Three Virgins and a Devil," each from the 1940's, and a more recent ballet from 1988, "The Informer." At the second intermission, Miss de Mille made clear that she had something more current to say.


Yale Class of '68 Still Making a Difference
To the Editor:
As class secretary of the Yale Class of 1968, I join my classmates in taking vigorous exception to the portrayal of the class in your May 30 article.
The article, essentially a grotesque summary of the book of essays by class members, produced on the occasion of the 25th reunion, concludes that the class has been self-indulgent and uncommitted to agendas that were articulated in the 1960's and pursued with violence and confrontation elsewhere.
Let me make three points.


THE SUPREME COURT: The States and the Law; In Crackdown on Bias, a New Tool
Before the Supreme Court ruling today upholding the Wisconsin "hate crime" law, a committee of the Nebraska Legislature defeated a similar measure, in part because lawmakers feared it might be unconstitutional.
Now, legal experts and advocates say, the Court's unanimous decision is likely to embolden states like Nebraska to adopt similar laws, or to strengthen the ones they have.
The Wisconsin law, like those of 26 other states and the District of Columbia, provides expanded sentences for crimes motivated by racial hatred or other kinds of bias.


COMPANY BRIEFS
GEOTEK INDUSTRIES, Philadelphia, has agreed to buy National Band Three Ltd., held by Vodafone GroupP.L.C., Newbury, Berkshire, England, and General Electric P.L.C., London, for $24 million.
LABATT BREWERIES OF CANADA, a unit of John Labatt Ltd., the country's second-largest brewer, said it would close its brewery in Saint John, New Brunswick, laying off 105 workers.
NESTLE S.A., Vevey, Switzerland, a beverage and culinary concern, has received approval from the European Commission to take over Source Perrier after selling its Vichy, Thonon, St.
Yorre and Pierval brands to the Castel Group.
Terms were not disclosed.
W.
R.
GRACE &amp; CO., Boca Raton, Fla., announced the completion of the sale of substantially all of the assets of Grace Drilling Company to subsidiaries of Nabors Industries, a land drilling concern, for about $32 million.


Panel Touts Two Alternatives To Cut Costs on Space Station
A White House advisory panel said today that the United States could develop a useful, if scaled down, space station for substantially less money than would be required by the current NASA proposal for the Space Station Freedom.
The independent committee of experts, impaneled to evaluate a three-month effort by a NASA team to redesign the Space Station to reduce its costs, favored two of the three options developed by the NASA team as "most deserving of further consideration" by the White House.


Westphal Prefers Coaching On Cool
Phil Jackson gives his players books; Paul Westphal gives his players sentences.
On the Phoenix Sun locker room walls are short quotations from such diverse sources as the Bible and Bill Russell, intended to turn the players into pragmatic thinkers.
Westphal, the Suns' head coach, collects the phrases the way Charles Barkley collects rebounds, and is also the one who glues them to the wallpaper.


Bid to Buy Orioles Filed in Court
An agreement to sell the Baltimore Orioles for $141.3 million to a group of Cincinnati businessmen headed by WILLIAM O. DeWITT JR. was filed yesterday in United States Bankruptcy Court in New York.
The agreement, filed by attorneys for the Orioles' owner, ELI JACOBS, would be the highest amount ever paid for a baseball team, topping the $125 million paid last year for the Seattle Mariners.


A Hurdle Is Cleared by Supreme Court Contender


THE SUPREME COURT: Hate Crimes; JUSTICES UPHOLD STIFFER SENTENCES FOR HATE CRIMES
The Supreme Court gave its approval today to a new approach to punishing hate crimes, ruling unanimously that states may impose harsher sentences on criminals who choose their victims on the basis of race, religion or other personal characteristics.
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist's opinion for the Court upheld a Wisconsin state law that is similar to sentence-enhancement laws now on the books in more than half the states.
In an unusual show of state unanimity, the 49 other states filed a joint brief in support of the Wisconsin law.
With a similar Federal measure now under consideration in Congress, the Clinton Administration also filed a brief in support of the Wisconsin law.


Prosecutors Move to Show Mobster's Illness Is a Ruse
In a new attempt to try Vincent Gigante on charges that he is the boss of a major crime family, Federal prosecutors said yesterday that four Mafia defectors will testify that he is faking mental incompetency to evade imprisonment.
For more than a decade, Mr.
Gigante has been observed behaving oddly in public.
He has periodically strolled near his home in Greenwich Village in pajamas, bathrobe and slippers, mumbling incoherently.
In the early 1980's, when agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation served him with a subpoena, they had to follow him into the bathroom where he stood under a running shower with an umbrella over his head.


Lead Forces Closing of Parts of Two More Parks
After surveying nearly 70 sites under or near bridges, the New York City Parks Department said yesterday that it was closing sections of two more parks, including ballfields in the Bronx at the peak of the baseball season, because they were contaminated with debris containing potentially harmful levels of lead.
The public will be barred today from large sections of the parks -- Louis Cuvillier Park in Manhattan and Macombs Dam Park in the South Bronx -- so crews can remove contaminated paint chips, said Stewart Desmond, a spokesman for the Parks Department.
The job could take weeks.


Little Progress Seen in Effort to Crack AIDS Puzzle
The ninth international meeting on AIDS ended here today after 5,500 presentations that showed only slight gains in scientific knowledge about the disease.
"Our progress seems desperately slow," Dr.
Michael H. Merson, the director of the World Health Organization's AIDS program, said at the close of the weeklong meeting.
His remarks to the more than 14,000 participants also reflected gloom about the spread of H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS, in many areas of the world.


Emergency Life Support for Baby Parrots in Connecticut


President Has First Meeting With High Court Candidate
Judge Stephen G. Breyer met for nearly two hours over lunch with President Clinton today, clearing the final hurdle in his path to a Supreme Court nomination, White House officials said.
The officials said that the first face-to-face meeting between the two men had gone well and that they expected Mr.
Clinton to announce his selection of Judge Breyer soon, possibly Saturday.
Some aides said Mr.
Clinton wanted time to give final thought to the nomination before announcing it.


Corrections
An article by The Associated Press on Wednesday about an order by the New York State Court of Appeals, granting a new trial for a man convicted of murder in New York City, misidentified a lawyer who told the police not to talk to the man, Kenneth West, unless the lawyer was present.
He was Kenneth Joelson.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Producer price inflation was flat in May and retail sales posted a weaker-than-expected rise.
The data indicated continued slow economic growth and provided evidence that inflation jumps in April did not represent a worrisome price surge that could cause the Fed to raise interest rates.  [ Page 35. ]
Cable television customers will have to wait a few more months for Government-imposed price reductions because the F.C.C. is short of money to handle an expected avalanche of paperwork caused by complicated new regulations.  [ 35. ]
Replacing the Administration's now-abandoned B.T.U. tax is boiling down to a process of finding a tax that has the fewest, weakest and least vocal opponents.  [ 10. ]  Companies
The New York Times's purchase of The Boston Globe combines the interests of two newspaper families -- the Sulzbergers and the Taylors -- and continues a broad industry shift in which papers like The Globe, free-standing for 121 years, become subsidiaries of big media companies from somewhere else.  [ 35. ]
The Times took its biggest step yet in a 20-year effort to move beyond dependence on metropolitan New York and its flagship newspaper.  [ 47. ]  Some Bostonians expressed the feeling that a big-city rival had muscled into their town.  [ 47. ]
The future of Colt's Manufacturing, the venerable gun maker, was clouded when the Connecticut Legislature banned sales of its best-selling rifle -- blaming it and other military-style semiautomatic weapons for a rise in drug-related urban violence.  [ 1. ]
Northwest's two largest unions scuttled a proposed agreement to exchange a stake in the airline for wage and benefit cuts.  [ 37. ]
Choice Hotels bought 163 European hotels for an undisclosed sum from Inovest, one of France's largest budget hotels.  [ 37. ]
General Motors said it would close or sell some parts-making units unless it gains concessions on wages.  [ 37. ]
Merck agreed to sell its Calgon Water Management business to English China Clays for $307.5 million in cash.  [ 37. ]
R.
H.
Macy's sales and cash flow rose in its fiscal third quarter, further evidence of its slowly reversing fortunes.  [ 37. ] International
American and Japanese officials began discussions on a new framework for bilateral economic relations.
But, as expected, they did not reach an agreement.  [ 35. ] Markets
Bond prices jumped and interest rates fell on indications that inflation eased in May.
The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond dropped to 6.80 percent, its lowest in more than a month.  [ 35. ]
Stocks advanced modestly, helped by a sense of relief that inflation had eased.
The Dow industrials gained 13.29 points.  [ 36. ]
The dollar held its ground despite signs of eased American inflation, which hurt chances for higher interest rates.  [ 46. ]
Oil and gold prices declined as a key index of commodity prices dropped to its lowest level in more than three months.  [ 46. ] Your Money
The explosive growth of initial public stock offerings has drawn many investors, some of whom have been disappointed.  [ 33. ]
Low- and no-load mutual funds are trying to attract larger investors with pampering more common at financial planners.  [ 33. ]
New tax breaks for people who buy cars that run on alternative energy sources are especially generous for electric cars.  [ 34. ]
Student loans will be cheaper, beginning with the 1994-95 academic year, under a bill approved by a Senate committee.  [ 34. ]


Dentist Is Charged With Rape
A Bronx dentist was arrested yesterday on charges that he twice raped a 16-year-old patient whom he had placed under anesthesia during an office visit on Thursday, the police said.
The girl, a patient of the dentist for several years, was hired for a summer job as his receptionist on Thursday, and had an appointment with him for treatment that afternoon, said Lieut.
Hazel Stewart, commander of the Bronx Special Victims Squad.


Old Accusations Are Embroiling Senator in Texas
Just days after Texans overwhelmingly voted to send her to Washington as a Senator, Kay Bailey Hutchison is embroiled in a raucous Texas-sized legal fracas in Austin, stemming from the State Treasurer job she is about to give up.
The District Attorney there said today he had subpoenaed more than a dozen employees of the office and of her campaign in an investigation of accusations that Mrs.
Hutchison had misused state funds and state authority in pursuit of the Senate post.
Investigators also combed through her state offices in Austin over the last two days and removed several cartons of records for what the District Attorney, Ronnie Earle, described as a grand jury investigation into the matter.


Results Plus
COLLEGE BASEBALL Rally Puts L.S.U. in Championship Game L.S.U. rallied for three runs in the bottom of the ninth to beat Long Beach State, 6-5, and earn a berth in today's championship game against Wichita State in the College World Series in Omaha.
Armondo Rios tied the game with a two-run double, then scored the winner when Todd Walker's infield smash glanced off first baseman John Swanson into right field.
Fifth-seeded L.S.U. (52-17-1) plays for its second title in three years against Wichita State (58-16), the team the Tigers defeated, 6-3, in the 1991 final. (AP) TENNIS Australian Upsets Edberg in Three Sets Stefan Edberg's Wimbledon preparations were jarred yesterday when he was beaten, 4-6, 7-6 (11-9), 6-3, by Jamie Morgan in the quarterfinals of the Queen's Club championships in London.
The second-seeded Edberg held two match points in the second set tie-breaker but failed to capitalize against the heavy-serving Australian, who is ranked 83d in the world.
Edberg then double-faulted the set away at 10-9.
In the deciding set, Morgan broke the third-ranked Swede in the eighth game.
In the next game, he finished the upset with his 22d ace and a service winner.
Morgan next plays Michael Stich, who won the battle of the German Wimbledon champions when he beat Boris Becker, 6-4, 7-6 (7-2).
Defending champion Wayne Ferriera of defeated Marc Goellner, 6-4, 6-2, and Todd Martin downed David Witt, 6-4, 6-2. (AP) Masur Beats Krajicek: Wally Masur outlasted second-seeded Richard Krajicek, 16-14, in the second-set tie breaker to win their quarterfinal match, 6-3, 7-6, in the Rosmalen Grass Court Championships in the Netherlands.
Masur's semifinal opponent will be third-seeded MaliVai Washington.
Fifth-seeded Aleksander Volkov will face No. 8 Arnaud Boetsch in the other semifinal. (AP) Garrison-Jackson Wins Indoors: Playing indoors because of rain, fourth-seeded Zina Garrison-Jackson defeated Katrina Adams, 6-3, 6-2, in the Edgbaston tournament in Birmingham, England.
The other singles matches were postponed until today. (AP) ROWING Princeton and Washington Women Win Princeton and Washington women's crews won their heats yesterday as the National Collegiate Rowing Championships began on Harsha Lake, east of Cincinnati.
The Tigers and the Huskies were joined in the final by eights from defending champion Boston University and Cornell, both runners-up in the heats.
Three more crews qualified from a repechage race later in the day: California, Georgetown and Wisconsin.
Seven men's eights will race today for the Herschede Cup and the national championship.
Brown and Washington, both undefeated, head the field.
Others competing are California, Northeastern, Penn, Stanford and Yale.
CYCLING Indurain Wins Tour of Italy Stage Miguel Indurain of Spain practically secured his second straight Tour of Italy championship by routing his rivals yesterday in a tough uphill time test in Sestriere, Italy.
Indurain dominated the 19th stage, leading from start to finish in a 31.4-mile, against-the-clock run and finishing in 1 hour 36 minutes 29 seconds.
With only two stages left, Indurain has an overall lead of 1:34 over Piotre Ugrumov of Latvia. (AP)


Robert Harrah, 77, Business Executive And Philanthropist
Robert E. Harrah, an industrialist, died Wednesday at his home southeast of Willits.
He was 77.
His family said the cause was cancer.


Q &amp; A
Munis and I.R.A.'s
Q If I have a municipal bond in an I.R.A., will the interest remain tax-free when I begin withdrawals?
PETER C. WILLIAMSON, Linden, N.J.
A In almost all cases, it does not pay to keep tax-exempt municipal bonds in an individual retirement account because an I.R.A. is a vehicle for tax-deferment.
Because these bonds usually pay less interest than taxable bonds, an investor would probably receive a higher return by buying taxable bonds for an I.R.A.


Britons Kill 2 Croats After Croats Attack Aid Convoy
British troops with the United Nations killed two Bosnian Croat militiamen today near the village of Nova Bila after Croats attacked and looted a private unarmed aid convoy, killing some of the drivers, a United Nations official said.
It was the first time that British soldiers reported killing any combatants in Bosnia since United Nations troops began protecting aid convoys here late last fall.


Sports of The Times; Bold Enough To Strut Your Stuff
THERE was a time, particularly after dramatic victories by the Mets, Jets, Yankees or Giants, when Frank Sinatra's classic rendition of "New York, New York" would filter through the stadium sound system and hard-core New Yorkers would allow their chests to swell ever so slightly with pride and ego.
When times were good, a victory affirmed being part of something large and important, of living in a bustling city with more than 7.3 million people, many of whom came from other places in search of fame or fortune or simply bold adventure.


Vincent S. Murino, 68, U.S. Weather Official
Vincent S. Murino, a retired official of the National Weather Service who helped to develop five-day forecasts and other advances, died on June 5 at a hospital near his home in Falls Church, Va.
He was 68.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


CHRONICLE
FELICE N. SCHWARTZ, who 31 years ago founded Catalyst, a national nonprofit organization that works to help women in business and professional life, will step down as its president next month.
She will be succeeded by SHEILA W. WELLINGTON, the secretary of Yale University.
"I am ready to move on to the next stage of my life," said Mrs.
Schwartz, 68.
"I want to have more leisure, to spend time with my five grandchildren and their parents, to get out from under the very tough job of running Catalyst. I am only now recognizing how exclusive my focus has been."


Reimann Opera Troupe
The Reimann Opera Company will present Dominick Argento's "Postcard From Morocco" tonight and Sunday night at 8 at the New York University Theater, 35 West Fourth Street, in Greenwich Village.
The 1971 opera, with a libretto by John Donohue, is set among travelers who are stranded at a North African railroad station.
The production is directed by Dorothy Danner, and the cast includes Susan Botti and Julie Newell, sopranos; Diane Kesling, mezzo-soprano; Ian Bourg and Dean Anthony, tenors; Jeremy Pick, baritone, and Jose Garcia, bass.
Roger Mahadeen is to conduct the orchestra.
Tickets are $10.
Information: (212) 998-4947.


Jimbo's Jumbos Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Schneider Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 15


To Assure a Nuclear-Free Korea
Deft diplomacy by the Clinton Administration has coaxed North Korea back from the brink.
The North had threatened to bolt from the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty and build nuclear arms.
It will now allow routine international inspections of its nuclear sites.
Gaining access to its nuclear waste sites will require further negotiation; that could provide more evidence of how much plutonium North Korea might already have produced.
But the resumption of routine inspections is a critical first step toward assuring that the Korean Peninsula is truly nuclear-free.


Royals' Owner Chooses Successors
Royals owner EWING KAUFFMAN named the five people who will run the franchise as part of his complicated succession plan, and all five echoed his goal to keep the team in Kansas City.
Kauffman, 76 and suffering from bone cancer, was not able to attend the press conference because of illness, said his wife, MURIEL.


Ultra Pac Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Classical Music in Review
Florilegium Chamber Choir The German Church 315 West 22d Street


Katie Beers to Stay Another Year in Foster Care
Katie Beers, the 10-year-old who was kidnapped and held captive for 16 days in an underground bunker, will remain in foster care for at least another year under an agreement reached in Suffolk County Family Court.
The agreement, which was confirmed by a lawyer involved in the case, reportedly involved an admission by Katie's mother, Marilyn Beers, that she was neglectful and that her lax supervision created the conditions that made the abduction possible.


Ex-Trooper Gets Prison for Faking Evidence
Despite a plea for leniency and letters of support from 200 family members and friends, a judge today sentenced a former state trooper to 6 to 18 years in prison for fabricating evidence in 21 criminal cases.
"When law enforcement is corrupt, nobody in society is free," Acting Justice Betty D. Friedlander of State Supreme Court told the former trooper, Robert M. Lishansky, before sentencing him for his role in an evidence-tampering scandal that has rocked the New York State police.


Bridge
When Gail Greenberg of Manhattan goes to Memphis later this month to compete in trials to determine the 1993 United States Women's Team for world championship play, she may think of a few days of concentrated play as a rest cure.
It will certainly be a change from her activities as proprietor of a new bridge club, Honors, at 42 East 74th Street.
Today, for example, she will be busy organizing a party, with play, prizes and a barbecue. (Those seeking information may call (212) 717-6364.) A week ago she was even busier: While competing in the Epson Worldwide Bridge Contest she was greeting players, answering the telephone and admitting new arrivals.


Holly Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Israel Bans Discrimination Against Homosexuals in Military
The Israeli Army, regarded by some Americans as a model worth studying in the debate over homosexuals in the military, said today that it had issued new orders banning discrimination against gay men and lesbians in recruiting and in assignment to sensitive security positions.
Officers say the orders also drop a previous requirement that soldiers undergo psychological evaluation if they are found to be homosexuals or declare that fact openly.


A Star and Understudy In a Drama of Teaching
IN Room 236 at Frederick Douglass middle school in Harlem, Jennifer Hollis is a 20-year-old ingenue, a fresh-faced, open-hearted junior from Connecticut College who is there as an intern.
Pupils in the school, just seven or eight years younger than her, stop at the door to look at her and point her out to each other.
In the subway on the way to school, girls approach her ostensibly to ask for help with homework.
Sometimes they ask bold questions such as did she get a car when she graduated from high school in Abington, Mass.
Her questioners were surprised when she told them no; they said they thought all white teen-agers in the suburbs received cars for graduation.


5,000 Women to Prove That the Mini Is Still in Style
Lisa Ondieki has been battling a bacterial infection, Wanda Panfil has been suffering from sciatica and Francie Larrieu-Smith is 40 years old.
But if that suggests that this morning's 22d running of the Advil Mini Marathon may be wide open to the more than 5,000 women who will turn Central Park into a festival of female achievement, don't count out the favorites too soon.
There is nothing wrong with 20-year-old Tecla Loroupe that a good night's sleep won't cure, and if Loroupe admitted to a little tiredness yesterday after a seven-hour flight from Frankfurt, don't be misled.
Loroupe has been training in Germany, but she hails from Kenya, and that alone would make her a sleeper to win in New York, as her countrywoman Delillah Asiago did two years ago.


Bronx Hears a Slur and Responds With Its Cheer
New Hampshire's State Parks and Recreation Director was only trying to explain why he wanted to scrap some old playground equipment.
The reason he gave: The state parks were starting to look like the Bronx.
Apparently, he picked on the wrong borough.
The Bronx, after all, known as "the borough of parks and universities," is a place that, statistically speaking, is 25 percent park.
It has the city's largest park: Pelham Bay, which, at 2,764 acres, is bigger than three Central Parks.
It also has Van Cortlandt Park, the city's third largest, which, at 1,164 acres, is roughly 1-60th the size of all the parks in New Hampshire.


Oratorio of Spirituals
In celebration of Black History Year in New York State, the Festival Ensemble Chorus and Orchestra, conducted by Frederick Bell, is to perform R. Nathaniel Dett's "The Ordering of Moses," an oratorio based on black spirituals, tomorrow at 4 P.M. at the Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters, 632 West 155th Street, Manhattan.
The soloists are to be Joan Donovan, soprano; Ruth Elmore, contralto; John Morrison, tenor, and T. Ray Lawrence, baritone.
Tickets are $10; $7 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 234-9321.


ATC Environmental Inc. reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


New Law in France Allows Random Identity Checks
After only a few hours of public debate, the National Assembly, which is dominated by conservatives, gave overwhelming approval today to a law authorizing the police to carry out random identity checks with the aim of clamping down on illegal immigration.
The law is one of three pieces of legislation prepared by the 10-week-old Government to address growing fears here that immigration from the third world is changing the French way of life.
Many French citizens also blame immigrants for rising crime levels.


New Plan Realty Trust reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Find Money for the M.T.A.
User-friendly subways and buses are essential to the quality of New York City life.
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority has made remarkable progress in upgrading both systems with new equipment and overdue maintenance, but City Hall now threatens to cut back.
In these final days of budget juggling, it is critical that the Mayor and City Council find more for mass transit.
Last month the State Legislature approved a five-year, $9.6 billion program for capital improvements in mass transit for the New York metropolitan area -- a commendably farsighted act on the state's part.
The plan assumes the city will put up $1 billion -- or $200 million a year, as in past years.
But Mayor David Dinkins's fiscal team contends that the city can't afford the full amount.


CHRONICLE
"And the winner is . . ." When that phrase is spoken tomorrow at the Student Academy Awards ceremony at the Samuel Goldwyn Theater in Beverly Hills, Calif., the recipients, in some cases, will be New York University film students.
N.Y.U. swept three of the four top awards, gold medals awarded by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.
The honors will go to Stephanie L. Hill in the documentary category, Graham Justice in the dramatic category and Ethan Spigland in the experimental category.
Silver and bronze medals will also be awarded in each category.


Johnson Is Out of Action With a Mystery Ailment
The official release yesterday termed the findings a "viral syndrome." The reality is that the doctors, Howard Johnson and the front office are all uncertain about what is wrong with the Mets' third baseman.
The alarm was such last night that the Mets anticipated having to place Johnson on the disabled list.
Johnson, who has complained of fatigue, swollen hands and persistent aches and pains, will not play this weekend.
An examination yesterday by Dr.
James Olichney was apparently deemed inconclusive or insufficient, and Johnson was set for another battery of tests today.
Johnson was at Shea Stadium briefly yesterday, and he spoke of weakness and sore joints.


May National Service Live Up to Peace Corps; Why Not Altruism?
To the Editor:
In "What Price Patriotism?" (Op-Ed, June 3), Professors Michael S. McPherson and Morton Owen Schapiro assert that it seems "silly" to assume young graduates would opt for President Clinton's national service program in lieu of a job in the public sector, considering the accompanying personal net loss of $10,000 per year of service.
Professors McPherson and Schapiro confuse their costs and benefits and miss the point of the national service program.


Browns Sign Metcalf to an Extension
Cleveland Browns running back ERIC METCALF signed a three-year contract extension through 1996 for about $1.7 million a year.
Metcalf gained 614 yards on 47 receptions and rushed for 301 yards on 73 carries last season. (AP)


Billups Enters Guilty Plea
Former defensive back LEWIS BILLUPS pleaded guilty yesterday in Lexington, Ky., to making threats against Washington Bullets basketball player REX CHAPMAN, whose sister, JENNY, Billups had been dating.
Billups, who spent most of his career with the Cincinnati Bengals, will be sentenced Aug. 13. (AP)


Macy Shows Gain in Sales, Cash Flow
Offering further evidence that its fortunes are slowly reversing, R. H. Macy &amp; Company, which is operating under bankruptcy-law protection, said yesterday that its sales and cash flow were stronger in its fiscal third quarter.
The retailer has met its plan for the last three months, and last month it announced that its expense-reduction efforts were paying off more quickly than it had anticipated.


NORTH KOREA SAYS IT WON'T PULL OUT OF ARMS PACT NOW
Averting a major confrontation with the West, North Korea said today that it would not withdraw for now from the international treaty banning the spread of nuclear weapons.
The announcement came just hours before the North Korean pullout was to take effect on Saturday.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
3.01
3.65
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.10
3.65
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.17
3.24
3.74
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.58
5.69
6.88
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.80
6.87
7.85
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.75
7.80
8.78
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.86
5.88
6.60
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6  NORTH KOREA CRISIS AVERTED
In a last-minute move before a deadline, North Korea said that it would not pull out of the treaty banning the spread of nuclear weapons and that it would abide by its commitments for the time being.  1  U.N.
STRIKES BACK IN SOMALIA
American and allied forces attacked in the air and on the ground to destroy the power base of a Somali leader who has been blamed for ordering the deadly ambush of United Nations peacekeepers.  1  NIGERIA SAYS ELECTION IS NOT OFF
Nigeria's military authorities said the first presidential elections in nearly a decade will go ahead as planned, despite a high court ruling that the balloting Saturday should be postponed.  4  RUSSIA HOLDS BACK ON TROOPS
Russia declined to commit troops to defend the six areas the United Nations has declared safe havens in Bosnia though officials have indicated that Russia would be willing to send more troops.  3  U.N.
TROOPS KILL 2 CROATS
British troops attached to the United Nations killed two Bosnian Croat militia members after Croats attacked and looted an unarmed aid convoy, killing some drivers.  3  DOUBTS ON UKRAINE ARMS PLEDGE
Ukraine is caught up in a severe economic downturn and a seeming breakdown in its political leadership, raising more doubts than ever about its ability to carry out a pledge to get rid of its nuclear weapons.  5  AIDS MEETING YIELDS LITTLE
The ninth international meeting on AIDS ended in Berlin after 5,500 presentations that showed little more than incremental gains in scientific knowledge about the disease.  5  A Cambodian province said it will secede and ordered the U.N. out.  6  French Assembly approved crackdown on illegal immigrants.  2  New Israeli Army rule protects gays from discrimination.  2  New Delhi Journal: A sense of collapse in a once-proud city.  4  National 7-11  HATE-CRIME SENTENCES BACKED
The Supreme Court gave its approval to a new approach to hate crimes, ruling unanimously that states may impose harsher sentences on criminals motivated by hate.  1
Experts said the ruling would aid hate-crime enforcement.  8  ANIMAL SACRIFICE PROTECTED
The Supreme Court unanimously ruled that a Florida city's ban on ritual animal sacrifice violated the religious freedom of the followers of an Afro-Cuban religion.  1  A SMALLER, SHARPER MILITARY
Senior Pentagon officials will present their vision of a smaller, reshaped post-cold-war military, that would rely on fewer but more versatile weapons systems.  1  TRAVELING ON ANOTHER'S DIME
Members of Congress traveled to hot spots in this country and around the world last year, courtesy of trade associations and lobbyists.  7  INVESTIGATION IN SENATE RACE
A Texas official has charged that Kay Bailey Hutchison misused state money and authority from her job as State Treasurer to pursue election to the United States Senate.  7  CAPITALIZING ON INDIAN CULTURE
Tribal leaders say there is a growing trend toward misusing American Indian culture for monetary gain, selling copies of sacred items.  7  CLINTON MEETS COURT HOPEFUL
Judge Stephen Breyer met with President Clinton for nearly two hours, clearing the final hurdle in his path to a Supreme Court nomination, White House aides said.  10  SEARCHING FOR PASSABLE TAX
The Senate is struggling to find a replacement to the President's B.T.U. tax that brings the least outcry from lobbyists.  10  CHEAPER SPACE STATION POSSIBLE
An advisory panel said the United States could develop a useful space station for substantially less money than NASA has proposed.  10  Beliefs: Roman Catholic bishops set aside an hour to discuss abuse.  6  A jury found that a farm union used illegal boycott tactics.  11  Metro Digest 23  ORDEAL ON THE SEA
As Chen Fuxing tells it, the Golden Venture's odyssey to America was a trial of struggle and desperation.
In an interview, he provided a glimpse of the ship's ordeal at sea.  1  CONFLICT IN CONNECTICUT
The Connecticut law banning certain assault weapons is the first so loaded with complications, with the interests of the state and its leading gun maker so entwined and so in conflict at the same time.  1  Business Digest 35
Robert E. Harrah, an industrialist.
Raymond Parker, Catskills hotelier and a rancher.
Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21  Editorials  To assure a nuclear-free Korea.
Abortion and health care package.
Find money for the M.T.A.
Fernandez legacy to city schools.
Letters  Russell Baker: Terror in the sunlight.
Students on social justice:  Mari Shopsis: The cold hand of charity.
Stephanie Nearpass: "Aunt Nancy Men," heroes of feminism.
Gabriel Baron Eber: One big union.
Christopher Pontecorvo Wiedmann: Freedom riders.
Heather R. McGeory: On the road to upheaval.
Gabriella Gruder-Poni: They died to defeat the Reich.
Chronicle 22 Bridge 14  Crossword 15


Arleen Auger, 53, Subtle Interpreter of Art Songs
Arleen Auger, an American soprano who was renowned for both her commanding presence on the opera stage and the subtlety of her song interpretations, died on Thursday at the home of a friend in Leusden, a suberb of Amsterdam, in the Netherlands.
She was 53 and lived in Hartsdale, N.Y.
Mary Lou Falcone, Miss Auger's publicity agent, said the cause was brain cancer.


The Venice Biennale: An Art Bazaar Abuzz
The 45th Venice Biennale may have its formal opening on Sunday, but for the last five days there have been more artists and dealers, museum curators, collectors and journalists milling around this sweltering city than pigeons on the Piazza San Marco.
It's like a giant convention that just happens to be about art, with curators negotiating loans in outdoor cafes, dealers rushing about with their artists in tow and collectors trying to figure out who the next rising stars of the art world will be.
The 98-year-old Biennale has long been regarded as the granddaddy of art exhibitions.
As Thomas Krens, the director of the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, pointed out, "Everyone may love to criticize it, but no one would dare miss it." This year more than 50 countries are represented, each having chosen the artists to be shown in its pavilion.
The show's theme, "The Cardinal Points of Art," was selected by Achille Bonito Oliva, the Biennale's curator, who said that "rather than imposing a restrictive critical approach," the theme he selected was a way of acknowledging "cultural nomadism and the coexistence of the languages that have formed contemporary art."


Toilets in the Park
To the Editor:
New York City's Central Park on a beautiful Sunday afternoon is a joy.
Having to use a toilet in Central Park on a beautiful Sunday afternoon is a horror.
Any woman who frequents the Sheep Meadow area knows that she is going to wait at least 20 minutes for a gruesome and unsanitary experience.
Never any toilet paper.
Always a stench.
Frequently puddles at our feet.


Energy Tax Quest: Levy That Draws Least Outcry
As it seeks to find a replacement for the Administration's B.T.U. tax, the Senate is struggling to choose the least ugly of several alternatives.
It has quickly discovered that every option has somebody ready to loathe it.


It Was a Grand Day . . . to Become a Citizen


Innkeeper Expands In Europe
Choice Hotels International has added 163 European hotels to its rapidly expanding hospitality empire, bringing to more than 3,000 the number of Choice franchises in 30 countries.
With its parent company, Manor Care Inc., Choice purchased the properties for an undisclosed sum from Inovest, one of France's largest operators of budget properties.
The acquisition gives Choice 144 more properties in France, plus 19 additional hotels in six other European countries, including its first hotels in Spain and Portugal.
The agreement comes less than two months after Choice formed a joint venture with the Journey's End Corporation, Canada's biggest hotel management company, which owns 120 inns.


Excerpts From Supreme Court Opinions on the Ritual Sacrifice of Animals
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's unanimous decision today in Church of the Lukumi v.
Hialeah that a city's prohibition of ritual animal sacrifice violated the constitutional right to free exercise of religion.
Justice Anthony M. Kennedy wrote the majority opinion, which was joined in full by Justice John Paul Stevens and in most respects by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justices Antonin Scalia, Clarence Thomas and Byron R. White.
Justice David H. Souter wrote a separate opinion, as did Justice Harry A. Blackmun, whose opinion was joined by Justice Sandra Day O'Connor.
BY JUSTICE KENNEDY, For the Court
The principle that government may not enact laws that suppress religious belief or practice is so well understood that few violations are recorded in our opinions.
Concerned that this fundamental nonpersecution principle of the First Amendment was implicated here, however, we granted certiorari.
Our review confirms that the laws in question were enacted by officials who did not understand, failed to perceive, or chose to ignore the fact that their official actions violated the nation's essential commitment to religious freedom.
The challenged laws had an impermissible object, and in all events the principle of general applicability was violated because the secular ends asserted in defense of the laws were pursued only with respect to conduct motivated by religious beliefs.
We invalidate the challenged enactments and reverse the judgment of the Court of Appeals.
This case involves practices of the Santeria religion, which originated in the 19th century.
When hundreds of thousands of members of the Yoruba people were brought as slaves from eastern Africa to Cuba, their traditional African religion absorbed significant elements of Roman Catholicism.
The resulting syncretion, or fusion, is Santeria, "the way of the saints." The Cuban Yoruba express their devotion to spirits, called orishas, through the iconography of Catholic saints.
Catholic symbols are often present at Santeria rites, and Santeria devotees attend the Catholic sacraments.
The Santeria faith teaches that every individual has a destiny from God, a destiny fulfilled with the aid and energy of the orishas.
The basis of the Santeria religion is the nurture of a personal relation with the orishas, and one of the principal forms of devotion is an animal sacrifice.
The sacrifice of animals as part of religious rituals has ancient roots.
. . .
According to Santeria teaching, the orishas are powerful but not immortal.
They depend for survival on the sacrifice.
Sacrifices are performed at birth, marriage and death rites, for the cure of the sick, for the initiation of new members and priests, and during an annual celebration.
Animals sacrificed in Santeria rituals include chickens, pigeons, doves, ducks, guinea pigs, goats, sheep and turtles.
The animals are killed by the cutting of the carotid arteries in the neck.
The sacrificed animal is cooked and eaten, except after healing and death rituals.
. . .
The religion was brought to this nation most often by exiles from the Cuban revolution.
The District Court estimated that there are at least 50,000 practitioners in South Florida today.
Petitioner Church of the Lukumi Babalu Aye Inc. (Church), is a not-for-profit corporation organized under Florida law in 1973.
The Church and its congregants practice the Santeria religion. . . .
In April 1987, the Church leased land in the city of Hialeah, Fla., and announced plans to establish a house of worship as well as a school, cultural center, and museum. . . .
The prospect of a Santeria church in their midst was distressing to many members of the Hialeah community.
. . .
In September 1987, the City Council adopted three substantive ordinances addressing the issue of religious animal sacrifice.
Ordinance 87-52 defined "sacrifice" as "to unnecessarily kill, torment, torture or mutilate an animal in a public or private ritual or ceremony not for the primary purpose of food consumption," and prohibited owning or possessing an animal "intending to use such animal for food purposes."
. . .
The Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment, which has been applied to the States through the Fourteenth Amendment, provides that "Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof . . ." The city does not argue that Santeria is not a "religion" within the meaning of the First Amendment.
Nor could it.
Although the practice of animal sacrifice may seem abhorrent to some, "religious beliefs need not be acceptable, logical, consistent, or comprehensible to others in order to merit First Amendment protection." Thomas v.
Review Bd. of Indiana Employment Security Div. (1981).
Given the historical association between animal sacrifice and religious worship, petitioners' assertion that animal sacrifice is an integral part of their religion "cannot be deemed bizarre or incredible." Frazee v.
Illinois Dept. of Employment Security (1989).
Neither the city nor the courts below, moreover, have questioned the sincerity of petitioners' professed desire to conduct animal sacrifices for religious reasons.
We must consider petitioners' First Amendment claim.
In addressing the constitutional protection for free exercise of religion, our cases establish the general proposition that a law that is neutral and of general applicability need not be justified by a compelling governmental interest even if the law has the incidental effect of burdening a particular religious practice.
Employment Div., Dept. of Human Resources of Oregon v.
Smith (1990).
. . .
Although a law targeting religious beliefs as such is never permissible, if the object of a law is to infringe upon or restrict practices because of their religious motivation, the law is not neutral (see Employment Div., Dept. of Human Resources of Oregon v. Smith) and it is invalid unless it is justified by a compelling interest and is narrowly tailored to advance that interest.
There are, of course, many ways of demonstrating that the object or purpose of a law is the suppression of religion or religious conduct.
To determine the object of a law, we must begin with its text, for the minimum requirement of neutrality is that a law not discriminate on its face.
A law lacks facial neutrality if it refers to a religious practice without a secular meaning discernable from the language or context.
Petitioners contend that three of the ordinances fail this test of facial neutrality because they use the words "sacrifice" and "ritual," words with strong religious connotations.
We agree that these words are consistent with the claim of facial discrimination, but the argument is not conclusive.
The words "sacrifice" and "ritual" have a religious origin, but current use admits also of secular meanings.
The ordinances, furthermore, define "sacrifice" in secular terms, without referring to religious practices.
. . .
The record in this case compels the conclusion that suppression of the central element of the Santeria worship service was the object of the ordinances. . . .
No one suggests, and on this record it cannot be maintained, that city officials had in mind a religion other than Santeria.
It becomes evident that these ordinances target Santeria sacrifice when the ordinances' operation is considered.
Apart from the text, the effect of a law in its real operation is strong evidence of its object.
To be sure, adverse impact will not always lead to a finding of impermissible targeting.
For example, a social harm may have been a legitimate concern of government for reasons quite apart from discrimination.
The subject at hand does implicate, of course, multiple concerns unrelated to religious animosity, for example, the suffering or mistreatment visited upon the sacrificed animals and health hazards from improper disposal.
But the ordinances when considered together disclose an object remote from these legitimate concerns.
The design of these laws accomplishes instead a "religious gerrymander," Walz v.
Tax Comm'n of New York City, an impermissible attempt to target petitioners and their religious practices.
. . .
In sum, the neutrality inquiry leads to one conclusion: The ordinances had as their object the suppression of religion.
The pattern we have recited discloses animosity to Santeria adherents and their religious practices; the ordinances by their own terms target this religious exercise; the texts of the ordinances were gerrymandered with care to proscribe religious killings of animals but to exclude almost all secular killings, and the ordinances suppress much more religious conduct than is necessary in order to achieve the legitimate ends asserted in their defense.
These ordinances are not neutral, and the court below committed clear error in failing to reach this conclusion.
We turn next to a second requirement of the Free Exercise Clause, the rule that laws burdening religious practice must be of general applicability.
Employment Div., Dept. of Human Resources of Oregon v.
Smith, 494 U. S., at 879-881.
All laws are selective to some extent, but categories of selection are of paramount concern when a law has the incidental effect of burdening religious practice. . . .
The principle that government, in pursuit of legitimate interests, cannot in a selective manner impose burdens only on conduct motivated by religious belief is essential to the protection of the rights guaranteed by the Free Exercise Clause. . . .
In this case we need not define with precision the standard used to evaluate whether a prohibition is of general application, for these ordinances fall well below the minimum standard necessary to protect First Amendment rights.
. . .
We conclude, in sum, that each of Hialeah's ordinances pursues the city's governmental interests only against conduct motivated by religious belief.
The ordinances "ha(ve) every appearance of a prohibition that society is prepared to impose upon  [ Santeria worshippers ]  but not upon itself." The Florida Star v.
B.
J.
F. (1989).
This precise evil is what the requirement of general applicability is designed to prevent.
A law burdening religious practice that is not neutral or not of general application must undergo the most rigorous of scrutiny.
To satisfy the commands of the First Amendment, a law restrictive of religious practice must advance "interests of the highest order" and must be narrowly tailored in pursuit of those interests. . . .
A law that targets religious conduct for distinctive treatment or advances legitimate governmental interests only against conduct with a religious motivation will survive strict scrutiny only in rare cases.
It follows from what we have already said that these ordinances cannot withstand this scrutiny.
. . .
BY JUSTICE SOUTER, Concurring
This case turns on a principle about which there is no disagreement, that the Free Exercise Clause bars government action aimed at suppressing religious belief or practice.
The Court holds that Hialeah's animal-sacrifice laws violate that principle, and I concur in that holding without reservation.
Because prohibiting religious exercise is the object of the laws at hand, this case does not present the more difficult issue addressed in our last free-exercise case, Employment Div., Dept. of Human Resources of Oregon v.
Smith (1990), which announced the rule that a "neutral, generally applicable" law does not run afoul of the Free Exercise Clause even when it prohibits religious exercise in effect.
The Court today refers to that rule in dicta, and despite my general agreement with the Court's opinion I do not join Part II, where the dicta appear, for I have doubts about whether the Smith rule merits adherence.
I write separately to explain why the Smith rule is not germane to this case and to express my view that, in a case presenting the issue, the Court should re-examine the rule Smith declared.
According to Smith, if prohibiting the exercise of religion results from enforcing a "neutral, generally applicable" law, the Free Exercise Clause has not been offended.
I call this the Smith rule to distinguish it from the noncontroversial principle, also expressed in Smith, though established long before, that the Free Exercise Clause is offended when prohibiting religious exercise results from a law that is not neutral or generally applicable.
It is this noncontroversial principle, that the Free Exercise Clause requires neutrality and general applicability, that is at issue here.
But before turning to the relationship of Smith to this case, it will help to get the terms in order, for the significance of the Smith rule is not only in its statement that the Free Exercise Clause requires no more than "neutrality" and "general applicability," but in its adoption of a particular, narrow conception of free-exercise neutrality.
. . .
While general applicability is, for the most part, self-explanatory, free-exercise neutrality is not self-revealing.
A law that is religion neutral on its face or in its purpose may lack neutrality in its effect by forbidding something that religion requires . . . .
A secular law, applicable to all, that prohibits consumption of alcohol, for example, will affect members of religions that require the use of wine differently from members of other religions and nonbelievers, disproportionately burdening the practice of, say, Catholicism or Judaism.
Without an exemption for sacramental wine, Prohibition may fail the test of religion neutrality.
It does not necessarily follow from that observation, of course, that the First Amendment requires an exemption from Prohibition; that depends on the meaning of neutrality as the Free Exercise Clause embraces it.
The point here is the unremarkable one that our common notion of neutrality is broad enough to cover not merely what might be called formal neutrality, which as a free-exercise requirement would only bar laws with an object to discriminate against religion, but also what might be called substantive neutrality, which, in addition to demanding a secular object, would generally require government to accommodate religious differences by exempting religious practices from formally neutral laws.
If the Free Exercise Clause secures only protection against deliberate discrimination, a formal requirement will exhaust the Clause's neutrality command; if the Free Exercise Clause, rather, safeguards a right to engage in religious activity free from unnecessary governmental interference, the Clause requires substantive, as well as formal, neutrality.
Though Smith used the term "neutrality" without a modifier, the rule it announced plainly assumes that free-exercise neutrality is of the formal sort.
Distinguishing between laws whose "object" is to prohibit religious exercise and those that prohibit religious exercise as an "incidental effect," Smith placed only the former within the reaches of the Free Exercise Clause; the latter, laws that satisfy formal neutrality, Smith would subject to no free-exercise scrutiny at all, even when they prohibit religious exercise in application.
The four Justices who rejected the Smith rule, by contrast, read the Free Exercise Clause as embracing what I have termed substantive neutrality.
The proposition for which the Smith rule stands, then, is that formal neutrality, along with general applicability, are sufficient conditions for constitutionality under the Free Exercise Clause.
That proposition is not at issue in this case, however, for Hialeah's animal-sacrifice ordinances are not neutral under any definition, any more than they are generally applicable.
This case, rather, involves the noncontroversial principle repeated in Smith, that formal neutrality and general applicability are necessary conditions for free-exercise constitutionality. . . .
In being so readily susceptible to resolution by applying the Free Exercise Clause's "fundamental nonpersecution principle," this is far from a representative free-exercise case.
While, as the Court observes, the Hialeah City Council has provided a rare example of a law actually aimed at suppressing religious exercise, Smith was typical of our free-exercise cases, involving as it did a formally neutral, generally applicable law.
The rule Smith announced, however, was decidedly untypical of the cases involving the same type of law.
Because Smith left those prior cases standing, we are left with a free-exercise jurisprudence in tension with itself, a tension that should be addressed, and that may legitimately be addressed, by re-examining the Smith rule in the next case that would turn upon its application.


No Headline
"It's taken us so much pain to get here. All we heard was Americans really champion human rights. We were under the impression we would get to stay." -- CHEN FUXING, who described the immigrant voyage that ended on a Queens beach last week.  [ 24:6. ]


Excerpts From Court's Decision to Permit Hate-Crime Penalties
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's decision today in Wisconsin v.
Mitchell, upholding the constitutionality of laws that provide increased punishment for crimes motivated by bias.
Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist wrote the unanimous opinion.
Respondent Todd Mitchell's sentence for aggravated battery was enhanced because he intentionally selected his victim on account of the victim's race.
The question presented in this case is whether this penalty enhancement is prohibited by the 1st and 14th Amendments.
We hold that it is not.


Woman Won't Take School Board Seat
A woman elected to a community school board in the southeast Bronx who had faced allegations that she was ineligible for the seat because she lived outside the district announced yesterday that she would not take her seat.
The woman, Sandra Love, had listed 875 Boynton Avenue in Soundview as her address when she filed as a candidate for Community School Board 8.
But Edward F. Stancik, the special commissioner of investigation for the New York City school district, said yesterday that "evidence indicated that her primary residence was actually in Mount Vernon."


Newspaper Executive Warns Graduates on Speech Codes
Leonard Downie Jr., the executive editor of The Washington Post, criticized efforts to restrict and punish "hate speech" on college campuses in a commencement address at Ohio State University yesterday.
The university conferred 5,846 degrees at its 115th annual commencement.


No Babe Ruth Reprise, but Still a Sense of Loss
This is a town that defines itself by its institutions -- the Red Sox, Harvard, the Kennedys, Larry Bird and the Celtics and, for 121 years, The Boston Globe.
Today, as news came that The Globe had been bought by The New York Times, it felt a little as if the big city rivals had muscled in, even though those rivals had been invited to acquire the paper.
David Nyhan, a columnist at The Globe who delivered the paper as a boy, walked out his front door at 7 A.M. today and picked up his paper, which carried a front-page banner headline and an article about the sale.


METRO DIGEST
A VOYAGE OF TERROR  As Chen Fuxing tells it, the Golden Venture's odyssey to America was a trial of desperation and fear.
The lack of food, water, light and space broke the 300 travelers down and a kind of Darwinian order took shape.
The weaker ones, who typically got the last scraps of a daily meal of rice and water, would beg for more.
Page 1.
AT COLT, A SENSE OF BETRAYAL  Inside the rambling old red-brick fortress of Colt's Manufacturing Company in Hartford, where lines of the company's best-selling black military-style Sporter rifles stand ready for shipment, the sense of betrayal hangs as heavy as the aroma of machine oil.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  NEW STRATEGY IN MOB CASE  In a new attempt to try Vincent Gigante on charges that he is the boss of a major crime family, Federal prosecutors say four defectors from the Mafia will testify that he is faking mental incompetency.
Page 25.
DENTIST CHARGED WITH RAPE  A Bronx dentist has been arrested on charges that he twice raped a 16-year-old patient whom he had placed under anesthesia during a visit to his Melrose office, the police said.
The girl, a patient of the dentist for several years, was hired for a summer job as his receptionist.
Page 25.
A YOUNG TEACHER ALSO LEARNS  In Room 236 at Frederick Douglass Middle School in Harlem, Jennifer Hollis is a 20-year-old ingenue, a fresh-faced, open-hearted junior from Connecticut College who is there as an intern.
Pupils in the school, just seven or eight years younger than her, stop at the door to look at her and point her out to each other.
Page 25.
WHERE IS THE GRASS GREENER?
New Hampshire's state parks and recreation director was only trying to explain why he wanted to scrap some old playground equipment.
The reason he gave: The state parks were starting to look like the Bronx.
Apparently, he picked on the wrong borough.
Page 25.
Operation Rescue's founder, Randall Terry, is sentenced to five months in jail.
Page 10.
REGION COOPERATION, NOT PROGRESS  In the best of circumstances, buying a cooperative requires as much coordination as juggling five balls in the air while riding a unicycle.
Throw in the emotional politics and the personalities of the Yonkers desegregation case and things become even more difficult.
Page 26.  6-YEAR TERM FOR FORMER TROOPER  Despite a plea for leniency and letters of support from 200 family members and friends, a judge in Ithaca, N.Y., sentenced a former state trooper to 6 to 18 years in prison for fabricating evidence in 21 criminal cases.
Page 26.
CONTINUED FOSTER CARE FOR KATIE BEERS  Katie Beers, the 10-year-old who was kidnapped and held captive for 16 days in an underground prison, will remain in foster care for at least another year under an agreement reached in Suffolk County Family Court in Riverhead.
Page 26.
FLORIO SIGNS ANTI-BIAS LAW  Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey has signed a bill to allow victims of bias crimes to sue their assailants.
Page 8.


F.C.C. Delays Cable TV Price Cuts
Cable television customers will have to wait a few more months for the Government to impose $1 billion in price reductions because the Federal Communications Commission needs more time and money to tackle its own regulations.
The F.C.C. had planned to impose tough new cable rate regulations on June 21 that were expected to produce the price rollbacks nationwide.
But the commission announced today that it would have to delay the rollbacks until after Oct. 1 because Congress had yet to appropriate an extra $12 million for more computers, office space and 240 new lawyers, accountants and other staff to deal with an expected avalanche of paperwork.


Morgan's Lawsuit Award Reduced
A Federal appeals court in San Francisco reversed a $450,000 punitive-damages award in a police-misconduct case involving Hall of Famer JOE MORGAN on the grounds that the award was too large.
The appeals court upheld a lower court ruling that Morgan's constitutional rights were violated when he was detained by a police officer at Los Angeles International Airport in 1988.
The court also upheld $90,000 in compensatory damages. (AP)


Looking Closer at Indignation Over Schools and Doctors' Cars
To the Editor:
Sometimes I have to laugh at the things people say in your pages.
Righteous indignation combined with faulty logic is particularly entertaining.
A single issue (June 1) gave me a couple of chuckles.


Classical Music in Review
Harlem Festival Orchestra American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters


May National Service Live Up to Peace Corps
To the Editor:
In 1987 two professors at Mercy College in New York compared the salary history of 1,000 former Peace Corps volunteers with 1,000 Fulbright scholars.


Maxco Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Mets Make a Deal, Sending Fernandez Back North
The Mets, unable to deliver at all on a season of promise, at least made good yesterday on a week's worth of threats of a shake-up.
They traded shortstop Tony Fernandez to the Toronto Blue Jays for outfielder Darrin Jackson and gave reliever Paul Gibson his outright release.
The satisfaction of the dealing, though, was minimal, considering that the Mets had regarded their acquisition of Fernandez from San Diego last winter as an absolute steal that would simultaneously bolster their defense and offense.
Yesterday's trade addressed one of the club's less-pressing needs and raised questions about its long-term plans for the shortstop position.


Abortion and the Health Care Package
Within days of his inauguration, President Clinton kept an important promise to American women.
In discarding five restrictive Federal policies, he supported their right to make their own decisions about their own reproductive lives -- and rejected his immediate predecessors' attempts to limit that right.
Given his vigorous support of abortion rights, one might assume that Mr.
Clinton would be equally vigorous in insuring that any national health care package include abortion services.
Assume nothing.
Asked about the issue at a televised town meeting recently, he said weakly, "I don't think a decision has been made about that," adding, "we shouldn't take away from people some right they may now have in their health insurance plans."


Times Co.'s Strategy: Dominate Northeast
With its $1.1 billion purchase of The Boston Globe, The New York Times Company is taking the biggest step in its 20-year effort to move beyond metropolitan New York and its flagship newspaper, further hedging its financial future.
The Globe purchase certainly advances that goal, analysts and consultants agree.
But the question raised by the purchase, they say, is whether it is smart to make a huge bet on the Northeast, a region whose economic outlook is uncertain, and on the newspaper business, an industry often regarded as mature.


Nothing Elementary About the Elements
The United States Open seemed to have arrived a week early, in the second round of the Buick Classic, as swirling winds made for a survival test today rather than the kind of birdie assault customarily seen on the PGA Tour.
After 36 holes on a treacherous setup at the Westchester Country Club, only eight golfers were under par, with Tom Kite, Jeff Maggert and Duffy Waldorf tied for the lead at three-under-par 139.


Beliefs
It is difficult to imagine a convention of 250 unmarried men where the great danger is that sex will go insufficiently discussed.
But many people fear that could happen next week when the country's Roman Catholic bishops gather in New Orleans for the semiannual meeting of their national conference.
At a two-day meeting, the bishops have scheduled a little less than an hour to talk about the problem gnawing at the reputation and morale of the American Catholic Church: sexual abuse of minors by priests.
In a crowded agenda, that issue will compete with questions like "what is the right age for receiving the sacrament of Confirmation" and "when should masculine pronouns be retained for God" -- topics that soak up episcopal energies like blotting paper.


Big Breaks for Buying Alternative-Energy Car
NEW tax breaks become available on July 1 for people who buy cars that run on electricity, natural gas or other alternative energy sources.
The changes, enacted by Congress last year as part of energy legislation, are especially generous for electric cars.
Consumers can claim a tax credit of 10 percent for an electric vehicle, effectively receiving a government rebate of up to $4,000.


Moscow Won't Send More Troops to Balkans
Despite requests from Britain and France, Russia declined today to commit troops to the United Nations peacekeeping force that is to defend six "safe havens" for the beleaguered Muslims in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
In recent weeks, the Russian Foreign Minister, Andrei V. Kozyrev, has indicated that Russia would be willing to send more troops as peacekeepers to the Balkans, a pledge he reiterated today.
"We will be prepared to send additional peacekeepers," he told reporters before meeting with Secretary of State Warren Christopher.


School Board Seeks Refund Of Bus Fees
Last year, without warning, New York City school authorities alerted 37 bus companies about a costly mistake: Since 1986, the Board of Education said, it had overpaid the companies between $20 million and $22 million for student transportation and the board wanted its money back.
The bus companies, however, have refused to return a penny, contending that school administrators were responsible for the mix-up by switching in 1990 to a new system of computing contract increases and suddenly applying it retroactively.


Chock Full O'Nuts reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Rape Case in a Small Town Stirs Cries of Injustice
The events that took place behind locked doors at the Casablanca restaurant and bar in the early morning hours of Oct. 26, 1991, are no longer in dispute.
A 24-year-old local woman, a hospital technician, passed out in the women's restroom after too many free drinks.
Her date, the son of the Gouverneur police chief, was asleep outside in his pickup truck.


Oh, the Places We Could Go . . .


First Mortgage (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Common Traditions and Visions for 2 Big Papers
The marriage of The New York Times and The Boston Globe began with a phone call last fall from Arthur Ochs Sulzberger, a descendant of a man who stabilized an ailing newspaper in New York, to William O. Taylor, a descendant of a man who kept one afloat in Boston.
In a way, both men said yesterday, it was their similarities and the similar traditions of the newspapers they have run for much of their adult lives that brought them -- and their companies -- together.


Worries Over Inflation Are Eased by May Data
Inflation at the producer level evaporated in May, providing strong evidence, relieved economists said today, that jumps earlier in the year did not represent the start of a worrisome price surge.
The Government also reported today that retail sales in May posted a weaker-than-expected rise, an indication of continued lackluster growth in the economy.


Indians Complain of Religious and Cultural Theft
In a trendy art shop here, a fur-covered doll identified as a Navajo dancing bear glares from a shelf, its mouth agape and arms outstretched in a furious stance.
With a $170 price tag, the doll seems to be a cherished artifact of American Indian culture.


King C. Chen, 67, Dies; Studied Asian Politics
King C. Chen, a political science professor and author who specialized in Asian politics and international relations, died on Wednesday at a hospital in Newark.
He was 67.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Yonkers Outlines Barriers To Minority Housing Plan
In the best of circumstances, buying a cooperative requires as much coordination as juggling five balls in the air while riding a unicycle.
Throw in the emotional politics and the personalities of the Yonkers desegregation case and things become even more difficult.
That became apparent in a Federal courtroom yesterday as the City of Yonkers tried to explain why in more than a year's effort to desegregate the city's housing it had yet to move a single family into a cooperative apartment.
The act of lining up qualified families, fiscally stable buildings, welcoming cooperative boards, state and Federal mortgage assistance agencies, and feuding city and court officials is proving to be an extraordinary challenge.


Before Dawn, Flares and Gunfire
Under the deafening drone of planes, orange flares cascaded through the black sky just before dawn.
The city shook for more than an hour as an American gunship fired dozens of booming rounds at ground targets.
Several bursts of machine gun fire responded from the area where General Aidid's house is located, and what appeared to be two fires glowed on the horizon.
Then the gunship fire stopped at about 5 A.M. in what appeared to be a temporary lull.
Twice the Muslim call to prayer echoed through the city.


Getting a New England Day Off to a Pleasant Start


Crying Betrayal in Hartford, Colt Faces Uncertain Future
Inside the rambling old red-brick fortress of Colt's Manufacturing Company, where lines of black military-style Sporter rifles stand ready for shipment, the sense of betrayal hangs as heavy as the aroma of machine oil.
The Connecticut General Assembly, which just three years ago rescued this history-laden company by buying 47 percent of the stock, this week banned sales of the Sporter -- Colt's best-selling rifle -- blaming it, along with other military-style semiautomatic rifles, for an increase in urban drug violence.


Alfred Funk, 43, Dies; Led the German Society
Dr.
Alfred Funk, executive director of the German Society of the City of New York, died on Thursday at Jersey City Medical Center in Jersey City.
A resident and native of Jersey City, he was 43.
The cause was a heart attack, the society reported.


2 Big Unions Drop Plan For a Northwest Stake
The two largest unions representing Northwest Airlines workers have scuttled a proposed concession agreement that would have given the workers a significant stake in the carrier in exchange for cuts in wages and benefits.
The airline has signaled it needs concessions to lower operating costs and avoid filing for protection from creditors under bankruptcy law.
The move by the Machinists and Aerospace Workers International Association and the International Brotherhood of Teamsters to abandon the proposal before either group took a final vote sets up another round of airline-union negotiations.


NIGERIA SAYS VOTE WILL STILL BE HELD
Nigeria's military authorities announced today that the first presidential elections in nearly a decade would go ahead as planned on Saturday, despite a ruling from the nation's highest court that the voting be postponed.
The authorities said the high court in Abuja, the capital, had no right to preside over the conduct of the elections.
The vote will be held as scheduled, they said, despite allegations that the election may have already been marred by fraud and vote-buying.


Review/Dance; Moving Little, Saying Much
Phoebe Neville is celebrating her 30th anniversary as a choreographer with "Amazon Songs, 1991-92." The solo program is being presented through tomorrow night at St.
Mark's Church under the auspices of the church's Danspace Project.
There is no one quite like Ms.
Neville in American dance, for she can conjure up melancholy, wonder, terror or ecstasy with the barest minimum of steps and gestures.
She does very little, but she achieves much.


Society Is Entitled To Deadly Retribution
To the Editor:
In "Death Row, U.S.A." (Op-Ed, June 2), Jack Greenberg styles himself "one who supports abolition of the death penalty." I respond as one who supports the death penalty's continuation and prompt imposition.


Have Lobby, Will Travel, U.S. Lawmakers Report
When trade associations, interest groups or foreign lobbyists paid the way, members of Congress were a mobile lot in 1992.
West Palm Beach, Fla., was a popular winter destination.
New Orleans was fashionable in the spring.
Some made their way to Taipei or Israel for extended forays.
Congress released the financial disclosure forms of most of its 535 representatives and senators today, making public the travel itineraries and personal financial data for the past year.


INSIDE
Economic Reports Ease Fear of Inflation Surge
Producer price inflation was flat in May and retail sales posted a weaker-than-expected rise.
The reports pointed to slow economic growth and allayed fears that the Federal Reserve would soon raise interest rates to curb inflation, which had surged earlier in the year.
Page 35.
Cable Price Cuts Delayed
The Government-imposed reductions in cable television rates will be delayed because the F.C.C. needs more money to put them in place.
Page 35.
Doubt Over Ukraine Arms
With Ukraine's leadership in disarray and its economy in a downturn, the ability to make the transition to a non-nuclear state is in doubt.
Page 5.
Bulls Beat Suns Again
The Chicago Bulls beat the Phoenix Suns to take a commanding 2-0 lead in the National Basketball Association championship series.
Page 29.


Orioles, Cardinals, Blue Jays, Sea Gulls?
With apologies to the Brewers and Yankees because of the negative connotation associated with the phrase, it was a night for the birds at County Stadium.
More than a hundred sea gulls congregated on the field in the early innings tonight to eat newborn moths in the grass.
Some even stayed for nine innings of exciting baseball.
What they witnessed was a wonderful comeback by the Yankees that peaked with Kevin Maas blasting a two-run pinch-homer in the ninth inning off Doug Henry to lift the Yankees to a 5-4 victory.


THE SUPREME COURT: Animal Sacrifice; Court, Citing Religious Freedom, Voids a Ban on Animal Sacrifices
The Supreme Court ruled today that a Florida city's ban on ritual animal sacrifice violated the religious freedom of the followers of an Afro-Cuban religion in which the sacrifice of animals plays a central role.
All nine Justices agreed that the prohibition, enacted in 1987 by the City of Hialeah, violated the First Amendment's guarantee of the free exercise of religion.
"The principle that government may not enact laws that suppress religious belief or practice is so well understood that few violations are recorded in our opinions," Justice Anthony M. Kennedy wrote for the Court.  [ Excerpts, page 9. ]


Cheaper Student Loans in the Offing
Student loans will be cheaper, beginning with the 1994-95 academic year, if a bill approved Thursday by a Senate committee is enacted.
The up-front fees charged to students would be cut in half to 4 percent of the loan amount from 8 percent now.
"It will be an immediate savings," said Madeleine Kunin, Deputy Secretary of Education.
"And we're very confident it will be a more streamlined system."


British Company Will Buy Calgon Unit From Merck
Merck &amp; Company, the world's largest prescription drug maker, announced an agreement yesterday to sell its Calgon Water Management specialty chemicals business to English China Clays P.L.C. for $307.5 million in cash.
Calgon, based in Pittsburgh, had about $225 million in sales last year.
It has 1,300 employees, mainly in the United States.
Calgon products are used in water treatment, cosmetics, paper making and other industrial processes.


U.S. Open: Towns Brace For 30,000
TOMORROW, the deluge.
With the start of practice rounds for the U.S.
Open, an estimated 30,000 spectators will descend upon the Baltusrol Golf Club here.
For Springfield (population: 14,000) and its neighbors, Summit and Union, the weeklong championship will present a giant challenge in crowd control and a major economic opportunity.


POSTINGS: Seaport Salvation; Greek Revival Restoration
Frank J. Sciame couldn't help noticing 247 Water Street three years ago.
That was when his firm, the F. J. Sciame Construction Company, was building the new Seamen's Church Institute, two doors to the south.
At the same time, the company was looking to move out of its offices at 24 West 40th Street.
No. 247 had surely been a handsome Greek Revival structure in its day, with six trunk-like gray granite piers at its base, supporting a broad granite entablature.
But decrepitude had turned into disaster in January 1990, when an entire section of brick tore off the building's facade during a snowstorm.


SAINT HILLARY
As a resident of New York State who has lived under the divine guidance of Saint Mario Cuomo for too many years, I would caution the newly canonized Saint Hillary against trying to force her beliefs on the people of this country.


The Stuff That Plays Are Made Of
Anna Deavere Smith has been honing her new one-woman show, "Twilight: Los Angeles, 1992" up until the last minute.
The play, whose subject is the Los Angeles riots, is a follow-up to "Fires in the Mirror," her critically praised 1992 show at the Joseph Papp Public Theater in New York.
Ms.
Smith creates her works by interviewing people about a particular topic.
Then using their own words, she brings each individual to life on stage.


Christopher Gives Turks Plan to End Rights Abuses
Secretary of State Warren Christopher asked Turkish leaders today to cooperate with a detailed American proposal to help end widespread human rights abuses in the country, he and other Administration officials said.
At the same time, the United States announced that it would provide Turkey with $336 million in aircraft and other military equipment.


World Markets; Telmex Rides a Roller Coaster
MEXICO'S stock market, the Bolsa Mexicana de Valores, has grown in sophistication and importance recently, but one stock dominates it -- Telefonos de Mexico.
Telmex is also one of the most heavily traded New York Stock Exchange issues.
And in the past two weeks, a few stray words by a Telmex executive in New York about disappointing earnings ignited a selloff in both markets, proving that while all eyes at the Bolsa may be on the fate of the North American Free Trade Agreement, company news still moves markets, especially if it's made by Telmex.


Ending Torture Isn't Colonialism
It turns history upside down when third-world countries, long the victims of colonialist oppression, chop away at the liberating principles of human rights.
But that is exactly what's happened in preparation for the World Conference on Human Rights, which opens in Vienna tomorrow.
So deep are divisions over the universality of human rights, a concept some belittle as excessively "Western," that delegates could not agree on condemning torture in their draft declaration.
Prodded by China and Indonesia, 40 Asian countries approved a statement contending that standards of justice and fairness should be tempered by "regional peculiarities and various historical, cultural and religious backgrounds." The statement adds that human rights should never be used as "an instrument of political pressure" or made a condition for development aid.
Going further, 41 African states say their right to such aid is absolute.


New York Acts On Rental Cars
New York is following Florida and Colorado in removing any identifying designations from the license plates of rental cars.
Auto rental companies were among those calling for a change after a German tourist driving a rented car was killed in Miami in April.
The companies say marked cars have been a target for years, although a spokesman for Hertz, Joseph Russo, hastened to say that "the problem seen in Florida has not occurred elsewhere, except in terms of auto theft."


SAINT HILLARY
Your article on Saint Hillary was a devilish attempt to set her up as a visionary, impractical dreamer.


Where Are The Cukors?
To the Editor:
In describing "boy" and "girl" movies  [ "The Great Divide: The Sexes at the Movies," May 23 ] , Suzanna Andrews is really kind to men.
I went to the movies two or three times a week as a kid.
Now I can hardly find five a year that don't make me ill.
Part of the problem is that there are no directors like George Cukor, who thought women were fascinating and wonderful.
Male directors have tapped into the pornography of violence so dear to young men's hearts.


Mirrored Images
Body-obsessed Los Angeles seems to be just as enthralled with models as New York.
The oh-so-glamorous world of modeling will be the subject of two films in development and a recently signed novel.
And who, by the way, were those blond twins everyone spotted on the runway at the Calvin Klein benefit for AIDS Project Los Angeles?
MODEL MOVIE I: Columbia Pictures is developing a film that will take an arch look at the modeling business.
The team that put together "Heathers" is behind this one: Daniel Waters as screenwriter and Michael Lehmann as director.


More Blizzard
To the Editor: In the Blizzard of '93, my husband and I were safe at home in Connecticut.
However, last summer we had a "stranded passenger" experience that proved how accommodating an airline can be.
In July, my husband and I and our 13-year-old grandson boarded a United flight at La Guardia for Boise, Idaho.
We were to stop in Denver, and as we approached, an announcement came that the city was experiencing severe thunderstorms and our flight would terminate there.


Hired Guns Offer Tactics For the Race
CHRISTINE TODD WHITMAN stood at the podium in an East Brunswick hotel last Tuesday surrounded by cheering supporters after winning the Republican nomination to run against Gov.
Jim Florio in November.
Responding to supporters chanting: "Jim must go.  Jim must go," Mrs.
Whitman promised: "We'll do it.  We'll do it." She then described how she would keep that promise: "We're going to do it in the way we ran this campaign. We're going to do it based on the issues."


Strolling a New England Isle
FOR a brief moment last August Cuttyhunk Island made the news.
The quickest way to describe the location of the newly named Queen's Bottom reef off Massachusetts where the QE2 ran aground is to say that it lies halfway between this little-known island and Martha's Vineyard.
By the time my wife, Susan, and I headed out to Cuttyhunk on our annual visit late in September, the island had returned to its somnolence.
In history texts, the first English settlement in New England, established by Bartholomew Gosnold and his band of pioneers on Cuttyhunk in 1602, occasionally receives a brief footnote.
But Gosnold's major mark on history was made when he anchored "near a great cape, where in five or six hours we had pestered our ship so with codfish that we threw numbers of them overboard again . . . wherefore we named the place 'Cape Cod.' "


Suspects' Haste a Puzzle in Kuwait Trial
As Kuwait presents its case against 14 men being tried in what authorities say was a plot to kill former President George Bush, local officials and Western diplomats say the evidence has only strengthened their view that Iraq provided the explosives-laden jeep that the defendants are accused of taking into the country.
But the bumbling of the ring accused of planning the remote-control bombing in April -- including their failure to receive much help from supposed associates in Kuwait and their rush to abandon the explosives and hurry back to Iraq before their mission had been completed -- has puzzled many people who watched the initial day of testimony on June 5.


Whistle Silenced, Cityspire Sales Resume
CITYSPIRE, the 73-story tower at 150 West 56th Street, is known for many things, not all of them flattering.
It was built taller than zoning rules allowed.
It was supposed to have an arcade and rehearsal studio, which were never built.
Then, it began to whistle so loudly that people 10 blocks away lost sleep on windy nights.


Baseball Brawl With a Difference
To the Sports Editor:
The outrageous 20-minute brawl on June 6 between the Baltimore Orioles and the Seattle Mariners should not be taken lightly.
Umpire Durwood Merrill called it the worst melee between two teams that he had seen in 17 years.


In the End, Distortion Triumphed Over Lani Guinier's Writings
To the Editor:
Prof.
Carol Swain's "Black-Majority Districts: A Bad Idea" (Op-Ed, June 3) criticizes race-conscious districting, the policy of promoting the representation of the interests of black Americans by establishing electoral districts with black majorities.
According to Professor Swain, African-Americans "cannot benefit from the continued emphasis on segregating black voters in black majority districts." She says she disagrees here with Prof.
Lani Guinier, the former nominee to head the Justice Department's Civil Rights Division.


Karpov as Black: No More Mr. Draw
ANATOLY KARPOV used to be generous in agreeing to draws when he played Black, saving his attempts at winning for his turns with White.
So, the former world champion won tournament after tournament by half-point margins without suffering a defeat.
Lately, he has opted for a more strenuous strategy that includes playing for victory as Black.
This gives him greater margins of victory, but he loses a game now and then.


Shortsightedness
To the Editor:
Prejudice does die hard, as Suzanna Andrews makes clear.
In discussing gender stereotypes, she dismisses two movies because the male leads, Danny DeVito and Al Pacino, are short and therefore have no credible romantic appeal.
Either I've missed some fundamental point about prejudice, or she has.
HALLIE BLACK Chicago


Kollek's Last Run May Be Toughest
Not many months ago, when he was a mere 81 years old, Mayor Teddy Kollek allowed that he had become too old to run for office again and that he himself would not vote for someone with so much mileage on him.
Now, a few weeks past his 82d birthday and deep into his 28th year of dominating Jerusalem City Hall, Mr.
Kollek has decided that he has enough steam left, after all, for one more hurrah.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended May 29  MANHATTAN  Chelsea  $371,000
112 West 18th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 850-sq.-ft. loft condo in a renovated building; elevator, dining area, exposed-wood beams; common charge $348, 100% tax-abated (Brokers: Delson/ Ginsberg-Coleman/Neary)  Greenwich Village  $560,000
45 Fifth Avenue (11th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,500-sq.-ft. duplex penthouse-co-op in a prewar building; dining area, solarium, 1,000-sq.-ft. roof terrace, Hudson River view; maintenance $1,747, 60% tax-deductible (Brokers: Don DeFranco Co.-Corcoran Group)  SoHo  $285,000
426 West Broadway (Prince St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,250-sq.-ft. condo in a renovated prewar building; elevator; common charge $647, taxes $1,392 (Brokers: Eychner &amp; Associates-Bellmarc Realty)  Upper East Side  $959,000
1056 Fifth Avenue (87th St.)  4-bedroom, 5-bath, 3,000-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, maid's room, dining room, 3 exposures; maintenance $2,556, 48% tax-deductible (Broker: Freda Green &amp; Associates)  West Side  $390,000
1991 Broadway (66th St.)  2-bedroom, 3-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. postwar condo; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, den, 2 terraces, Jacuzzi, 4 exposures; common charge $931, taxes $3,600 (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  BRONX  Riverdale  $81,000
3875 Waldo Avenue  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; entry foyer, gallery, dining room, sunken living room, renovated kitchen; maintenance $590, 45% tax-deductible (Broker: ERA/Susan Goldy &amp; Co. Realtors)  Wakefield  $140,000
3971 Amundson Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished attic, 1-car garage, 33- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $850 (Cancro Realty)  BROOKLYN  Cobble Hill  $302,500
23 Douglass Street  2-family, 4-story, brick and brownstone house; 3 bedrooms in primary duplex; 2 bedrooms in other duplex; 1 1/2 baths in each; original moldings and detail, 50.3- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,250 (Broker: Harborview Realty)  Park Slope  $300,000
399 4th Street  2-family, 4-story brownstone in need of renovation; 6 bedrooms, dining room in primary triplex, 1 bedroom, 1 bath in simplex, 20- by 95-ft. lot, taxes $2,300 (Broker: Warren Lewis Realty)  Windsor Terrace  $122,000
202 Seeley Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining area, eat-in kitchen, 2 exposures; maintenance $530, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Barron Real Estate)  QUEENS  Forest Hills  $250,000
68-50 Clyde Street  2-family, attached, 3-story brick house; 2 baths in primary unit; 1 bath in other; 2 bedrooms, dining room in each, 18- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,700 (Broker: Advantage Forest Hills Realty)  Rego Park  $320,000
65-29 Fitchett Street  2-family semi-attached brick house; 3 bedrooms in primary unit; 2 bedrooms in other; dining room, 1 1/2 bath in each; finished basement, 2-car garage, 32- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $3,200 (Broker: Madeleine Realty)  STATEN ISLAND  Eltingville  $252,500
25 Mott Street  2-family detached brick and frame house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each unit; full basement, 55- by 100-ft. irregular lot; taxes $2,000 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/Schlott Realtors)  Port Richmond  $80,000
14 Grove Place  2-family detached frame house in need of rehabililitation; 2 baths in primary unit; 1 bath in other; 2 bedrooms, dining room, eat-in kitchen in each; full basement, 23- by 156-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)


Europeans Fear Unemployment Will Only Rise
A new unease has taken hold in Western Europe as the conviction grows that record levels of unemployment may be tied less to the region's economic slump than to fundamental shifts in the work place and in the global economy that will persist beyond the current recession.
Last year, as the number of jobless mounted, the focus was on high German interest rates.
By discouraging investment and consumption, the argument went, the high cost of money in Western Europe was delaying recovery and the creation of jobs.
But as the rates have fallen this year, without any immediate response, awareness has grown that something deeper may be wrong.


Wendy Dubin, Brooks Bitterman
Wendy Dubin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Nathan L. Dubin of West Hartford, Conn., was married yesterday to Brooks Bitterman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Bitterman of New York.
Margaretha Birknes, a justice of the peace in South Dartmouth, Mass., performed the ceremony at the bride's home there.
Ms.
Dubin, a potter and a freelance writer, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Barnard College and received master's degrees in art history from Columbia University and in artisanry from the University of Massachusetts.


Sherrie L. Katz, Andrew Rosen
Sherrie Lynne Katz, the daughter of Mrs.
Marvin H. Berg of Moreland Hills, Ohio, and the late Dr.
James B. Katz, was married yesterday evening to Andrew Scott Rosen, the son of Arlene and Edward Rosen of the Bronx.
Rabbi Benjamin A. Kamin performed the ceremony at the Ritz-Carlton Hotel in Cleveland.


Northwest Indian Treasures
THE Cascade Mountains run like a spine down the backside of the Pacific Northwest, splitting Oregon into two distinct landscapes.
The west is wet, a verdant rain forest.
The east is dry and sunny, a sagebrush ocean washing across red soil.
The difference in terrain seemed as clear to me as a geology exhibit during a recent 100-mile drive from Portland to the Warm Springs Reservation, home to three Indian tribes whose stories are intricately connected to the land east of the mountains.
I planned to visit the Museum at Warm Springs, which opened in March to showcase a large collection of tribal art, and spend a weekend at Kah-Nee-Ta, a resort built at a hot springs on the reservation.
As Highway 26 crossed the Blue Box Summit, about an hour's drive from Portland, and began its descent off the eastern face of Mount Hood, the narrow, wooded view opened to frame a broad expanse of high desert.
Clouds thinned into threads above red-rock volcanic columns.
On this side of the Cascades, the air is drier, the light brighter, the horizon wider.
Snow-capped mountains stretch across the horizon.


U.N. Mandate Grows
The United Nations has expanded its mandate in peacekeeping operations with its attack on a Somali faction leader who is accused of killing Pakistani peacekeepers.
But the action raises troubling questions about whether United Nations efforts must depend on United States firepower.
News analysis, page 16.


A Challenge? Not Much of One
To the Sports Editor
It is an unfortunate message the racing industry sends to the public when it rewards an already super-rich "sportsman" with a million-dollar bonus for owning a horse only good enough to finish seventh.
That's what happened as a result of the recent Belmont Stakes, the climactic event in a promotion sponsored by an automobile company.
Because the rules of the Chrysler Triple Crown Challenge insist that a horse must finish all three races in the series, Prairie Bayou, the Preakness winner who broke down in the Belmont and subsequently had to be destroyed, was eliminated from consideration despite having amassed the most points in the series.


BEST SELLERS: June 13, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
44
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
5
2
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $24.) A lawyer in pursuit of his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
3
4
2
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $23.95.) A former naval officer tracks down a terrorist conspiracy headed by a vengeful woman.
4
2
13
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
5
6
9
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
6
3
6
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences when she covers a story.
7
7
130
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
8
8
6
GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Delacorte, $27.50.) Cordial relationships and terrorism between the Japanese and foreigners in Yokohama in 1862.
9
9
8
THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
10
10
7
A SEASON IN PURGATORY, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $22.) The political and social machinations of a wealthy Irish Catholic family.
11
11
6
ANGEL, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $23.) The reunion of four people is transformed by the appearance of two celebrated men.
12
1
PAPER DOLL, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) Spenser tracks the killer of an upper-crust Boston woman to her past in a small South Carolina town.
13
12
9
"J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $21.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man who apparently committed suicide.
14
14
7
CHARMS FOR THE EASY LIFE, by Kaye Gibbons. (Putnam, $19.95.) The fortunes of three indomitable North Carolina women.
15
14
EINSTEIN'S DREAMS, by Alan Lightman. (Pantheon, $17.) Fantasies said to be dreamed by Albert Einstein in 1905, when he was a young patent clerk.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
44
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
2
2
39
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
3
3
5
THE REAL ANITA HILL, by David Brock. (Free Press, $24.95.) A journalist's account of the relationship between the law professor and Clarence Thomas.
4
4
17
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians and others about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
5
6
8
THINKING OUT LOUD, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) Essays on current topics by the New York Times columnist.
6
7
5
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
7
5
26
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
8
14
2
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Morrow, $20.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
9
10
5
CULTURE OF COMPLAINT, by Robert Hughes. (New York Public Library/Oxford University, $19.95.) Essays critical of current cultural trends.
10
16
2
OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS, by Anne Lamott. (Pantheon, $21.) A novelist recalls her first year as a single parent.
11 *
8
30
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under Government debt.
12
9
4
TURMOIL AND TRIUMPH, by George P. Shultz. (Stewart/Scribners, $30.) The memoirs of Ronald Reagan's Secretary of State.
13
11
PREPARING FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, by Paul Kennedy. (Random House, $25.) A Yale historian assays social and political forces.
14
13
2
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $17.95.) Life in a tiny Georgia town; by a first-grade teacher and radio commentator.
15 *
12
ASSEMBLING CALIFORNIA, by John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) Investigations into the geological history of California.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
7
A WOMAN'S WORTH, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $17.) Advice for women.
2
2
48
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf.
3
4
2
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
4
3
13
BEATING THE STREET, by Peter Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Investing.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 29, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's choices of other recent books of interest) BALKAN GHOSTS: A Journey Through History, by Robert D. Kaplan. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) A reporter's gallery of heroes and villains, past and present, who made Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Romania and the former Yugoslavia the sweethearts they are.
BODIES ELECTRIC, by Colin Harrison. (Crown, $20.) An urban thriller in which a corporate executive does a good deed and unknowingly sets perilous events in motion.
THE BUTCHER BOY, by Patrick McCabe. (Fromm International, $19.95.) A grueling and all too believable novel that enters the deranged mind of a love-starved Irish schoolboy.
CHIMNEY ROCK, by Charlie Smith. (Holt, $22.50.) Mr.
Smith's novel appropriates the language and vision of Southern Gothic to the dwellers in a nasty, dusty Hollywood.
COMPULSORY HAPPINESS, by Norman Manea. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) Four cranky, brilliant novellas about the soul's deterioration in a totalitarian state, by a Romanian emigre.
G.
M.
TREVELYAN: A Life in History, by David Cannadine. (Norton, $32.95.) Trevelyan (1876-1962), a Cambridge historian and Whig aristocrat, hoped to see decent liberal values established in Europe in the 20th century, but lived to see them disappear everywhere.
THE INVENTION OF TRUTH, by Marta Morazzoni. (Knopf, $18.) An absorbing novella about artists and lookers at art; it concerns John Ruskin and 300 women working on the Bayeux Tapestry.
ISLAM AND THE WEST, by Bernard Lewis. (Oxford University, $25.) Learned essays on political culture, encounters and confrontations, including the author's responses to the critics of the "Orientalism" they say he practices.
LENIN'S TOMB: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire, by David Remnick. (Random House, $25.) Decline and fall, observed by a wise, industrious Washington Post reporter in the disappearing Soviet Union, 1988-91.
LIFE'S DOMINION: An Argument About Abortion, Euthanasia, and Individual Freedom, by Ronald Dworkin. (Knopf, $23.) Mr.
Dworkin contends that the relevant choices proceed from the idea that life is sacred, and that therefore the state must not interfere.
THE MAN WHO WASN'T MAIGRET: A Portrait of Georges Simenon, by Patrick Marnham. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) A thoughtful account of a writer whose output makes his claim to have made love to 10,000 women plausible.
SWORDFISH: A True Story of Ambition, Savagery, and Betrayal, by David McClintick. (Pantheon, $25.) A grimly fascinating and sometimes funny account of a successful sting operation by an entertaining lot of Federal drug agents against a Colombian cocaine ring.
TINTIN IN THE NEW WORLD: A Romance, by Frederic Tuten. (Morrow, $22.) An American novelist introduces a French comic strip hero to the temptations of the real world.


Best Books For the Shore, For Young And Old
THIS summer, some people may lug to the beach all 1,295 pages of Gore Vidal's collected essays, "United States," or Vikram Seth's 1,349-page novel, "A Suitable Boy." (They'd make a nearly balanced set of exercise weights.) It's a safe bet those people won't have children and their paraphernalia to lug along, too.
A parent can carry only so much, and if you want to sink into a book while watching the kids, you'll need eyes all over your head.
One clever alternative that won't break your back is to take along books both adults and children can savor.
These are not merely children's stories that adults will find inoffensive, but crossover works that grown-ups without children might want to read, too.
The heroes range from Aladdin (the original version) to Max (a super-chic dog gone Hollywood).
And the tales include two stunning versions of "Cinderella," one witty, one lyrical.


SAINT HILLARY
Michael Kelly made Mrs.
Clinton sound like a fuzzy-minded crusader, dazzled by the complexities of Niebuhr and Tillich.


THIS WEEK'S NUMBERS


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Agents of the Law
WHEN Pat Ricioppo heard the leaves rustling, she knew it wasn't just another day in her hometown of Lynbrook.
"I looked up," she said, "and I couldn't believe it. There were two strange-looking men in a tree. I thought they were homeless people."
Actually they were marines, in sniper camouflage.
"We're on display today," said a green-faced Anthony McDonough of Islip, who on terra firma looked like the Swamp Thing.
Every inch of his uniform and helmet was pasted with vines, leaves and grass.


Gutter Replacement: Project for Two People
REPLACING worn-out aluminum or galvanized gutters with vinyl ones is usually a relatively easy job for two people.
Generally, the main criterion is easy access to the roof.
Vinyl gutters cost about the same as aluminum but are easier to join, require no maintenance other than cleaning and are sturdy enough to resist denting from a ladder leaning against them.


Lauren Ashburn and Paul Dueffert
Lauren Elizabeth Ashburn, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren W. Ashburn of Wyomissing Hills, Pa., was married yesterday to Paul Keith Dueffert, the son of Shirley M. Dueffert of Waconia, Minn., and the late Orville Dueffert.
The Rev.
Anthony Mongiello, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony in the Memorial Chapel at Albright College in Reading, Pa.
Ms.
Ashburn, 25, is keeping her name.
She is a news assistant at New York 1 News in New York.
She graduated from Albright and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
Her father is the senior vice president of Kelly Michener Inc., an advertising agency in Lancaster, Pa.
Her mother, Ellen Ashburn, is the director of reading and language arts for the Reading Public School District.


Brown Eight Makes It a Triple Play
The Brown men's varsity won the Herschede Cup, the top prize at the National Collegiate Rowing Championships here this afternoon, and thus captured rowing's triple crown, becoming the first eight ever to accomplish that feat.
As at the two other key events of the season, the Eastern Sprints and the Intercollegiate Rowing Association regatta, the Bears broke away from their foremost rival, Pennsylvania, this time prevailing over the Quakers by 2.83 seconds.


What Are They Training For?
YOU know who they are.
You're heaving your way through your ninth minute on the Stairmaster, wondering exactly how humiliating it would be to pass out in front of a roomful of people on the way to the drinking fountain.
Glancing up for a gulp of oxygen, you see them: the ones who work out three to four hours without breaking a sweat.


JUNE 6-12: Democratic Outcomes; Facing the Music, With The People Calling the Tune
Democracy has had a few surprises up its sleeve this month, not least for Guatemala's President, Jorge Serrano Elias, who tried to grab near-dictatorial powers and instead ended up in exile in Panama.
Even more unexpectedly, the Guatemalan Army, known for wiping out its critics, last week allowed Congress to name a human rights campaigner, Ramiro de Leon Carpio, as the new President.
Mr. de Leon Carpio may now spend his time looking over his shoulder, but Bolivia demonstrated that even Latin American countries with a history of military rule can change.
Last Sunday, it held its fourth free presidential election since 1982.
Because no one polled more than 50 percent, Congress will have the last word.
But the old dictator-turned-democrat, Gen.
Hugo Banzer Suarez, who ran second, said he would not challenge the top vote-getter, Gonzalo Sanchez de Lozada.


A la Carte; The Wheel of Fortune Spins Out AuthenticFare
THERE is no chow mein, chop suey, egg roll or egg foo young at the exceptional new Fortune Wheel seafood restaurant in Levittown.
The familiar menu mainstays are considered gimmicky Americanized Chinese dishes by both Asian and Western purists.
Those aficionados flock to the Fortune Wheel because it is the real thing.


Dining Spots That Promise A Taste of the Great Outdoors
WHEN the weather in the city turns gentle enough for jacketless strolling and lunchtime sunbathing, outdoor cafes begin to blossom like azaleas.
Unlike Paris, Madrid and Rome, New York City does not have the magnificent grand boulevards that invite sidewalk dining.
New Yorkers need considerable ingenuity to carve cafes out of little corners of sidewalks and postage-stamp back lots.
Despite the difficulties of urban geography, more restaurants than ever are serving outdoors this year, the city's Department of Consumer Affairs reports.
Moreover, on July 6, scores of leading restaurants plan to move serving tables onto the sidewalks and sell samples of their cuisine as part of an industry promotion called NY93.
All of the outdoor-dining settings in Manhattan described below are sufficiently removed from busy streets to avoid fumes and noise. (All prices cover a three-course meal, including tax and a 15 percent tip, but not drinks.) Some spots are more spacious than others, some more romantic.
Yet all, in their own peculiar way, offer foliage-starved New Yorkers a tiny taste of the great outdoors.
AMERICAN FESTIVAL CAFE, 20 West 50th Street, Rockefeller Center, (212) 246-6699.
One of three restaurants surrounding the winter skating rink in Rockefeller Center, American Festival Cafe occupies much of that space in summer with umbrellas, tables for 85 diners, and a bar.
This is a special spot for breakfast, too.
The American-international menu includes sandwiches, salads, gazpacho, summer pastas, steamer clams, grilled chicken, fried calamari and fried chicken.
Dinner is about $20 to $30 a person.
BARBETTA, 321 West 46th Street, (212) 246-9171.
Midtown's most majestic outdoor cafe can be found at this turn-of-the-century town house restaurant.
While in recent years Barbetta has rarely been known for exceptional food, it is better now than it has been in some time.
One enters the town house and passes a long bar before reaching the grand dining room, which has an 18th-century Piedmontese crystal chandelier, silk drapes and chairs upholstered in brocade.
Outside is a large, leafy garden with trees, flowers and sculptures.
It is a wonderful place to linger on a sunny afternoon.
Among the better dishes are charcoal-grilled squab with cranberry beans, grilled baby chicken, rack of veal and sundry risotti.
Dinner is about $45 a person.
BAROLO, 398 West Broadway, between Spring and Broome Streets, SoHo, (212) 226-1102.
One of the prettier and more spacious outdoor gardens downtown can be found at this colorful northern Italian restaurant.
Behind the two main dining rooms, far from the street fumes and racket, is a walled-in garden seating 90 with spotlighted trees, terra-cotta floors and a balcony.
The sizable dining rooms have sponged yellow walls and dark green banquettes.
The food was uneven on recent visits, and pastas seem to be the strong cards.
Simple roasted or sauteed fish are generally done well, too.
Dinner is about $35 a person.
CAFE, 210 Spring Street, SoHo, (212) 274-0505.
This is an al fresco spot for night owls, a diverting place to stop after the movies for a brandy or cappuccino.
Cafe is owned by Richard Widmaier-Picasso, a grandson of the artist.
The crowd can be relentlessly trendy.
The main dining room and bar is casually Parisian, with rattan chairs, a marble floor, and dim lighting.
In warm weather, a narrow porch is converted to an outdoor cafe that holds about a dozen tables.
It is far enough from the Avenue of the Americas to avoid the automobile and bus fumes and the noise.
The straightforward bistro fare is generally satisfying: leeks vinaigrette, curly chicory with bacon and Roquefort, steak au poivre, roast chicken, roasted salmon with thyme, and rack of lamb.
Dinner is about $35 to $40 a person.
IL CASALONE, 1675 Third Avenue, near 93d Street, (212) 369-1944.
This attractive addition to the northern reaches of the Upper East Side is a beguiling spot with a rustic look: stone and stucco walls, wood-beam ceiling, wood-fired ovens.
In the back is a big glass-enclosed stucco-and-wood porch overlooking a grass commons shared by several apartment buildings.
In clement weather, the glass is removed to create a delightful outdoor cafe.
The food is not memorable, but there are enough worthy dishes to merit a visit: the colorful and well-seasoned grilled vegetable plate, a salad of goat cheese and roasted peppers, and various soups of the day.
Pastas are uneven, though.
Penne with eggplant, tomato, mozzarella and basil is a safe bet, as is the orecchiette tossed with broccoli and spicy sausages.
Dinner is about $25 to $35 a person.
GASCOGNE, 158 Eighth Avenue, between 17th and 18th Streets, Chelsea, (212) 675-6564.
The lusty cooking of Gascony, the rugged French province of foie gras, confit, game and Armagnac, is the specialty of this enchanting little spot.
Gascogne has a farmhouse look, with rough sandstone walls, partly exposed brick and an attractive walled garden in the back.
Foie gras is a specialty, of course, either in a lusty terrine or sauteed with basil, artichokes and roasted garlic.
Other good dishes include sauteed lamb in a garlic crust with tarragon, loin of rabbit wrapped in pancetta, and fillet of beef with black peppercorn and Armagnac sauce.
Dinner is about $35 a person.
LION'S ROCK, 316 East 77th Street, (212) 988-3610.
A giant granite rock behind this upbeat bar and restaurant prompted the establishment's name.
The owners took advantage of this geological oddity to create an unusual outdoor cafe ringed by flowers.
At sundown, the indoor lights are dimmed and the rock is illuminated, creating a dramatic backdrop.
Lion's Rock has an unpretentious, wholesome menu.
This spring, the owner, Frank Visakay, decided to lower all prices by 40 percent to improve business.
The American and international fare is simple and usually satisfying: skewered shrimp with peanut sauce, calf's liver with onions and bacon, grilled lamb chops with garlic mashed potatoes, and penne with basil, smoked mozzarella and Parmesan.
Dinner is about $25 a person.
LE MADRI, 168 West 18th Street, Chelsea, (212) 727-8022.
Some of the more innovative and enticing northern Italian fare in New York City can be found at the rustic-looking restaurant.
Le Madri has a large main dining room with pale yellow walls, a vaulted ceiling supported by columns, a fabulous tiled wood-burning pizza oven and well-spaced tables.
Outside is a recently renovated 50-seat outdoor patio enclosed by a wooden trellis where diners sit under wide umbrellas.
It is always a lively spot at this time of year.
Regional Italian specialties on the menu include panzotti (oversized ravioli) stuffed with ricotta and spinach, glossed with butter and garnished with pine nuts; calf's liver with balsamic vinegar and onion compote, and baby chicken roasted in the wood-burning oven.
Dinner is about $40 a person.
MIRACLE GRILL, 112 First Avenue, near Seventh Street, East Village, (212) 254-2353.
This neighborhood is replete with so-called outdoor cafes, which often are nothing more than a few tables set out on the busy sidewalk.
Miracle Grill, a rugged-looking spot serving some zesty Southwestern fare, has both an outdoor terrace and a pretty garden with an ivy-covered wall, pathways, shade trees and flower beds.
Terrific margaritas go down too smoothly, so have some food nearby.
Among the recommended dishes are quesadillas filled with corn, zucchini, chilies and cheese; black bean soup with cilantro cream; grilled swordfish with a mango-and-black-bean salsa, and the Yucatan chicken fajita with black beans, onions, guacamole and sour cream.
Dinner is about $25 a person.
LA PETITE FERME, 973 Lexington Avenue, at 71st Street, (212) 249-3272.
Natural wood, dried flowers, and antiques contribute to the romantic farmhouse feeling here.
Behind the restaurant is a cozy brick patio holding a half-dozen tables.
It's a delightful spot, hidden from neighbors by a tall fence and spiraling foliage.
The bistro fare is generally satisfying here, including salade nicoise, grilled squid and mache, flank steak with ginger sauce, and more.
Dinner is $35 to $40 a person.
PIETRO AND VANESSA, 23 Cleveland Place, near Lafayette Street, SoHo, (212) 941-0286.
This offbeat spot does not engender confidence with its plastic stained-glass ceiling lights, a faux-brick bar and dime-store art, yet the Italian food is acceptable, sometimes better.
Moreover, the friendly staff and the unhurried pace give the place a warm feeling.
The spacious 100-seat outdoor cafe has long tables and folding chairs and is framed by the backs of buildings, with no greenery to soften the look.
At least there is plenty of open space to allow sunshine, and you are far from street noise.
Among the better dishes are chicken with mozzarella, porcini and tomatoes; capellini with pesto; linguine with clam sauce, and fried calamari.
Dinner is about $25 a person.
PROVENCE, 38 Macdougal Street, SoHo, (212) 475-7500.
The scents and tastes of Provence are wonderfully evoked at this popular bistro.
Right now, a small but alluring outdoor patio is open.
It is protected from the elements by a blue-and-white striped tent and has a flower-ringed fountain in the center.
A nice starter is pissaladiere, an onion-and-anchovy tart.
Another evocative winner is the Provencal fish soup with spicy rouille.
Among main courses to consider are the pan-roasted lamb with ratatouille, braised rabbit with fava beans, and roasted monkfish with saffron sauce.
Dinner is about $40 a person.
RAPHAEL, 33 West 54th Street, (212) 582-8993.
Restaurant Raphael remains one of the hidden jewels of midtown Manhattan, both for its superior country-French cooking and for its enchanting outdoor cafe.
Since 1991, the chef has been Jean-Michel Bergougnoux, who ran the three-star kitchen at Le Cygne until it closed.
His Provencal-inspired menu offers many temptations: confit of eggplant and lamb with warm goat cheese, grilled fresh sardines with basil, roasted skate with capers and a warm salad of winter greens, and a risotto with braised veal perfumed with star anise and cilantro.
Dinner is about $50 a person.
LE REFUGE, 166 East 82d Street, (212) 861-4505.
This enchanting little French auberge in the middle of the Upper East Side rates a 9 or greater on the romantic scale.
The dining room has a creaky old charm with lots of aged wood, a beamed ceiling and antiques.
The back dining room has brick walls and soft candlelight.
At this time of year, a backyard patio, enclosed by a white picket fence, holds five tables.
The traditional French menu includes such winning dishes as buttery lobster ravioli, salad of arugula and goat cheese, well-cooked shrimp over couscous with tomato compote, and lamb stuffed with spinach and accompanied by a soothing potato gratin.
Dinner is about $40 a person.
THE SEA GRILL, 19 West 49th Street, Rockefeller Center, (212) 246-9201.
This sophisticated and stylish cousin to the casual American Festival Cafe shares the same outdoor area, with 70 umbrella-shaded seats.
Seafood is the specialty, of course, and the menu carries everything from simple, light salads to more elaborate fare.
Not every creation hits its target, but the batting average is high.
The restaurant has an excellent American wine list with fair prices.
Dinner is $35 to $50 a person.
TATOU, 151 East 50th Street, (212) 753-1144.
This week, this worthy American restaurant and nightclub is to open a 40-seat outdoor dining area on the sidewalk far enough back to avoid fumes.
Inside, the soaring dining room resembles a turn-of-the-century vaudeville house.
Entertainment is provided nightly.
The menu is replete with assertive and homey American fare: roasted-corn chowder with corn-stick croutons, roasted vegetable tart with yellow-pepper coulis, pan-roasted halibut with a crust of crab meat and potatoes, and roasted salmon coated with honey mustard.
Dinner is about $40 a person.
VONG, 200 East 54th Street, (212) 486-9592.
This exotic and wildly popular Southeast Asian restaurant has recently opened an outside patio comfortably removed from busy Third Avenue.
Jean-Georges Vongerichten, the chef and owner, serves a limited but enticing menu, essentially a sampling of the indoor food.
Among the dishes are a crab spring roll with tamarind dipping sauce, green papaya salad with cashews, lobster with shiitake and mustard greens over rice, and grilled beef in ginger broth.
Appetizers run $8 to $12, main courses $16 to $20.
A daily prix-fixe menu, including dessert, is $25.


Mia Rhee and Daniel Kim
Mia Haeyoung Rhee, the daughter of Dr.
Chong Heon Rhee of Easton, Conn., and the late Youngsil Rhee, was married yesterday to Daniel Dae Hyun Kim, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Doo Tae Kim of Easton, Pa.
The Rev.
Louis Lunardini, an Episcopal minister, officiated at the First Presbyterian Church in Fairfield, Conn.
The Rev.
Ki Chun Lee, also an Episcopal minister, participated.


Clearwater Revival Coming to Valhalla
WHAT can you do for the father who has everything?
Take him -- and the rest of the family -- to Clearwater's Great Hudson River Revival next Saturday or Sunday.
Since 1978 the event has been lighting up the Father's Day weekend with song, children's entertainment, crafts, environmental exhibitions andother activities showcasing the rich diversity and abundant talent of the American folk scene.
As in past years, the event takes place on the Valhalla campus of Westchester Community College, offering musical performances, storytelling sessions and do-it-yourself folk dancing more or less continuously -- and simultaneously -- on six outdoor sound stages.
The roster of artists ranges from Odetta, Tommy Makem, Pete Seeger and Livingston Taylor to dozens of other solo and group performers.


Juliette White, Jeffrey Hyson
Juliette Darling White, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George C. White of New York, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Nugent Hyson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John M. Hyson of Berwyn, Pa.
The Rev.
Dorsey W. M. McConnell, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony in the Harkness Chapel at Connecticut College in New London.
Mrs.
Hyson, 25, is a development assistant for the College of Arts and Sciences at Cornell University in Ithaca, N.Y.
She and her husband graduated from Yale University.
Her father is the founder and the president of the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center in Waterford, Conn.
Her mother, Elizabeth D. White, is a theatrical producer in New York and a jewelry maker in New York and Waterford.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
ANNIE'S PROMISE By Sonia Levitin. 186 pp. New York:  Atheneum. $14.95. (Ages 10 and up)


Friend Arrested in Stabbing Death of 12-Year-Old
After an afternoon of bicycling and relay races down a quiet residential block in Brooklyn, Charles Mapp, 12, and his best friend joined other youths on the stoop of a brownstone apartment building, relaxing and enjoying the warm spring night.
But words between the two friends quickly turned loud and harsh on Friday, and eventually screams pierced the night as Charles lay on a sidewalk with a steak knife in his chest.
He died 10 minutes later at Woodhull Medical Center.


Loroupe Leads Rarely Tardy Kenyans
Tecla Loroupe's vivid memories of her Kenyan school days served her well in New York.
Like a schoolgirl who knows exactly what's in store if she's late for the opening bell, the 20-year-old Kenyan fairly flew through Central Park yesterday to get to the finish on time to win the 22d annual Advil Mini Marathon.
Behind her were a score of elite runners straining for success and some 5,500 other women, many of whom couldn't have cared less about the dramatic duels at the head of the chase or even about their own times in the 10-kilometer race.
Schuwalow Finishes Strong
For those who did care, however, the victory could hardly have been more impressive.
Loroupe, who ran stride for graceful stride with Lisa Ondieki of Australia before breaking away between the fourth and fifth miles, covered the hilly 6.2-mile course in 32 minutes 31 seconds, 18 seconds ahead of Carolyn Schuwalow of Australia, who surged ahead of a tiring Ondieki in the last few hundred yards.


Kathryn J. Beeby, Louis J. Scenti
Kathryn Jean Beeby, a daughter of Shelley and Kenneth Beeby of Duxbury, Mass., was married there yesterday to Louis John Scenti, the son of Isabel Scenti of Cranston, R.I., and the late Louis J. Scenti.
The Revs.
Lewis and Joy Mills, Episcopal priests, officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Beeby, 31, is keeping her name.
She is the executive assistant and the chief of staff to the Commissioner of the New York City Sanitation Department.
She graduated from New York University and received a master's degree in public policy from the New School for Social Research.
Her father is a vice president and the chief legal counsel at Ocean Spray Cranberries Inc. in Lakeville, Mass.


Aphrodite Spirocostas, Carlo Prinzo
Aphrodite Ann Spirocostas, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Nicholas Spirocostas of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Carlo Joseph Prinzo, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Angelo Prinzo of Dix Hills, L.I.
The Rev.
Damaskinos Ganas performed the ceremony at Kimisis Theotokou Greek Orthodox Church in Brooklyn.


A Broker in Human Lives
SPY TRADER Germany's Devil's Advocate and the Darkest Secrets of the Cold War.
By Craig R. Whitney.
Illustrated. 375 pp.
New York: Times Books/Random House. $25.


'Schmoozing': Time Well Spent
To the Editor:
As a biographer of Leonard Bernstein, I should like to clarify a statement about him that James Oestreich made in his portrait of Kurt Masur and the New York Philharmonic  [ "Speak Loudly, Carry No Stick," May 23 ] .
Bernstein did not "routinely" waste "the first half-hour of rehearsal with talk and pleasantries." Bernstein led more than 1,200 Philharmonic performances in a 47-year relationship that included 11 (1958-69) as music director.
You don't establish a record like that if you "routinely" spend 20 percent of your rehearsal wasting time.


CLASSICAL MUSIC
June 14 to 19
LEONARD BERNSTEIN TRIBUTE.
As part of its 150th-anniversary celebration, the New York Philharmonic is collaborating with the Film Society of Lincoln Center and the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts in an examination of Leonard Bernstein's music.
June 15 to 22
THE MET IN THE PARKS.
The Metropolitan Opera's annual free concerts in New York City's parks are opportunities for opera fans, devoted or casual, to hear some of the company's singers and its orchestra in unstaged versions of standard repertory works, perhaps while tucking into a picnic dinner.
This year's schedule includes Puccini's "Madama Butterfly" and Donizetti's "Elisir d'Amore." For the opening-night "Butterfly" on the Great Lawn in Central Park (June 15), the cast includes Diana Soviero as Cio-Cio-San, Wendy White as Suzuki, Franco Farina as Pinkerton and John Fowler as Sharpless, with Michelangelo Veltri conducting.
Performances will also be presented at Prospect Park in Brooklyn ("L'Elisir," June 16), Cunningham Park in Queens ("Butterfly," June 18), Great Kills Park on Staten Island ("L'Elisir," June 19) and Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx ("Butterfly," June 22).
All concerts begin at 8 P.M.
Information: (212) 362-6000.
June 23
BACH ARIA GROUP.
The main focus of the Bach Aria Group's activity is at the State University of New York at Stony Brook, where it is presenting an ambitious series of seminars and concerts called "The International Bach" starting June 14.
But the ensemble is coming into Manhattan to present "Bach's Italian and French Influences" at 8 P.M. on June 23 at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue and 112th Street, Morningside Heights.
Works of Vivaldi and Couperin are interspersed with Bach selections, which include the "Brandenburg" Concerto No. 5 and several Mass and cantata excerpts.
The group's performances are not always the last word in musicological stylishness, but it plays Baroque music lovingly.
Suggested donation: $10.
Information: (212) 662-2133.
June 26
LUCIANO PAVAROTTI.
With members of the New York Philharmonic, Luciano Pavarotti will sing favorite arias and Neapolitan songs in a free concert at 8 P.M. on the Great Lawn in Central Park.
There will also be a live telecast on Channel 13 in New York.
Information: (212) 875-5709.
July 8 and 9
DIAMANDA GALAS.
This avant-garde composer and vocalist characteristically tackles uneasy topics in her semi-theatrical works.
Her latest, "Insekta," is described as "an electro-acoustic monodrama about dementia in women." Its world premiere, at 8 P.M., is the opening salvo in Lincoln Center's Serious Fun festival at Alice Tully Hall.
Tickets: $20 to $30.
Information: (212) 721-6500.
July 14 to 29
NEW YORK PHILHARMONIC.
As it did last summer, the Philharmonic is taking up residence at its old home, Carnegie Hall, for a series of summer concerts.
This year's programs, devoted to works by Brahms and Schumann, are all to be conducted by Kurt Masur.
Included are the Brahms First Symphony and the Schumann Piano Concerto, with Richard Goode (July 14 and 15); the Schumann First Symphony and the Brahms Second Piano Concerto, with Garrick Ohlsson (July 21 and 22), and the Schumann Fourth Symphony and the Brahms Violin Concerto, with Shlomo Mintz (July 28 and 29).
All concerts are at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $12 to $55.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
"JOHN CAGE: IN MEMORIAM." Margaret Leng Tan, a specialist in contemporary piano music and a renowned interpreter of John Cage's works, will offer an overview of his keyboard music on July 26.
Besides works composed for a conventional, untampered-with piano, the program includes pieces for toy piano, bowed piano and prepared piano (that is, with pieces of metal, wood and rubber set between the strings).
The 8 P.M. concert is part of the Serious Fun festival at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center.
Tickets: $20 to $30.
Information: (212) 721-6500.
July 23 and 24
SUMMERGARDEN CONCERTS.
The Summergarden entrance is at 14 West 54th Street, Manhattan.
Performances are Fridays and Saturdays at 7 P.M.
Information: (212) 708-9500.
Aug. 3 to 7
MOSTLY MOZART FESTIVAL.
Neeme Jarvi, an Estonian conductor who has done wonders with the Detroit Symphony, is to lead the Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra in two programs at Avery Fisher Hall, both of which include Mozart dances and a pair of concertos.
In the first (Aug. 3 and 4), Maxim Vengerov will play Mozart's Violin Concerto No. 3, and Lilian Kallir will be the soloist in Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 19.
In the second (Aug. 6 and 7), Garrick Ohlsson will play Mozart's Piano Concerto No. 9, and Antonio Meneses is to be the cello soloist in Tchaikovsky's Variations on a Rococo Theme.
Concerts begin at 8 P.M., pre-concert recitals at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $13 to $25.
Information: (212) 721-6500.
Aug. 9
LES ARTS FLORISSANTS.
William Christie and his stunning early-instrument band are performing Purcell's "Dido and Aeneas" and Charpentier's "Acteon" on Aug. 9 in what seems likely to be the highlight of this year's Mostly Mozart series at Avery Fisher Hall.
The concert is at 8 P.M., with a pre-concert recital at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $15 to $30.
Information: (212) 721-6500.
Aug. 20 and 21
CECILIA BARTOLI.
Mozart is one of this Italian mezzo-soprano's specialties, and at the Mostly Mozart Festival's finale she is to sing "Exsultate, Jubilate" and several arias.
The program, to be conducted by Gerard Schwarz at Avery Fisher Hall, also includes Mozart's Symphonies No. 29 and 39.
The concert is at 8 P.M., with a pre-concert recital at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $17 to $35.
Information: (212) 721-6500.


Sipping Moselle on a Lazy Afternoon
I HAD parked my car in the municipal lot along the riverbank in the center of town, and when I returned from lunch there was a parking ticket stuck under the wiper balde.
What was the fine?
A few marks?
It was worth it.
We had eaten in one of the kitschy tourist restaurants in Bernkastel, Germany, but the meal had been perfect: a fat, fresh trout lightly poached with a few herbs, a couple of small boiled potatoes and a Lauerburg riesling from the Wehlener Sonnenhur vineyard.


Julie Ann Oehler, Arthur Judson 3d
Julie Ann Oehler, the daughter of Kenneth C. Oehler of Chicago and the late Carole S. Oehler, was married yesterday to Arthur Judson 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Judson 2d of Philadelphia.
The Rev.
Richard C. Weymouth performed the Episcopal ceremony in the chapel of the Salisbury (Conn.) School, a private academy.
Mrs.
Judson, 25, is an assistant retail manager in Philadelphia for Rodier-Paris, a women's clothing boutique.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina.
Her father is the director of human resources at Unitrin Insurance in Chicago.
Her mother was a coordinator of the children's arts programs at the Art Institute of Chicago.


'The Hyphen of Passion Between Shilly and Shally'
DREAM OF FAIR TO MIDDLING WOMEN By Samuel Beckett.
Edited by Eoin O'Brien and Edith Fournier. 241 pp.
New York: Arcade Publishing in association with Riverrun Press.


Sports of The Times; Golf's 'Little Red' Twosome
THE day after Tom Kite won last year's United States Open in Pebble Beach's gusts, he had to travel to the Buick Westchester Classic.
His wife, Christy, returned to their Austin, Tex., home with the shiny silver Open trophy.
And with orders on what to do with it.
The next morning, she took the trophy to the Austin Country Club, where one of golf's legendary teaching pros was giving a lesson.


Learning More About Learning Disabilities
I want to commend the article ("What 'Learning Disability' Means," May 30) and Beryl Kaufman for further informing the public about learning disabilities.
Because those individuals with learning disabilities are of at least average intelligence, it should be emphasized that they can learn as well as their average intelligent peers and should be given every opportunity to do so.
We all have different learning styles.
Each of us uses a variety of strategies with which we receive, store and retrieve information in order to learn about and evaluate our environment.


ART
Opening Today
THE JEWISH MUSEUM, 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92d Street, Manhattan.
After a two-and-a-half-year hiatus, during which the facade of its 1908 landmark building, the Warburg Mansion, was ingeniously cloned and its internal space nearly doubled, the Jewish Museum reopens today in expanded and renovated quarters.
Hours: Sundays, Mondays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, 11 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.; Tuesdays, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Closed Fridays and Saturdays.
Admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 423-3200.
"ELIJAH PIERCE: WOODCARVER," the Studio Museum in Harlem, 144 West 125th Street.
Observing the centenary of Pierce's birth, this is a celebration of the 60-year career of one of America's premier self-taught artists, who specialized in carved and painted wood reliefs.
Through Aug. 22.
Hours: Wednesdays, Thursdays and Fridays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays, 1 to 6 P.M.; closed Mondays and Tuesdays.
Admission: $5 for adults; $3 for students and the elderly; $1 for children under 12.
Information: (212) 864-4500.
Continuing
"JOHN HEARTFIELD: PHOTOMONTAGES," Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
A Berlin Dadaist who understood the threat of Nazism from the very beginning, John Heartfield (1891-1968) helped invent photomontage and used it to fight for Germany's consciousness and soul.
His bitterly satirical, passionately clearsighted and brilliantly composed images, which appeared on book covers and left-wing magazines, are among this century's greatest examples of political art.
This exhibition is the first full-scale survey of Heartfield's achievement in the United States.
Through July 6.
Also at the Modern: "LATIN AMERICAN ARTISTS OF THE 20TH CENTURY." The largest survey of modern Latin American art ever assembled, this crowded show offers an unfocussed tip-of-the-iceberg view that is outmoded and patronizing.
It's first half, which includes early modernists like Diego Rivera and Joaquin Torres-Garcia, is passingly good; its second, a disaster that gives only glimpses of the strength of contemporary Latin American art.
Through Sept. 7.
Hours: Thursdays, 11 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Fridays through Tuesdays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Wednesdays.
Admission: $7.50; $4.50 for students and the elderly; free for children under 16; Thursdays, 5 P.M. to 7 P.M.
"pay what you wish." Information: (212) 708-9480.
"SPLENDID LEGACY: THE HAVEMEYER COLLECTION," Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street, Manhattan.
Call it an in-house blockbuster, a museum-within-a-museum or full disclosure.
This show presents the cornucopia of paintings, sculptures, drawings, prints and decorative objects that the American sugar baron H. O. Havemeyer and his prescient wife, Louisine, gave the Metropolitan in the decades around the turn of the century.
From Rembrandt and El Greco to numerous works by Courbet, Degas, Cezanne and the Impressionists, from Japanese screens and Chinese vases to Islamic ceramics, it is a staggering exhibition.
It tells a tale of esthetic passion, opulent living and tremendous public spirit, while also outlining much of the history of art in fine style.
Through June 20.
Also at the Metropolitan: "THE WAKING DREAM: PHOTOGRAPHY'S FIRST CENTURY." The invention of photography enabled the world to know itself in a new way, and that new knowledge illuminates this astounding exhibition.
With 253 often rare, usually breathtaking images from the Gilman Paper Company Collection, the show begins with some of the first photographs ever made, from England and France in the early 1840's, and ends with photography's artistic coming of age in the first decades of the 20th century.
It is a compelling story, in which technical invention goes hand in hand with the will to document and the desire to create.
Through July 4.
Also at the Metropolitan: DRAWINGS FROM THE J. PAUL GETTY MUSEUM.
The youngest major-league collection of Old Master drawings is little more than a decade old and relatively small by European standards.
But the 130 works in this exhibition, which range from Raphael to van Gogh, suggest that what it lacks in quantity and longevity, it more than makes up in quality.
Through Aug. 8.
Hours: Sundays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, 9:30 A.M. to 5:15 P.M.; Fridays and Saturdays, 9:30 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Admission: $6; $3 for the students and the elderly .
Information: (212) 535-7710.
"CZECH CUBISM: ARCHITECTURE AND DESIGN," Cooper-Hewitt National Museum of Design, 2 East 91st Street, Manhattan.
The invention of Cubism set off artistic aftershocks all over Europe, most fantastically in Czechoslovakia, where its effects were strongest in the applied arts, not the fine arts.
This exhibition of more than 100 drawings and objects created from 1910 to 1925 examines the flourishing of what might be called a Cubism of everyday life; it includes furniture, ceramics and metalwork as well as architectural renderings of the Cubist buildings of Prague.
Through July 25.
Hours: Tuesdays, 10 A.M. to 9 P.M.; Wednesdays through Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sundays noon to 5 P.M.
Suggested contribution: $3; $1.50 for students and the elderly; free on Tuesdays after 5 P.M.
Information: (212) 860-6898.
"A GREAT LEGACY: MORGAN COLLECTIONS, 1913-1943," Pierpont Morgan Library, 29 East 36th Street, Murray Hill.
In the 30 years between J. P. Morgan Sr.'s death and his own, J. P. Morgan Jr. continued to add to the collection that his famous father had so grandly begun, making important acquisitions and opening the library to the public in 1924.
This exhibition of more than 300 works features illuminated manuscripts, rare printed books and autographed manuscripts; it is the first comprehensive display of the younger Morgan's collecting achievement.
Through Aug. 15.
Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sundays, 1 to 5 P.M.; closed Mondays.
Suggested contribution: $5; $3 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 685-0008.
"SECRECY: AFRICAN ART THAT CONCEALS AND REVEALS," Museum for African Art, 593 Broadway, near Prince Street, SoHo.
The inaugural exhibition of this renamed and relocated museum, formerly at 54 East 68th Street, includes nearly 100 extraordinary artworks from sub-Saharan Africa: masks, figures, textiles, architectural fragments and reliquary objects.
It takes visual power for granted to examine social power, placing innovative emphasis on the objects' ritual uses and meanings and on the sacred, secret knowledge often encoded in their patterns and forms.
Through Aug. 22.
Hours: Wednesdays, Thursdays and Sundays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Fridays and Saturdays, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Closed Mondays and Tuesdays.
Admission: $3; $1.50 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 966-1313.
"BOB BISHOP: A LIFE IN AMERICAN FOLK ART," Museum of American Folk Art, 2 Lincoln Square, at 65th Street, Manhattan.
A tribute to Robert Bishop, who died last year after serving as director of the museum from 1977 to 1991, this exhibition commemorates his impact on both the museum's collection and the definition of folk art itself.
Ranging from portraits by the 19th-century artist Ammi Philips to Shaker seed boxes, to contemporary folk art, it offers something for every taste, purist and otherwise.
Through Sept. 12.
Hours: daily except Mondays, 11:30 A.M. to 7:30 P.M.
Suggested donation: $2.
Information: (212) 977-7298.
"GODS, GUARDIANS AND LOVERS: TEMPLE SCULPTURE FROM NORTH INDIA, A.D. 700-1200," the Asia Society, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street, Manhattan.
Presenting 74 lavishly carved stone sculptures from the golden age of Hindu temple-building, this exhibition makes an unusual attempt to heighten their religious meaning by recreating a sense of their original architectural settings.
Through Aug. 15.
Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 11 A.M to 6 P.M.; Fridays, 11 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Admission: $2; $1 students and the elderly; free Fridays, 6 P.M. to 8 P.M.
Information: (212) 288-6400.
PAUL KLEE AT THE GUGGENHEIM, Guggenheim Museum SoHo, 575 Broadway, at Prince Street.
A rare chance to see at one time nearly everything in the Guggenheim's collection by this brilliantly inventive modernist: 60 paintings and works on paper that date from Klee's teen-age years to the end of his life.
Through Sept. 19.
Hours: Sundays, Mondays and Wednesdays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Thursdays through Saturdays, 11 A.M. to 10 P.M.
Admission: $5; $3 students and the elderly; under 12 free.
Information: (212) 423-3500.
June 25
REBECCA HORN, Guggenheim Museum, 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, Manhattan.
This is the first American retrospective of the German artist, who is known primarily for her eerie mechanical installation pieces but also works in performance, film, video and assemblage.
This show of 60 works will include little-known efforts from the early 1970's and the artist's 1990 feature film "Buster's Bedroom," as well as two new complementary installation pieces titled "Paradiso" and "Inferno" created specifically for the museum's Rotunda Gallery and the Guggenheim Museum SoHo.
Through Oct. 1.
Hours: Fridays through Wednesday, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Admission: $7; $4 students and the elderly; under 12 free; Tuesdays, 5 to 8 P.M.
"pay what you wish." Information: (212) 423-3500.
July
"HAND-PAINTED POP: AMERICAN ART IN TRANSITION, 1955-1962," Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street, Manhattan.
Before Pop artists started using the silk-screen process and other means of mechanical reproduction to scavenge images from mass culture, they did it by hand, often carrying over Abstract Expressionistic flourishes and asides from their immediate predecessors.
This exhibition will examine the transition between the two movements with 150 works by Jim Dine, Jasper Johns, Larry Rivers, Roy Lichtenstein, Wayne Thiebaud, Cy Twombly and others.
July 9 through Oct. 10.
Also at the Whitney: "IN THE SPIRIT OF FLUXUS." About 500 objects and documentary materials by some 40 artists, dating from 1962 to the present, trace the genesis and resiliency of this irreverent, anarchic art movement, which grew out of Dada and helped set the stage for Conceptual, performance and installation art.
July 16 through Oct. 3.
Hours: Wednesdays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M; Thursdays, 1 to 8 P.M.; Fridays through Sundays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $6; $4 students and the elderly; July 1, $5 students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3600.


Ways to Make the Most of the Strawberry Season
THE local strawberry crop is late this year, as it was last year, making the lush, ripe berries more welcome than ever.
The season is now in full swing.
Farm stands and markets throughout the region are overflowing with berries by the quart.
Pickers take to the fields, and even some supermarkets have caught on and are selling locally grown strawberries from fields that perfume the air.


Mediators Fly to Croatia To Broach Peace Options
Thwarted by continued fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the threat of a new war in Croatia, international mediators unexpectedly flew to Zagreb today to discuss possible changes in their troubled peace plan with President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia, officials familiar with the initiative said.
Although they refused to discuss the proposed changes in any detail, those officials said the mediators, Lord Owen and Thorvald Stoltenberg, were reviewing their plan for dividing Bosnia and Herzegovina into 10 largely autonomous provinces under a weak central government and considering changes that might effectively partition the country into separate regions of Serbs, Croats and Muslims instead.


Ray Sharkey, 40; Actor Often Played Role of Tough Guy
Ray Sharkey, a television and film actor whose portrayals of rough-hewn and emotionally vulnerable tough guys won wide acclaim, but whose personal life descended into a nightmare of drug and alcohol abuse, died on Friday at Lutheran Medical Center in Brooklyn.
He was 40 years old.
He died of AIDS, according to Herb Nanas, his manager since 1975.


Helen Tsai, Howard Boey
Helen Jeng-Chyi Tsai, a research analyst, was married yesterday to Dr.
Howard Patrick Boey, a physician.
The Rev.
Karl Johnson, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the ceremony at the Neighborhood Church in Palos Verdes Estates, Calif.
Mrs.
Boey works for Cambridge Systematics Inc., a technology and transportation consulting company in Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in city planning from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Shin L. Tsai of Palos Verdes Estates.


Balanchine: Visions Without The Frills
Although George Balanchine was often choreographically unorthodox, few balletgoers would compare his art with modern dance.
Yet it's possible to do so, and not just because he and Martha Graham created "Episodes" in 1959.
That project was a pairing, rather than a collaboration: two independently choreographed works to music by Webern that were performed on the same program.
Balanchine, the familiar argument runs, was a product of ballet's most classical traditions.
But this stance overlooks the questing spirit that led him to what was known from the 1920's onward as Absolute Dance.
Among the milestones along Balanchine's journey toward that form are "Apollo" (1928), "Concerto Barocco" (1941), "Tchaikovsky Piano Concerto No. 2" (1941) and "The Four Temperaments" (1946).
All four have been splendidly danced by the New York City Ballet during its current "Balanchine Celebration." To see these works at the New York State Theater and to compare them with the way they were said to look when new is to gain insights into how Balanchine developed his own Absolute Dance.


THE DEATH OF EROS
What is the world coming to, Bloom asks, when the "radical egalitarians" seek to overthrow all that "used to be thought natural"?
The effort to polarize the sexes through the use of romantic props and plots, however, is not "natural." In fact, it has required some pretty fancy measures -- foot binding, whalebone corsets and, more recently, surgical augmentation and reductions -- to sculpt women to fit artificially developed tastes.
JUDITH SORNBERGER Mansfield, Pa.


A Jazz Festival and Its Musical Muses; Gerry Mulligan -- This 'Big Fat Boy' Has a Generous Spirit
The 1993 JVC Jazz Festival, which runs from Friday to June 26, will be sleeker than in previous years.
With 20 concerts at six locations throughout Manhattan, the schedule is heavy in singers and tributes (to the likes of Thelonious Monk and Charlie Parker).
And because of rising costs, many smaller events, like the afternoon piano concerts, have been dropped.
But despite the leanness, the festival should still offer performances to satisfy the tastes of most jazz lovers.
Here, six noted authors tell why a performer or honoree on this year's program speaks to them.


Sound Bytes; Everything Intelligent, And All of It Connected
KAREN HARGROVE is general manager, digital office systems, for the Microsoft Corporation.
She is responsible for implementing Microsoft's vision of integrating personal computers with other office technologies, including printers, facsimile machines, photocopiers, personal communicators and telephones, using software called Windows at Work as the common command system.
Before joining Microsoft, Ms.
Hargrove worked on advanced hardware design and software development for the Digitial Equipment Corporation.


A Jazz Festival and Its Musical Muses; Lena Horne -- A Majestic Vessel, a Proffered Wink
The 1993 JVC Jazz Festival, which runs from Friday to June 26, will be sleeker than in previous years.
With 20 concerts at six locations throughout Manhattan, the schedule is heavy in singers and tributes (to the likes of Thelonious Monk and Charlie Parker).
And because of rising costs, many smaller events, like the afternoon piano concerts, have been dropped.
But despite the leanness, the festival should still offer performances to satisfy the tastes of most jazz lovers.
Here, six noted authors tell why a performer or honoree on this year's program speaks to them.


No Global Risk Seen in Nuclear Waste in Oceans
An international group of 116 scientists and radiation experts has reported that nuclear wastes dumped into the world's oceans over the decades apparently pose no global danger.
"Any potential problem would be a local one and would pose no threat on a global scale," the scientists said in a written statement issued on Thursday at a conference in Woods Hole, Mass.


Tech Notes; Flashlights With a Twist
FOCUSABLE flashlights, which have lenses that can be twisted to produce broad or narrow beams, are a favorite among airline mechanics, night watchmen and others who need to explore dark spaces.
Some nine million of the flashlights are sold annually, but their sales are held down because of the curse of the black spot -- the shadow that obscures any object in the center of the beam.
Now E. Edmund Ellion appears to have eliminated that problem.


From Mazes to Mermaids, Fun for All Ages
IF you can't get away from New York City this summer, you can round up the family and head for the parks.
Children can learn how music is similar to games and sports in a series of free outdoor concerts by the Little Orchestra Society in various cityparks.
Or they can get their blood pumping by running races in Central Park, where everyone receives a ribbon.
On the days when only air-conditioning can soothe the delicate equation of summer tempers, try taking advantage of city museums.
At the Asia Society in Manhattanm children can learn how to wrap a sari and a turban, Indian style.
If they want to make their own art, the Brooklyn Museum and the Metropolitan Museum of Art have theme-based workshops and tours every week that can be habit forming.


A Harvest Of Advice
IT'S usually around this time of year, when the weeds are leaping and the carrots need thinning and the raspberry plants (given to me two springs ago) are still in the same spot where I "heeled them in" and the African lilies probably won't bloom because I didn't bring them out of the cellar until last month and the horseradish roots (they arrived in March) are still in the refrigerator where, the label said, I could store them "for a few days," that I think to myself, I hate gardening.
Everyone else is waltzing around saying, "Whoopee, look at my perfect perennial bed." Or sipping Champagne at the very garden gala where I promised myself I'd be, catching up on garden gossip.
Or strolling down some 16th-century cypress alley somewhere, like the Villa d'Este in Italy.


Vaughn's Story Is a Tale Times Two
Tell Mo Vaughn that you want to talk to him about his successes this season and he's liable to smile and shake his head.
It does not matter that he is one of the league's most torrid batters, and that in the last 24 games he has hit a sizzling .361, with four home runs and 15 runs batted in.


An Economy Looking for Signals Gets One a Minute
PERHAPS it was naive, but the hope was once in the air that President Clinton would march into Washington, lift the nation's spirits, get employment up and the deficit down and have the economy gliding along like a high-speed train.
That hasn't exactly happened.
Instead Mr.
Clinton has gotten bloodied and bruised as he struggles to push his budget package through a Congress with ideas of its own.
This has dissipated the burst of confidence that greeted the President, and, to Mr.
Clinton's chagrin, the underpowered economy remains on the same unhappy course as when he arrived -- chugging uphill and on the slow track.
Some economic analysts believe that all the inside-the-Beltway mudslinging and mayhem can only cause the economy to lose more steam.
Washington has never been like Moscow of old, with heavy-handed bureaucrats pulling the strings of factories and shops thousands of miles away.
But Washington does send out countless subtle signals every day that influence myriad economic decisions, and in recent weeks those signals have spelled uncertainty with a capital U.
Businesses abhor uncertainty -- it worries them and often paralyzes them.
True, a considerable amount was to be expected, since Mr.
Clinton came into office on the promise of change, committed to cutting the deficit and overhauling health care.
But he seems to have piled it on with a vengeance -- with the help of Congressional Democrats and Republicans, of course.
This uncertainty further clouds an already murky economic picture, with just as many indicators pointing down as up.
Confusion in Washington inarguably hurts the economy to some degree because it has sent corporate executives to the sidelines, anxious for matters to clarify before they get on with the business of expanding, hiring and investing -- paradoxically, the precise economic goals that Mr.
Clinton wants to achieve.
With the investment tax credit here one day and gone the next, with trial balloons being floated about new consumption and payroll taxes, and with the energy tax seemingly changing every few minutes like a kaleidoscope, many corporate executives say they don't know who's on first.
A Tax Free-for-All
And the uncertainty is likely to continue for months to come, through the Administration's anticipated but much delayed effort to reform health care, which accounts for one of every seven dollars spent in the economy.
In its latest turn last week, the White House abandoned an energy tax on the heat content of fuels, and now appears ready to let a Congressional free-for-all determine what energy tax the country should have.
The leader among a raft of unpopular proposals is a transportation tax -- a levy on gasoline, diesel fuel and airline fuel pushed by Senator John Breaux, a Louisiana Democrat.
Seeing all this confusion, many executives are asking how they can decide whether to build a new factory or hire new workers when they don't know which new taxes they will face and how large they will be.
"Many businessmen are deferring decisions on hiring and capital spending -- either they don't know what Washington is going to come up with or they don't like what has already been proposed," said Roger Brinner, chief economist at DRI/McGraw-Hill, a consulting firm.
"They're uncertain or frozen."
In Mr.
Brinner's view, such uncertainty hardly hurt the first quarter of this year because most investment and hiring decisions had been locked in when Mr.
Clinton took office.
But many analysts agree this uncertainty is hurting the economy now.
In the first quarter, the economy inched upward at a miserably slow nine-tenths of 1 percent.
The Administration is praying for a robust second quarter, and many economists say that just might happen in spite of Washington's budget turmoil.
But if the economic torpor continues, it will hard to push the jobless rate much below 7 percent -- and to fulfill Mr.
Clinton's goal of creating 8 million jobs in four years.
Vicious Cycle
Indeed, if growth doesn't get better and soon, the economy's weakness could metastasize into serious political trouble for Mr.
Clinton, just as it did for George Bush.
That could complicate efforts to push through his economic and health care programs, forming a vicious cycle of uncertainty undercutting the economy and hampering lawmakers, creating more uncertainty, and so on.
Americans, Mr.
Brinner says, will be less game for sacrifice and grand experiments when the economy and their paychecks are going nowhere.
And members of Congress, already in a surly mood, might grow even less loyal to Mr.
Clinton as worries fester that he might not turn around the economy before the 1994 elections.
At the moment, the economy seems to be both accelerating and holding back.
On one hand, businesses seem discouraged by all the confusion in Washington.
But on the other, companies see the economy expanding, although slowly, quarter after quarter, and as orders flow in, they feel obligated to increase hiring.
"Even though companies are worried about new laws or taxes and all the uncertainty, that is very much overridden by the fact that new orders keep coming in," said Mitchell Fromstein, chief executive officer of Manpower Inc., the temporary help company.
For businesses, predicting how the economy will behave in six months is about as difficult as predicting whether Mr.
Clinton will stop stumbling by then.
On the negative side, consumer and business confidence are dipping, retail sales are weak and factories have scaled back their investment plans.
Brighter news, however, comes from the strong pickup in employment in May and surprisingly robust gains in car and housing sales.
What economic strength there is seems concentrated in sectors highly sensitive to interest rates.
Mr.
Clinton can claim some responsibility for that, since long-term interest rates dropped sharply after he was elected and unveiled his $500 billion deficit reduction package.
Since his $19 billion economic stimulus package went down in flames, he is looking to the sharp fall in interest rates as the economy's salvation, saying it will translate into $100 billion in stimulus.
The trouble is, the combination of tax increases and spending cuts in his budget package is bound to have a numbing effect on the economy -- what economists often call "fiscal drag." Companies complain that higher taxes or dropoffs in government contracts cause them to hire fewer people.
And corporate worries have been aggravated by reports that Mr.
Clinton's health-care package may include hefty payroll taxes of 7 to 10 percent of the wage base.
"We are being more than extremely careful about hiring," said Pepe Piedra, chairman of NeoCAD, a software company in Boulder, Colo.
"There could be a double whammy for us between the enormous tax increases in the economic package and the whammy of new taxes to pay for health-care reform."
One company recently finished a study on whether to modernize an existing American factory or replace it by building a new plant in Mexico.
The study concluded that it was a tossup, but, a company executive indicated, if the Administration pushes through a 10 percent payroll tax for health care, the investment will go south of the border.
With the recent shake-up in the White House, Administration officials nevertheless exude confidence that they will get their economic package passed this summer, that confidence in the economy will rebound and that Mr.
Clinton's popularity will likewise.
If only the American people were as confident.


Alina de la Sierra, Serre L. Murphy
Alina Margarita de la Sierra, a daughter of Mrs.
George Arellano of New York and Rafael de la Sierra of Coral Gables, Fla., was married yesterday to Serre Livingston Murphy, a son of Ruth Murphy of Bedford Hills, N.Y., and the late J. C. Murphy.
The Rev.
John Davis performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Vincent Ferrer in New York.
Mrs.
Murphy, 27, is an assistant vice president at the Commercial Bank of New York.
She graduated from Boston College.
Her father is an architectural consultant in Miami.
Her mother is a vice president at Brown, Harris, Stevens Inc., a real-estate brokerage in New York.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Maita Sanchez and of George Arellano, who is the senior vice president and general manager, in New York, for the paper manufacturer Abitibi-Price Inc.


Johnson Just as Bad Second Time Around
The sequel to Jeff Johnson's first horror show of 1993 was just as frightful for the Yankees tonight.
Five days after the pitcher was pummeled in his season debut, he duplicated the abominable start by being routed for five runs again and not lasting beyond the second inning again.
Johnson's 45-pitch fiasco allowed the Brewers to rush to an early cushion, cruise to a 9-1 victory over the Yankees at County Stadium and end their three-game losing streak.
The disastrous outing likely ended Johnson's sixth stint in the majors.
Manager Buck Showalter was hesitant to even give the left-hander his second start and hinted strongly that Johnson would be demoted to the minor leagues Sunday.


Play About Art Fosters Art
ART is begetting art, or so it seems, at the Schoolhouse, a theater space and gallery, where oil paintings by Michael Patterson in an exhibition titled "Conversations/Villages/Open Spaces" is on through July 4.
The show provides a fitting segue to the play, or is it the other way around?
"Sight Unseen" by Donald Margulies is about the purpose of art -- and a lot more -- but how many plays concern themselves with contemporary painters in the first place?


Maria Ritter, Chip Farnham
Maria Ritter and Joseph Farnham love cats, the ocean, flowers that grow by the sea, skinny-dipping, full moons, books and Cajun music, all of which they playfully incorporated into their June 5 wedding.
They met 15 years ago as students at the Gunnery, a boarding school in Washington, Conn.
"We were always getting yelled at for P.D.A. -- public display of affection," the bride recalled.


Lighten Up!
This week, buy a hammock.
Plant all the annual flower seeds you thought it was too late to plant.
I'm tossing in scarlet zinnias, lavatera, cosmos, lemon gem marigolds and spider flowers.
They'll come into their own by late summer.
Then read the accompanying article and take a nap.
Go see "Dave" or something even sillier.
Do not buy a single garden book.
Don't talk to any gardeners.
They might give you a plant.


Is Music Ever Mute On Politics?
When Wilhelm Furtwangler took the witness stand during de-Nazification hearings after World War II, he was challenged to defend his past.
Hadn't he, as music director of the Berlin Philharmonic, been a central figure in the Nazi cultural apparatus?
Didn't he lend his prestige to the murderous regime instead of leaving in protest?
Furtwangler testified: "It was my intention -- and this is the reason I did not leave Germany -- to prove that art means more than politics."
He was more than a bit naive.
In a recent Furtwangler biography, "The Devil's Music Master," Sam H. Shirakawa argues that the conductor consistently fought the regime from within, even aiding Jewish musicians; Furtwangler believed that great music could remain unsullied by Nazi pressures.
But it is clear that art cannot be completely separated from politics.
Art can be a tool of politics; it can use politics.
Some even assert that art is simply politics by other means.
It is certainly not a world apart.


No Excuses, No Solace As Big Names Stumble
Curtis Strange, Paul Azinger and Seve Ballesteros head into next week's United States Open under less than ideal circumstances after their showing at this week's Buick Classic.
These three, along with several other prominent players on the PGA Tour like John Daly, performed miserably in this week's tournament at the Westchester Country Club and missed the cut.


White-Hispanic Ticket Grabs At a Black Mayor's Coalition
FOUR years ago, Rudolph W. Giuliani, the racket-busting prosecutor who spent the 80's as the scourge of Wall Street and the mob, nearly kept David N. Dinkins from becoming the first black mayor of New York -- simply because he was white.
In a town where Democrats outnumber Republicans by 5 to 1, hordes of white voters deserted their party and Mr.
Dinkins, an heir of the Tammany Democratic machine.
Mr.
Dinkins won by just two percentage points after cobbling together a fragile coalition of blacks, liberal whites and Hispanic voters in an appeal for tolerance and racial healing.


Bernstein: Yet More Surprises?
If anyone still doubts Leonard Bernstein's status as an American folk hero, the matter should be put to rest this summer.
Bernstein's 75th birthday, on Aug. 25, will be celebrated worldwide, beginning on Monday with the New York Philharmonic's weeklong tribute to its former music director.
Sony Classical is scheduled to complete its massive 119-CD "Royal Collection" of Bernstein recordings by the end of the year, and Deutsche Grammophon's release of his final recordings is now complete.
With all the Bernstein videos flooding the market, it is only a matter of time before someone in Nashville, where Bernstein's archives now reside, "sights" him leaping passionately into the air at the climax of Mahler's "Resurrection" Symphony.
Passion is what Bernstein's music-making was all about.
In his concerts, recordings, teaching, writing, speaking, one always sensed a life-or-death need to communicate the composer's message.
Always controversial, he was damned in many quarters for exhibitionism on the podium, for exaggerating the music's emotional content at the expense of its structural integrity, for vulgarizing a dignified art form.
In his early days and well into his Philharmonic tenure, critics labeled his interpretations brash and immature.
Yet his audiences grew inexorably.
Today, listeners to his recordings from that era join Stravinsky in saying "Wow!"


MAYOR AND COUNCIL MAKE BUDGET PACT FOR NEW YORK CITY
Mayor David N. Dinkins and the New York City Council agreed early yesterday morning on a $31.2 billion budget that holds taxes steady, clips some social programs but still grows by nearly $1.8 billion over last year's adopted budget.
The Council's leaders and the administration reached an accord at 4:30 yesterday morning, resolving a week of tense and at times acrimonious negotiations over the shape of nearly $300 million in spending cuts by agreeing not to cut services quite so deeply as the Mayor had initially proposed.


Isn't It Romantic
"Oh, My God! Versace's doing grunge," exclaimed the reporter as three longhaired paragons ambled down the runway in multiple strata of vibrant checks.
"How can you call that grunge?" asked the editor seated two chairs down.


Lisa Johannessen and Robert Hoak Jr.
Elizabeth Ann Johannessen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John E. Johannessen of Grantham, N.H., was married yesterday to Robert Paul Hoak Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hoak of Miami.
The Rev.
Richard Ringenwald performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Manchester, Vt.


Waterfalls Offer Relief for the Body, Renewal for the Soul
Ever since Moses struck the rock, and it gushed forth, bringing cooling water to the blistered desert landscape, the waterfall has stood for all things good.
It stands for creativity, abundance and life, for relief from drought and the burning of the sun, for the cessation of thirst, both physical and spiritual.
The Makers of the Tarzan movies instictively understood the waterfall's powerful message.
Every Tarzan movie builds toward the eye-popping moment when the arrogant white hunter, at the head of a long line of native bearers, breaks through the sweltering jungle and, deafened by the roar, beholds stock film of Victoria Falls.
This is the moment when the audience realizes that there are some things even bigger than bwana's greed and ambition.
It is the moment when nature reclaims its due and humbles the puny fellow in the ridiculous pith helmet.


Tryout for Dickerson
Los Angeles Raiders tailback ERIC DICKERSON, the second-leading rusher in National Football League history, will meet with and work out for Atlanta Falcons management and coaches tomorrow, the Atlanta Journal-Constitution said.


Travels So Ordinary, Images So Rare
"ORDINARY events often best convey the true spirit of a trip."
This line appears in the first pages of "Focus on Travel" (Abbeville Press, $45), a new book by Allen Rokach, a photographer, and Anne Millman, a photography and science writer.
In fact, one of the book's main messages is that the ordinary can be dramatic when captured on film.


Janzen and Waldorf Are 1 and 1A in the Buick
With bogeys remaining far more prevalent than birdies, Lee Janzen and Duffy Waldorf shared a three-stroke lead today after the third round of the Buick Classic.
The two were tied at four-under-par 209 over what has been a rugged Westchester Country Club course.
Only two other players were under par after 54 holes, Ian Baker-Finch and Lorne Roberts, both at one-under 212.


Focus: Beaufort, S.C.; Putting an Old Saw to Work in the South
HERE in this riverside city of 10,000, where gracious mansions were seized early in the Civil War by Union forces, a new invader has stormed the town.
As before, the draw is real estate.
With its picturesque harbor, quaint downtown and elegant homes, Beaufort (pronounced BYEW-furt) has become a favored location for moviemakers.
While one production company was filming in a rural area outside town at the end of May, Paramount was scouring the city with a real estate broker, looking for just the right house.


After All Is Said and Done, More Is Said and Done
THE question of who would get the children of Woody Allen and Mia Farrow was settled last week when Acting Justice Elliott Wilk of State Supreme Court in Manhattan awarded custody of Satchel, Dylan and Moses Farrow to Ms.
Farrow, and severely restricted Mr.
Allen's access to them.
In a blistering 33-page decision, the judge was deeply critical of Mr.
Allen's actions as a father, denouncing him for becoming involved in an affair with Ms.
Farrow's daughter, Soon-Yi Farrow Previn.
Mr.
Allen is considering an appeal.
And Ms.
Farrow is seeking to overturn Mr.
Allen's adoptions of 7-year-old Dylan and 15-year-old Moses.
Satchel, 5, is the couple's biological son.
So this battle over dark matters is likely to go on in a most public light, as it has done for the last 10 months.
Here's some of what has been said so far.


Colleen Cowan And Patrick Dealy
Colleen Cowan, a daughter of Carol Cowan of Tucson, Ariz., and the late John Cowan, was married yesterday to Patrick Joseph Dealy, a son of Jane Dealy of Chevy Chase, Md., and Francis X. Dealy Jr. of London.
The Rev.
Mary Cushman performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
James' Church in New York.
Mrs.
Dealy, 30, is an actress in New York.
She graduated from Randolph-Macon Woman's College in Lynchburg, Va.
Her father was the president of Clowe &amp; Cowan Inc., an industrial-supply company in Amarillo, Tex.


Tara Mendrzycki and Adam M. Smith
Tara Ann Mendrzycki, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward C. Mendrzycki of Bronxville, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Adam Mason Smith, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Smith of Cranford, N.J.
Msgr.
James Connolly officiated at the Church of St.
Joseph's.
Mrs.
Mendrzycki Smith, 26, is a counselor in Mamaroneck, N.Y., with the drug abuse prevention program of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York.
She graduated from Duke University and received a master's degree in counseling from Columbia University.
Her father is a partner at the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett.
Her mother, Catherine Mendrzycki, is the principal of St.
Patrick's School, a parochial elementary school in Bedford, N.Y.


All the Color Was on the Canvas
JUAN GRIS By Christopher Green with contributions by Christian Derouet and Karin von Maur.
Illustrated. 311 pp.
New Haven:  Whitechapel Art Gallery/ Yale University Press. $50.


New Group Offers to Help the Ill Commit Suicide
A number of right-to-die advocates here have created what is apparently the nation's first organization intended to provide professionals who will help terminally ill people kill themselves.
It is unclear whether the organization's efforts violate the laws of Washington State, where the "promoting" of suicide has been illegal for almost two decades.


Citibank Starts New Flier Plan
Citibank has introduced a program in which its Visa and Mastercard customers can obtain frequent-flier points by charging purchases on their credit cards.
It replaces a similar program, operated by an outside concern, called Air Miles, which has been suspended in the United States.


Turnback the Alarm Gets Well Soon
Turnback the Alarm, who missed 10 months of racing after a severe injury last summer, continued to make long strides in her remarkable comeback yesterday when she won the $150,000 Hempstead Handicap at Belmont Park and anointed herself as one of the premiere fillies in the sport.
The 4-year-old gray, who is rapidly becoming a medical as well as a racing marvel, won her second Grade I stakes in three weeks as she outran a strong field of five rivals and, with a relentless move in the homestretch, beat Deputation to the wire by a length and a half.
And in the duel for second place, Deputation edged You'd Be Surprised by a nose while nobody else came within 14 lengths of the leaders.


Corrections
An article in the Long Island Weekly on May 30 about the cancellation of Author's Day at the Sag Harbor Elementary School referred incorrectly to the school's arrangements with Kate McMullan, author of "The Noisy Giants' Tea Party," and Jean Marzollo, writer of 60 books.
The authors did not receive a fee.


What Do Clothes Mean To an Artist Anyway?
"FALL FROM FASHION" at the Aldrich Museum of Contemporary Art in Ridgefield is not about fashion, at least not in the haute couture or Seventh Avenue sense of the term.
It is rather a comment on clothing and its significance, as perceived by artists.
The show, which was organized by the museum's director, Barry A. Rosenberg, comes with a glossy catalogue.
Unfortunately, too many of its pages are virtually empty and, as if to compensate, the layout is dreadfully tricky.
What is more, the silver cover aims to be provocative by featuring a photograph of a bearded, ponytailed young man in a dowdy dress, along with the question "Are Today's Artists Hung Up on Clothing?"


Device Makes Drunken Drivers Nonstarters
To the Editor:
A Manhattan bicyclist was dragged eight blocks after having been hit by a drunken driver, whose license had been repeatedly suspended and who was forbidden to drive (news article, June 1).
A technological development promises to reduce the problem of drunken driving by those who have lost their licenses: the ignition interlock device.
Attached to a car's ignition, this miniaturized "breathalyzer" prevents the car from being started if the driver "blows" too high an alcohol reading.
Circumvention seems less a problem than was feared, and there is reason to believe that the basic drinking habits of drivers may be altered.


Arianne Faber, Florian Kolb
Arianne Louise Faber, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Karlheinz Faber of Harrington Park, N.J., and Vienna, was married yesterday to Florian Christopher Kolb, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Karl-Heinz Kolb of Holzhausen, Germany.
The Rev.
Edward Duffy performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at O'Byrne Chapel in Purchase, N.Y.
Mrs.
Kolb is a curatorial assistant at the J. Paul Getty Museum in Malibu, Calif.
She graduated from Middlebury College and received a master's degree in art history from the Courtauld Institute of Art in London.
Her father is the senior vice president of Mercedes-Benz of North America Inc. in Montvale, N.J.


Incredible Shrinking Coffee
To the Editor:
Irwin Landau ("Why a Pound of Coffee Weighs 13 Oz.," Viewpoints, May 23) may already be a little behind the times when it comes to Maxwell House coffee.
Maxwell House Colombian is down to 12 ounces a can and its Master Blend tips the scales at 11.5 ounces.
All cans have exactly the same dimensions as the company's 16-ounce "1812" brand.
PHILIP KESSLER Westport, Conn., May 25


Richard Price On the Addictions Of Hollywood
Janet Maslin, writing in The New York Times, once described Richard Price as "a novelist whose work was cinematic long before it ever reached the screen."
"Beginning with 'The Wanderers' in 1979, and most recently with last year's 'Clockers,' " she went on, "he has written about tough urban situations in vibrant, colorful language the reader can truly see and hear."


Conversations/Natasha Dudinska; From Prague, a Student Of Lost Ideals and New-Found Evils
COMING of age politically has come too fast for Natasha Dudinska, a displaced idealist from a land once called Czechoslovakia.
In four years, she has passed from student to revolutionary to political organizer and back to student again, as her country has passed from Communism to liberation to dividing against itself.
Once, she was studying to be a diplomat.
Now she disdains power.
It's true, she says, that power corrupts.
In 1989, Ms.
Dudinska (her name is pronounced NAH-tah-shah DOO-din-shkah) suddenly was thrust to prominence as a leader of the college students whose protests sealed the doom of the Communist regime and helped restore self-determination to Czechoslovakia.
She was featured in documentaries about courage.
Then she watched helplessly as political leaders, without a referendum, determined that her nation would split into Czech and Slovak republics.
Now, she and friends are completing a documentary about what to her is another misuse of Europe's nationalisms, the slaughter in the Balkans.


Lead Contamination Closes 2 Ballfields


Currency
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen106.20
107.73
126.70
per Dollar
German Mark1.6280
1.6265
1.5770
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.2803
1.2793
1.1901
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.5220
1.5090
1.8515
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold$366.00
$376.30
$342.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


The Summer Ritual: Music Out-of-Doors
THE collaboration of musicians and the out-of-doors in Beethoven's Ninth or Bach's Brandenburgs, or even Schubert's "Trout" Quintet, can be quite glorious even when it encompasses the occasional cricket solo or thunderclap percussion.
Sometimes it even includes a seascape as backdrop or intoxicating gardens in full bloom.
And if one is truly fortunate, nature's own Klieg light, the moon, illuminates a masterpiece.
And always there is the barely audible rustle of sheet music.
Over the next few weeks a pleasant cacophany of creatures and natural phenomena will join with classical musicians in the perennial union.
And Connecticut, with its Berkshire foothills to the north and seascapes to the south, offers a variety of settings for the quintessential summer ritual.
One can board a 19th-century steamship in Mystic and revel in authentically performed Renaissance music while cruising the Sound.
Or, on a mountaintop in Falls Village just above the Appalachian Trail, a music lover can absorb string quartet music in a shed built to resonate like the interior of a violin.
Festival venues range from the intimate to the grandiose.
And while most of the settings encourage spreading a picnic on a grassy knoll or cracking a croquet ball while a brass quintet plays some buoyant preconcert selections, at the moment of truth -- the concert itself -- the music making is anything but casual.


From Fifis To Tutus
A newly reopened museum, a bridal couple, aspiring dancers, flowering trees, and at the Fifi Awards, some glorious fragrances.


Two Shows With Links to the Past
WESTCHESTER has returned to the past with two shows, one of tintypes at the Hudson River Museum in Yonkers, the other of Impressionistic paintings at the Hammond Museum in North Salem.
In the beginning was the daguerreotype, a silvered copper plate in which the reflections of faces, figures and landscape were fixed forever.
There was also the calotype, an image made with paper negative and positive.
Then came the ambrotype, which is a kind of daguerreotype except that it involves a negative coated with collodion, which becomes a positive when laid on a dark ground.
A cheap, virtually mass-produced variant of this was the tintype, an image on a thin sheet of iron, which, when painted, has the look of folk art.


About That American Industrial Policy . . .
To the Editor:
Regarding "Wall Street: The Reason It's So Far From Washington" (Viewpoints, May 9) and "An Industrial Policy Is Not Outdated" (Letters, May 30), one often-heard phrase is that the Government cannot pick "winners and losers."
People seem to forget that our foreign competitors have been doing just that -- the Japanese, for example, in optoelectronics and the Europeans, through the Airbus joint venture, in the large long-distance commercial aircraft business.


Spielberg Grapples With the Horror Of the Holocaust
At a railway siding, a Nazi commandant and his servile lieutenants feast on fruit and drink punch from a crystal bowl while hundreds of terrified Jews -- penned in stifling cattle cars -- beseech their captors for water.
Sixty miles from Auschwitz, near the site where this horror unfolded a half century ago, Steven Spielberg was directing this scene from "Schindler's List." Based on the acclaimed 1982 book by Thomas Keneally, the film tells the story of a vain German businessman, Oskar Schindler, who saved the lives of his 1,300 Jewish factory workers at the height of the Holocaust.


Linda Brockelman and W. S. Ogden Jr.
Linda Maughan Brockelman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anton H. Brockelman Jr. of Simsbury, Conn., was married there yesterday to William S. Ogden Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ogden of Annapolis, Md.
The Rev.
Robert Naylor performed the Congregational ceremony at the First Church of Christ.
Mrs.
Ogden, 31, is due to become an institutional securities trader next month at Alex Brown &amp; Company, a securities brokerage in Baltimore.
The bride graduated from Williams College.
She and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from the University of Virginia.


Against Odds


At 50, Conner Wary of Whitbread
The usually confident and often cocky Dennis Conner turns hesitant when it comes to a discussion about sailing in the Whitbread Round the World Race.
This attitudinal quirk has nothing to do with his team's ability to win, but rather, whether Conner wants to sail with his team.
"I have some trepidation about it, honestly," the 50-year-old Conner said in an interview last week.
"This is a young man's deal. When you get down to the Roaring Forties, you're cold and wet, and there are no showers. There is no way to get away."


Janice Meagher, Gregory Trojan
Janice Coupe Meagher, a director of strategic marketing for Taco Belle, and Gregory Alan Trojan, a senior finance director for Pizza Hut, both in Irvine, Calif., were married yesterday in Rhinecliff, N.Y.
The Rev.
Armond Padula performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Joseph's Church.


Fittipaldi Is Driven By More Than Racing
If any two drivers spanned the spectrum of motor racing in May at the Indianapolis Motor Speedway, those two were Emerson Fittipaldi and Bobby Rahal.
Fittipaldi used an alert late-race restart to win his second Indianapolis 500, while Rahal was bumped from the lineup with a few minutes left in qualifying and missed his first Indy 500 since he started coming there in 1982.


Mysterious Movement at Andrea Electronics
ADVOCATES of the theory of efficient markets may have a hard time explaining the trading in Andrea Electronics, whose shares have repeatedly moved 50 percent or more in a day, without any new information.
The bullish story on Andrea is that it has a wondrous device that will suppress street noise on pay telephones.
It hasn't sold any systems yet, and the GTE Corporation, for one, says it is happy with alternative systems and has not talked to Andrea.
But Bellcore, the research arm of the regional Bell companies, is looking at the system.


Celebrating Indian Art at Red Earth '93


Eileen Brennan, John Conlon Jr.
Eileen Doran Brennan, an associate at the law firm of Burke Horan &amp; Macri, was married yesterday to John Matthew Conlon Jr., an associate at the law firm of Milbank Tweed Hadley &amp; McCloy, both in New York.
The Rev.
Patrick A. Walsh performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Immaculate Conception in Tuckahoe, N.Y.
The bride graduated from the College of the Holy Cross.
She and her husband, both 29, received law degrees from Fordham University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Brennan Jr. of Eastchester, N.Y.
The bride's father is a lawyer for the Hearst Corporation in New York.


Unconventional College Finds Adults Are Good Students
AT Charter Oak State College in Connecticut there are no classrooms and no curriculum.
It does have a faculty but its members don't teach.
Ten percent of its students -- average age close to 40 -- live outside the state.
Some even live outside the country.
The college has no campus, but exists in a suite of rooms in a commercial office and shopping complex.
It is a most unusual place.
It is also relatively unknown.
Ask most people about Charter Oak and they might talk about the tree revered in early Connecticut history, where the colony's charter was hidden.
But a college?


Your Home: Mitchell-Lama; Desirable And Now, Available
AMONG the most desirable housing built in New York City for moderate-income families between in the 1960's and early 1970's were its 151,000 Mitchell-Lama apartments.
Some had spectacular views over the Hudson or East River, others were at the oceanfront or within walking distance of Lincoln Center or Greenwich Village.
Constructed with heavy subsidies from municipal and state sources and blessed with tax breaks, they provided thousands of families with an attractive apartment at a relatively low and stable cost, either as a rental or a co-op with a nominal share price.


Unshackled, Unconventional Sculptor
"I THINK I did well following my nose," said the sculptor John Chamberlain.
With little formal training and a resolute refusal to play by the rules the second-generation New York School artist innovated a bold development in postwar art.
Thirty-six years ago Mr.
Chamberlain ripped two fenders off a 1929 Ford at the home of Larry Rivers in Southampton and welded them into an abstract sculpture called "Shortstop." In so doing, he invented a method and medium for which he is well known.
His work is in the collections of institutions like the Museum of Modern Art and the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum.
Exhibitions attract fans from the Parrish to Paris.
Mr.
Chamberlain is in a position to savor success, but he continues to sniff out new challenges.


Ways to Make the Most of the Strawberry Season
THE local strawberry crop is late this year, as it was last year, making the lush, ripe berries more welcome than ever.
The season is now in full swing.
Farm stands and markets throughout the region are overflowing with berries by the quart.
Pickers take to the fields, and even some supermarkets have caught on and are selling locally grown strawberries from fields that perfume the air.


Waiting for a Rudder at I.N.S.
When the freighter Golden Venture ran aground off Queens last weekend, it sparked the latest crisis to confront an immigration agency that has lurched from controversy to controversy without a leader since President Clinton took office.
At a most sensitive time in immigration history, Mr.
Clinton has not yet nominated an Immigration and Naturalization Service Commissioner or publicly articulated an immigration policy distinct from his Republican predecessor.
As most senior immigration jobs are empty, the agency is being run by holdovers from the Bush Administration in Washington.
And into the vacuum local I.N.S. directors, career officials like William S. Slattery in New York, have moved to reassert their power and law-enforcement priorities.


More Than Merely Pop
To the Editor:
Regarding Edward Rothstein's essay "Beyond CD: Music Takes a Back Seat"  [ May 16 ] , I should like to note that the repertory of the world's most celebrated classical musicians is represented on DCC.
Further, with more than 101 titles currently available in the United States on DCC and with an additional 23 titles scheduled for release before the end of the year, Polygram Classics and Jazz (representing the London, Deutsche Grammophon and Philips Classics labels) is very definitely committed to this new digital sound carrier.


Where the Clothes Match the Music
IN SoHo's deepest heartland, on Spring Street near West Broadway, 100 percent polyester double-knit shirts are being snapped up by 23-year-olds for $74 apiece.
"They're very 'Mambo Kings,' very retro," said Joseph Melendez, the manager of Union, the 300-square-foot shop that throbbed with hip-hop music on a recent Friday afternoon.
Union also carries regulation blue nylon mail-carrier jackets with U.S.
Mail patches ($110) and shapeless brown shirts with the yellow logo of the United Parcel Service ($42): "American work wear, utility kind of stuff," said James Jebbia, an owner.


Maribeth Patterson, Mark Brostowski
Maribeth Micael Patterson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert J. Patterson of Madison, Conn., was married there yesterday to Mark Alan Brostowski, the son of Ronald Brostowski of Taylor, Mich., and Virginia Brostowski of Dearborn Heights, Mich.
The Rev.
Gerard G. Schmitz performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Margaret Church.
Mrs.
Brostowski, 31, is the vice president of merchandising sales for Reliance Apparel, a denim manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from Mary Washington College.
Her father is the director of public relations for the Southern New England Telephone Company in New Haven.
Her mother, Sheila M. Patterson, teaches computer skills at Daniel Hand High School in Madison.


Ways to Make the Most of the Strawberry Season
THE local strawberry crop is late this year, as it was last year, making the lush, ripe berries more welcome than ever.
The season is now in full swing.
Farm stands and markets throughout the region are overflowing with berries by the quart.
Pickers take to the fields, and even some supermarkets have caught on and are selling locally grown strawberries from fields that perfume the air.


Bullying Is Not Leading
To the Editor:
James Oestreich states that "as in every other area of music, the balance between control and freedom is intricate and delicate." This observation has direct bearing on the discussion in the article "Playing (and Singing) Politics" in the same issue.
Composers who use art as a bully pulpit, insisting on a narrow interpretation, ignore that delicate balance between freedom and control.
By its very nature, music is an art of multiple meanings.
And in music, as in most areas of life, we learn best by example.
By this I mean that we are moved by lessons of the heart, communicated with a generosity of spirit.
Thus, we are led rather than subdued.
MARY L. SENN Rome, N. Y.


THEATER
June
"CAMELOT." Playing the dashing Sir Lancelot du Lac, who lures Queen Guenevere away from King Arthur, Robert Goulet found overnight stardom on Broadway in the original production of Lerner and Loewe's musical.
That was in 1960.
Now he's back in a touring production of the show about the Knights of the Round Table and their ladies fair.
Only this time he's appearing as King Arthur.
Among other things, that means he'll be singing "I Wonder What the King Is Doing Tonight" instead of "If Ever I Would Leave You." Steve Blanchard and Patricia Kies are featured as Lancelot and Guenevere.
Previews begin Thursday; opens June 21.
Gershwin Theater, 221 West 51st, Manhattan.
Performances: Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays at 8 P.M.; Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M.
No Sunday performances.
Tickets: $45 to $65.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"A PERFECT GANESH." Two women, portrayed by Frances Sternhagen and Zoe Caldwell, take a trip to India in the newest play by Terrence McNally.
Fisher Stevens turns up as the various men -- some 20 of them -- they encounter along the way.
Ganesh, it seems, is the Hindu god of good fortune, who also puts in an appearance.
The director is John Tillinger, who has staged such successful McNally dramas as "Lips Together, Teeth Apart" and "The Lisbon Traviata." Currently in previews; opens June 27.
Manhattan Theater Club at City Center, Stage I, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
Performances (through Aug. 22.): Tuesdays through Fridays at 8 P.M.; Saturdays, 2:30 and 8 P.M.; Sundays, 2:30 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Information: (212) 581-1212.
"ORESTES." En Garde Arts, which scouts the city for unusual locations for its dramas, has settled on the Penn Yards, at 59th Street and 12th Avenue in Manhattan, for its next production, a contemporary retelling of Euripides's "Orestes," written by Charles L. Mee and directed by Tina Landau.
Kyle Chepulis is listed as the set designer, but the Hudson River, the New Jersey skyline and two twisted metal piers also figure prominently in the scenery.
Previews begin June 22.
Opens June 27.
Performances: Tuesdays through Sundays at 8:30 P.M.
Through July 18.
Tickets: Tuesdays, Wednesdays, Thursdays and Sundays, $15; Fridays and Saturdays, $17.50.
Information: (212) 274-8123.
July
"MEASURE FOR MEASURE." Something's rotten in Vienna, so the Duke, played by Kevin Kline, goes underground to see if he can find out just what it is.
The opening production of the 37th season of free Shakespeare in Central Park is to be directed by Michael Rudman, who has transposed the action to an island in the Caribbean.
The cast includes Andre Braugher, Lisa Gay Hamilton and Blair Underwood.
July 1 to 25.
Delacorte Theater, Central Park, entrance at Central Park West and 81st Street.
Performances: Tuesdays through Sundays, 8 P.M.; Free.
Tickets are distributed at 6:15 the night of the performance; early arrival is recommended.
Information: (212) 861-7277.
August
"IN THE SUMMER HOUSE." Jane Bowles's 1953 drama about a group of maladjusted Southern Californians and their efforts to evade reality was once described by Tennessee Williams as "the most original play I have ever read." This will be the first directorial undertaking of Joanne Akalaitis since she was abruptly deposed last spring as the artistic director of the Joseph Papp Public Theater.
Philip Glass is composing new music for the play, and George Tsypin is designing the scenery.
Previews begin July 8; opens Aug. 1.
Vivian Beaumont Theater, Lincoln Center.
Performances: Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays at 8 P.M.; Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sundays at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $30 and $37.50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"ALL'S WELL THAT ENDS WELL." After marrying Helena, Bertram decides that "a young man married is a man that's marred" and bolts for the wars.
Helena chases after him.
All manner of complications ensue before the two finally settle down.
The British director Richard Jones, who staged "La Bete" on Broadway a few seasons ago, will bring his distinctive eye to bear on the Shakespearean comedy.
Aug. 5 to 29.
Delacorte Theater, Central Park, entrance at Central Park West and 81st Street.
Performances: Tuesdays through Sundays, 8 P.M.
Free.
Tickets are distributed at 6:15 the night of the performance; early arrival is recommended.
Information: (212) 861-7277.
"ANNIE WARBUCKS." The on-again, off-again sequel to "Annie" is on again, although the story has been through so many incarnations, who knows what lies in store for the famous redhead and onetime orphan, now living in the lap of Daddy Warbucks's luxury?
You've got to hand it to the director and lyricist Martin Charnin, the composer Charles Strouse and the book writer Thomas Meehan: they don't give up.
Harve Presnell is playing Daddy and Donna McKechnie will be his secretary, Grace.
Annie hasn't been announced yet, but several young actresses grew too old for the part while waiting for this troubled musical to happen.
Previews begin July 6; opens Aug. 9.
Variety Arts Theater, 110 Third Avenue, at 13th Street, East Village.
Performances: Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays at 8 P.M.; Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2:30 and 8 P.M.; Sundays at 3:30.
Tickets: Sundays through Thursdays, $35 and $40; Fridays and Saturdays, $40 and $45.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"BLACK COMEDY" and "THE WHITE LIARS." Nancy Marchand is to star in this revival of two one-act plays by Peter Shaffer, first presented on Broadway in 1967.
The latter piece, the curtain-raiser, involves a young man and a fraudulent fortuneteller.
The former is about a sculptor, hoping to exhibit his wares to a wealthy buyer, until the lights in his apartment go out.
Mr.
Shaffer's trick is to reverse light and dark.
When the electricity is on, the stage is dark.
When it goes off, the stage lights come up, allowing the audience to observe a variety of characters stumbling over one another and the furniture.
Gerald Gutierrez directs.
Previews begin Aug. 10; opens Aug. 26; closes Oct. 10.
Roundabout Theater Company at the Criterion Center, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street, Manhattan.
Performances: Tuedays, Thursdays and Fridays at 8 P.M.; Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sundays at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $38 and $42.
Information: (212) 869-8400.


Playing It Close To the Head
The small round head appears to be the signature look of this summer; it's achieved with a skull cap crocheted or knitted from linen or cotton yarn in patterns that are airy and open.
There is even an evening version in sparkling Lurex (above left) that young people are wearing to evening parties.
The skull cap that is sweeping the Western fashion scene is an adaptation of African and Oriental regional head coverings.
The styles that cover more of the head than the originals often resemble bathing caps with the same fit that flattens the hair and drastically changes the silhouette of the head.


Christa Johnson, William Shaffer
Christa Farie Johnson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Wyatt Thomas Johnson Jr. of Atlanta, was married there yesterday to William Leland Shaffer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leland K. Shaffer Jr. of Rockville, Md.
The Rev.
Dr.
George Regas performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Cathedral of St.
Philip.
Mrs.
Shaffer, 26, was until recently a counselor at the Winter Multi-Services Center, a shelter for the homeless in Petaluma, Calif.
She graduated from Southern Methodist University, where her husband received a law degree.
Her father, known as Tom, is the president of the Cable News Network in Atlanta.


Where Poppies Grow
A HOUSE IN FLANDERS By Michael Jenkins.
Illustrated by Catherine Jenkins. 159 pp.
New York: Viking.


Mayor's Son Gets a Scholarship, and Protest Arises
A century-old system of political patronage here has been sidetracked by public anger over Mayor Sidney Barthelemy's awarding of a Tulane University scholarship to his own son.
On Friday, Mayor Barthelemy tried to defuse the anger by announcing that his son, Sidney 2d, would not, after all, attend Tulane.
And the private college in turn announced it would not honor mayoral and legislative scholarships until the rules for the patronage awards are changed.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Assigned Wayne Housie, outfielder, to New Orleans of the American Association.
National League


Characters From Books Captivate Young Readers
THE grounds of Westchester Community College usually welcome a diverse group of students -- but on a recent Saturday the campus was invaded by an especially young population.
Whether pushed in a stroller, carried on a father's shoulder or clinging tightly to a mother's hand, the county's children were out in full force.
Despite unseasonably chilly weather and stormy skies that dumped rain throughout the day, it seemed as if every parent who had a child under 12 had turned out for the first children's literature festival, Happily Ever After, on June 5.


Laura Thornton, David Pellegrino
Laura McNiece Thornton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John V. Thornton of Bronxville, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Guy Pellegrino, a son of Pamela B. Pellegrino of Fort Salonga, L.I., and Louis A. Pellegrino of Patchogue, L.I.
The Rev.
Donald J. Desmond performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Most Holy Trinity in Easthampton, L.I.
Ms.
Thornton, 26, is keeping her name.
She is the financial-operations coordinator for the Women's Tennis Council, the governing body of the Kraft women's professional tour, in New York.
She graduated from Colby College.


To Arms! To Arms! White Fly is Here
THE goal now is to keep the garden blooming through the sunny months.
If all goes well, everything should be nearly weedless and trouble free.
This does require a few extra hours outdoors, but all too often uninvited troubles appear.
One of the most discouraging is white fly.
These tiny insect pests seem to appear out of nowhere, and almost every kind of soft succulent leaf is to their liking.
They keep away from a few annuals like impatiens and begonias, but vegetable gardeners know this nuisance well, especially on squash and tomato plants.


In Canada's Race for Premier, Front-Runner Falters
A few months back it looked pretty certain that Canada was about to get its first woman as Prime Minister, a cello-playing lawyer from Vancouver named Kim Campbell, who at 46 is the same age as President Clinton.
But when 3,850 Progressive Conservative delegates start voting on Sunday at their leadership convention here the glamorous former Justice Minister, who was once photographed bare-shouldered behind her legal robes, will feel the pressure from a folksy 34-year-old man from a small town in Quebec named Jean Charest.


Sports of The Times; Golf's 'Little Red' Twosome
THE day after Tom Kite won last year's United States Open in Pebble Beach's gusts, he had to travel to the Buick Westchester Classic.
His wife, Christy, returned to their Austin, Tex., home with the shiny silver Open trophy.
And with orders on what to do with it.
The next morning, she took the trophy to the Austin Country Club, where one of golf's legendary teaching pros was giving a lesson.


Gone Fishin': A Father, a Daughter, a Dingy and a Pair of Fluke
The tides that sweep through Jones Beach Inlet carry with them a spectacular array of wildlife, each in its season.
In summer, there are ducks and geese, stripers and blues, egrets and herons.
In fall these warm weather residents head south and the patient observer will sometimes glimpse dolphins and whales.
In winter, Canada geese and harbor seals frequent the marshy islands of Long Island's Great South Bay and Hempstead Bay, yielding in spring to blackfish, flounder and fluke.
Mike McLaughlin is second-in-command at Ed's Fishing station, a white clapboard snack bar/boat livery/ tackle shop in Point Lookout, L.I., on the western shore of Jones Beach Inlet.
Mack was born in the Bronx, summered in Point Lookout, served in Danang during the Tet offensive, left the Army but stayed in Vietnam with Chase Manhattan, took a Vietnamese bride, and on his return, knocked around the Northeast until the tides finally beached him at Ed's.


To Arms! To Arms! White Fly is Here
THE goal now is to keep the garden blooming through the sunny months.
If all goes well, everything should be nearly weedless and trouble free.
This does require a few extra hours outdoors, but all too often uninvited troubles appear.
One of the most discouraging is white fly.
These tiny insect pests seem to appear out of nowhere, and almost every kind of soft succulent leaf is to their liking.
They keep away from a few annuals like impatiens and begonias, but vegetable gardeners know this nuisance well, especially on squash and tomato plants.


Ms. Smith, Mr. VanDenburgh
Stacey Louise Smith, a daughter of Larry and Dorothea Smith of Irvington, N.Y., was married yesterday to Arnold James VanDenburgh, the son of Esther Hastings VanDenburgh of Canton, Mass., and the late Arnold H. VanDenburgh.
The Rev.
Carla Forrest, a Baptist minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the summer home of the bride's parents on Block Island, R. I.
Mrs.
VanDenburgh, 30, is the archivist and a woodworker for Albert Paley, a metal sculptor in Rochester.
She graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in woodworking and furniture design from the Rochester Institute of Technology.
Her father is the managing editor of Parade magazine in New York.
Her mother is the business editor of The Rockland Journal News, a newspaper in West Nyack, N.Y.


Vaughn's Story Is a Tale Times Two
Tell Mo Vaughn that you want to talk to him about his successes this season and he's liable to smile and shake his head.
It does not matter that he is one of the league's most torrid batters, and that in the last 24 games he has hit a sizzling .361, with four home runs and 15 runs batted in.


Step by Step, the State Moves Toward Integration
THE new state legislation requiring all towns and cities to join regional discussions on achieving greater racial diversity in their public schools leaves much unstated because of the volatile politics of race.
To win passage in a reluctant General Assembly, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. and his Education Commissioner, Vincent L. Ferrandino, had to strip references to race and integration from the legislation and express their intent in the all-purpose euphemism "diversity." Even diversity was left undefined, and no goals for achieving it were stated.


United Way Reports 10 Percent Drop
CITING an uncertain economy, a smaller pool of donors and questions of staff misconduct, the United Way of Westchester and Putnam reported this month that contributions for the current fiscal year fell 10 percent short of expectations.
As a result, officials of organizations receiving money from United Way, an umbrella group that collects money for various charities, say they may now have to cut staff and possibly programs and turn to other fund-raising efforts to meet their budgets.


Sarah L. Clark, Robert A. Stuart
Sarah Louise Clark, a daughter of Warren Clark Jr. of Washington and Alice S. Ritchie of Chestertown, Md., was married yesterday to Robert Andrew Stuart, a son of August D. Stuart of Killington, Vt., and Marian R. Stuart of Morristown, N.J.
The Rev.
Roger P. Butts performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Paul's Church, Kent, in Chestertown.
Mrs.
Clark Stuart, 34, is a scientist at the Environmental Defense Fund in New York.
She graduated from Pomona College and received a master's degree in forestry and environmental studies from Yale University.


Out and Organized
IN big, loopy letters, Mary Hansen wrote the word "homosexual" on the blackboard, then turned to face the 25 unruly students in Anne Corey's ninth-grade humanities class at the High School of Telecommunications Arts and Technology in Brooklyn.
"Who's the babe?" one boy asked.
A few others hooted.
Ms.
Hansen, unfazed, asked them to divide into groups and make lists of words that came to mind when they thought about the one she had just finished writing.
"And don't censor yourself," she said.
"Seriously, we can handle it."
This was Ms.
Hansen's ninth such "peer training" session -- designed to promote tolerance of homosexuals among straight teen-agers and to provide role models for gay ones.
Her supervisor, David Nieves, who accompanied her, had led more than 100 peer trainings at other high schools and colleges.
There wasn't much they had not seen before: students unwilling to touch the paper on which the words were written; others reduced to shrieks when the lists were read aloud.
Ms.
Hansen just smiled and copied their replies onto the board.


Federal Inquiry Into Death of Artist in Street Fight
Federal civil-rights prosecutors in Manhattan and Washington are looking into the death of Grady Alexis, an artist killed two years ago in a Greenwich Village street fight involving an off-duty police officer.
James L. Cott, chief of the civil rights unit in the United States Attorney's office in Manhattan, confirmed on Friday that the incident that led to Mr.
Alexis's death was under review by his office and the Civil Rights Division of the Justice Department.
He declined to discuss details of the case, but he said that such a review can be -- but is not necessarily -- a precursor to the filing of Federal civil-rights charges.


Miss Roberts, Mr. Schneiderhan
Martha Landon Roberts, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph H. Roberts Jr. of Elmira, N.Y., was married there yesterday to John William Schneiderhan, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles W. Schneiderhan of Harwich , Mass.
The Rev.
Richard Kuenkler performed the ceremony at Grace Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Schneiderhan, 28, is the manager of the Rand McNally Map and Travel Store in Short Hills, N.J.
She graduated from the University of Hartford.
Her father is the vice president of the Hilliard Corporation, a manufacturer of industrial products in Elmira.
Her mother, Mary B. Roberts, is the director of development for Planned Parenthood of the Southern Tier there.


William McCarthy 3d, Eileen Libutti
Eileen Hope Libutti, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dennis Libutti of Lido Beach, L.I., was married last evening to William Joseph McCarthy 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William McCarthy of Chicago.
The Rev.
Roland Ghirlando, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Sands, a catering establishment in Atlantic Beach, L.I.
Rabbi Michael Ehrlich took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
McCarthy, 26, is an associate at Rivkin, Radler &amp; Kremer, a law firm in Uniondale, L.I.
She and her husband graduated from Boston University.
The bride received a law degree from New York Law School.
Her father is a senior vice president in East Rutherford, N.J., for the Sequa Corporation, a diversified manufacturer of aerospace, machinery and metal coatings.
Her mother, Phyllis Libutti, teaches third grade at the Lindell Elementary School in Long Beach.


INSIDE
Campaign Bill Threatened
A campaign finance bill may die in the Senate if Democrats cannot win over a few Republicans by modifying provisions for public money.
Page 30.
U.N.
Defied in Cambodia
Cambodian Government leaders, defeated in a U.N.-sponsored election, threatened secession by most of the eastern half of the country.
Page 9.
Microsoft Seeks Cable Deal
The software giant and two cable companies are creating a system to merge computing and TV.
Page 31.


About That American Industrial Policy . . .
To the Editor:
Prof.
William F. Schreiber of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Letters, May 30) justifies a national industrial policy on the grounds that it was our wonderfully efficient Government that made possible the development of computers, aircraft and pharmaceuticals, and that even farming wouldn't be so productive if it weren't for agricultural supports.
Collectivists speak with such assurance because they play the game with a stacked deck.
Government can stick its nose, uninvited, into any industry -- and then claim credit for every achievement of that industry ever after.
A private company has no choice but to put up with Government interference -- filling out forms, appearing before commissions and paying large taxes.


BEST SELLERS: June 13, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
44
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
5
2
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $24.) A lawyer in pursuit of his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
3
4
2
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $23.95.) A former naval officer tracks down a terrorist conspiracy headed by a vengeful woman.
4
2
13
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
5
6
9
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
6
3
6
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences when she covers a story.
7
7
130
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
8
8
6
GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Delacorte, $27.50.) Cordial relationships and terrorism between the Japanese and foreigners in Yokohama in 1862.
9
9
8
THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
10
10
7
A SEASON IN PURGATORY, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $22.) The political and social machinations of a wealthy Irish Catholic family.
11
11
6
ANGEL, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $23.) The reunion of four people is transformed by the appearance of two celebrated men.
12
1
PAPER DOLL, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) Spenser tracks the killer of an upper-crust Boston woman to her past in a small South Carolina town.
13
12
9
"J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $21.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man who apparently committed suicide.
14
14
7
CHARMS FOR THE EASY LIFE, by Kaye Gibbons. (Putnam, $19.95.) The fortunes of three indomitable North Carolina women.
15
14
EINSTEIN'S DREAMS, by Alan Lightman. (Pantheon, $17.) Fantasies said to be dreamed by Albert Einstein in 1905, when he was a young patent clerk.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
44
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
2
2
39
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
3
3
5
THE REAL ANITA HILL, by David Brock. (Free Press, $24.95.) A journalist's account of the relationship between the law professor and Clarence Thomas.
4
4
17
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians and others about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
5
6
8
THINKING OUT LOUD, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) Essays on current topics by the New York Times columnist.
6
7
5
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
7
5
26
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
8
14
2
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Morrow, $20.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
9
10
5
CULTURE OF COMPLAINT, by Robert Hughes. (New York Public Library/Oxford University, $19.95.) Essays critical of current cultural trends.
10
16
2
OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS, by Anne Lamott. (Pantheon, $21.) A novelist recalls her first year as a single parent.
11 *
8
30
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under Government debt.
12
9
4
TURMOIL AND TRIUMPH, by George P. Shultz. (Stewart/Scribners, $30.) The memoirs of Ronald Reagan's Secretary of State.
13
11
PREPARING FOR THE TWENTY-FIRST CENTURY, by Paul Kennedy. (Random House, $25.) A Yale historian assays social and political forces.
14
13
2
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $17.95.) Life in a tiny Georgia town; by a first-grade teacher and radio commentator.
15 *
12
ASSEMBLING CALIFORNIA, by John McPhee. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) Investigations into the geological history of California.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
7
A WOMAN'S WORTH, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $17.) Advice for women.
2
2
48
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf.
3
4
2
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
4
3
13
BEATING THE STREET, by Peter Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Investing.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 29, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
And Bear in Mind (Editor's choices of other recent books of interest) BALKAN GHOSTS: A Journey Through History, by Robert D. Kaplan. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) A reporter's gallery of heroes and villains, past and present, who made Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Romania and the former Yugoslavia the sweethearts they are.
BODIES ELECTRIC, by Colin Harrison. (Crown, $20.) An urban thriller in which a corporate executive does a good deed and unknowingly sets perilous events in motion.
THE BUTCHER BOY, by Patrick McCabe. (Fromm International, $19.95.) A grueling and all too believable novel that enters the deranged mind of a love-starved Irish schoolboy.
CHIMNEY ROCK, by Charlie Smith. (Holt, $22.50.) Mr.
Smith's novel appropriates the language and vision of Southern Gothic to the dwellers in a nasty, dusty Hollywood.
COMPULSORY HAPPINESS, by Norman Manea. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $22.) Four cranky, brilliant novellas about the soul's deterioration in a totalitarian state, by a Romanian emigre.
G.
M.
TREVELYAN: A Life in History, by David Cannadine. (Norton, $32.95.) Trevelyan (1876-1962), a Cambridge historian and Whig aristocrat, hoped to see decent liberal values established in Europe in the 20th century, but lived to see them disappear everywhere.
THE INVENTION OF TRUTH, by Marta Morazzoni. (Knopf, $18.) An absorbing novella about artists and lookers at art; it concerns John Ruskin and 300 women working on the Bayeux Tapestry.
ISLAM AND THE WEST, by Bernard Lewis. (Oxford University, $25.) Learned essays on political culture, encounters and confrontations, including the author's responses to the critics of the "Orientalism" they say he practices.
LENIN'S TOMB: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire, by David Remnick. (Random House, $25.) Decline and fall, observed by a wise, industrious Washington Post reporter in the disappearing Soviet Union, 1988-91.
LIFE'S DOMINION: An Argument About Abortion, Euthanasia, and Individual Freedom, by Ronald Dworkin. (Knopf, $23.) Mr.
Dworkin contends that the relevant choices proceed from the idea that life is sacred, and that therefore the state must not interfere.
THE MAN WHO WASN'T MAIGRET: A Portrait of Georges Simenon, by Patrick Marnham. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $25.) A thoughtful account of a writer whose output makes his claim to have made love to 10,000 women plausible.
SWORDFISH: A True Story of Ambition, Savagery, and Betrayal, by David McClintick. (Pantheon, $25.) A grimly fascinating and sometimes funny account of a successful sting operation by an entertaining lot of Federal drug agents against a Colombian cocaine ring.
TINTIN IN THE NEW WORLD: A Romance, by Frederic Tuten. (Morrow, $22.) An American novelist introduces a French comic strip hero to the temptations of the real world.


An Exuberant Epson: No Simple Deals
IF you play a large number of bridge deals, what percentage would you expect to consist of slam contracts?
Game contracts?
Part-score contracts?
Based on an analysis of 224 deals in the 1957 world championship, the answer is 10-48-42.
This indicates that in a normal session of play one can expect two or three slams, with games slightly outnumbering part scores for the rest of the deals.
If a session is particularly exciting, the slam percentage will go up and the part-score percentage down.
In this respect the deals in the first session of the Epson Worldwide Bridge Contest eight days ago were off the scale: 26-70-4.
The second session was also skewed, but less so: 10-75-15. (Only the first 24 deals, played by all contestants, are taken into account, and 5 deals likely to end in doubled part-score contracts have been ignored.)


On Capitol Hill, a Top Aide With No Belief in Age Limits
Even the baby-boomer White House, awash with aides under 30 years old, has few who can rival Henry Ellenbogen, the Boy Wonder of Capitol Hill.
At age 20, he hasn't yet completed his senior year as a history and science major at Harvard University, but as administrative assistant to a Florida Congressman, he manages a $1 million budget, supervises a staff of 17 and holds a job that usually requires at least 10 years experience in Congressional affairs.


If Business Is Better, What About 3M?
IF a weak economy is bad for a stock, why is it good for the stock market?
That puzzler reasserted itself when the stock market turned around and began to rise late last week, on the heels of a surprising announcement from one of the economy's most trusted bellwethers, the Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Company.


Should We Revive the Dinosaurs?
Much as we hate to be drawn into the frenzied hype for Steven Spielberg's "Jurassic Park," it is hard to ignore a megabuck movie that has already become grist for museum displays, op-ed commentary, "Nightline" and lively debate among scientists.
The film's central notion -- that arrogant, unscrupulous or unthinking scientists might bring long-extinct dinosaurs back to life -- has clearly struck a chord.
The faint of heart may rest assured that even the maddest of scientists will not have the capability any time soon of resurrecting the dinosaurs.
The movie, like Michael Crichton's book on which it was based, hypothesizes that blood-sucking mosquitoes dined on the dinos, and immediately afterward got stuck in tree resin that later hardened to amber, preserving the mosquitoes and the dinosaur blood for tens of millions of years.
Modern scientists are then able, in the movie, to extract the blood from the amber, isolate a fragment of dinosaur DNA, stick it into an egg, and presto -- out comes a new dinosaur.


Police Who Cut Through Red Tape
THE children who were waiting idly for the morning school bus in their apartment complex's parking lot eagerly ran over to the two adults who pulled into a parking space near the building's side entrance.
The children exchanged high fives and greetings with the two men, who asked them about homework, problems with siblings and classmates and their after-school plans.
Such a display of enthusiasm was a cheerful sight on a late May morning, yet hardly surprising for what seemed to be a friendly exchange between neighbors.


Eateries Where the Slupring Is Easy
SCENES from "Tampopo," Juzo Itami's 1987 Japanese noodle western, are now being played out in restaurants all over Manhattan.
Loud slurping sounds can be heard as customers in Japanese noodle shops do justice to huge platters, bowls and sometimes caldrons filled with skeins of velvety udon, soba, larmen and ramen garnished with fish, meat, chicken, tofu, seaweed, vegetables and such.
When it comes to noodles, the mannerly, ceremonious Japanese let loose: slurping is a show of satisfaction reserved for this category of foods, which, like the sound effects themselves, evolved from peasant-class customs over hundreds of years.
In Tokyo alone, there are tens of thousands of noodle shops, specializing in soba, or buckwheat noodles, with the best handmade on the premises daily.
New York has a small number of Japanese noodle restaurants, but they join the craze for pasta led by the Italians and reinforced by Chinese noodle shops all over town.


Pandering To Male Fantasies
To the Editor:
Let's face it: What every man wants (though few would admit it) is a woman capable of fulfilling his every sexual desire who will then make him a nice dinner and tuck him into bed.
Since most wives and girlfriends are incapable of playing this role, or unwilling to, a man will pay to see his ideal woman flickering across the screen.
Male movie executives know this and work it for all it's worth.


Kathleen Hansen, Kieran J. Fallon
Kathleen Marie Hansen, the daughter of Virginia L. Pavloff of Ringoes, N.J., and the late John L. Hansen, was married yesterday to Kieran John Fallon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dennis Fallon of Ossining, N.Y.
The Rev.
James F. Kuntz performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Peter's Church in Point Pleasant, N.J.
Mrs.
Fallon, 26, is a financial analyst in the Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation at the Federal Reserve Board in Washington.
She and her husband graduated summa cum laude from Georgetown University, where they were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's degree in international affairs from Columbia University.


French Movies Offer Tickets To Controversy
Nowhere in the world are films still taken as seriously as they are in Paris.
Old films, new films, dreadful films and sublime films.
In any week, nearly 300 different movies are available in theaters that vary in size and decor from the big and the grand to the minuscule and the barely functional.
On one recent Saturday afternoon I watched the first-run "Petain" in a 28-seat theater at the complex called the 7 Parnassiens.
There were five other people in the house. (Showing at adjoining theaters in the same complex: "Indecent Proposal," "The Crying Game," "Singles," "Toys" and "Enchanted April.") Moviegoing of such intimacy becomes something akin to group therapy.
Only in Paris, too, could there be the kind of controversy that now surrounds "Francois Truffaut: Portraits Voles" ("Francois Truffaut: Stolen Portraits"), a fascinating, very good (if incomplete) new feature-length documentary about the life and work of the artist who, when he was alive, was often dismissed as being too bourgeois.
The man whom his detractors thought to be too nice, too gentle, too eager to please, is now revealed to have been a rat.


Favorite for High Court Failed to Pay Maid's Taxes
White House officials confirmed this evening that President Clinton's leading choice for the Supreme Court had not paid Social Security taxes on the wages of a part-time housekeeper.
But the officials said the disclosure about Judge Stephen G. Breyer had nothing to do with Mr.
Clinton's decision earlier today to put off, until at least Monday, his announcement of a Supreme Court nominee.


Editorial Notebook; Ways and Means
With jurisdiction over taxes, trade law, health and welfare, the House Ways and Means Committee wields tremendous power.
The chairman's job is tough and time-consuming.
But for Representative Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois, the position is not without its rewards.
A story in Congressional Quarterly reveals Mr.
Rostenkowski as a master -- perhaps the master -- of the Congressional art of princely living.
The account, written by Phil Kuntz, spotlights two scandals that are central to the current battle over political reform: the use of campaign war chests as personal slush funds, and the lobbyist-provided perks that guarantee Mr.
Rostenkowski and many of his colleagues a life of blissful bondage.


Uffizi Gallery Reopening Set For Next Week
After the car bomb explosion that blasted through the Uffizi Gallery in Florence on May 27, the city authorities are now hoping to reopen part of it on June 20.
On that day visitors will be able to enter the east wing of the gallery -- relatively undamaged in the explosion -- that is home to the museum's unrivaled collection of Botticellis and other Italian works from the 13th-century Giotto to 16th-century artists.


MISSILE IS TESTED BY NORTH KOREANS
While North Korea's negotiators were dragging out the standoff over a nuclear non-proliferation treaty that ended on Friday at the United Nations, the Communist Government's engineers conducted what appears to be the first successful test of the country's homegrown mid-range missile, one that Japanese officials fear could travel as far as some of Japan's most populous cities.
The tests, conducted on the Sea of Japan on May 29 and 30, are believed to have involved the Rodong 1, a missile North Korea has been developing for several years and is preparing to export to Iran in return for oil.
American intelligence officials have said that the missile is believed to be capable of carrying a payload of chemical weapons, or perhaps a small nuclear device.


New Strength for U.N. Peacekeepers: U.S. Might
In staging air and ground strikes against the militia of a Somali faction leader, United Nations forces have expanded the United Nations mandate in peacekeeping operations, while raising the issue of whether efforts by the world organization must always depend on United States firepower.
From Bosnia to Cambodia, United Nations peacekeepers fire when they are fired upon.
But they do not conduct major punitive raids to neutralize stubborn foes.


Street Crackdown's Aim: Turn Down That Stereo!
Car alarms, barking dogs, garbage trucks, jackhammers.
These noises, which echo in the canyons of New York at all hours of the day and night, give added meaning to the phrase, "The city that never sleeps."
But this weekend, residents of at least one neighborhood may be finding it a little easier to get some rest.
On Friday night, the police cracked down on one of the most irritating sources of noise, confiscating 19 cars with stereo "boom boxes" from the noisy streets of Washington Heights.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SUSPENSE A PHILOSOPHICAL INVESTIGATION By Philip Kerr.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.


Variety Marks Summer Season
FRIDAY'S convergence of openings marked the end of the winter season ("Phantom" at the Paper Mill Playhouse in Millburn) and the start of summer (the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival's "Taming of the Shrew").
Besides Shakespeare, this year's festival comprises Shaw and Ibsen, and that does it for the classics of summer.
For the rest, theatergoers are being offered a smattering of stars in vehicles made to measure.


Albany Pressured to Draw Plans to Reduce Pollution
Imagine the impact on New York City traffic if large stretches of the Gowanus Expressway, the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive, the Brooklyn-Queens Expressway, and the Queensboro and Williamsburg Bridges had to be shut down because there was no longer money for repairs.
That's the nightmare that state officials are depicting to prod the Legislature into enacting a plan that would meet the requirements of the Federal Clean Air Act before the current legislative session is scheduled to end June 25.
Failure to do so could cost the state billions in roadway repair dollars.


Mondo Michael
THE name next to the buzzer in the hall says it all: Michael.
Just Michael.
Someone (not Michael) buzzes you in and directs you to a fifth-floor walk-up where Michael lives and publishes a hip, downtown magazine called U.
U is not about you. Him, maybe.


Natalie Cole Steps Out Of Her Father's Shadow
Natalie Cole's new album, "Take a Look," should erase any lingering doubts that the 1991 blockbuster "Unforgettable With Love" was an inspired, one-of-kind stroke of pop nostalgia.
Recorded with many of the same arrangers and players, the new album also focuses on jazz and pre-rock pop songs, many of them standards lavishly arranged for orchestra.
But if the sound of "Take a Look" (Elektra 9 61496; CD and cassette) is similar to that of "Unforgettable," a tribute to her father, Nat (King) Cole, its perspective is broader and quirkier.
And it firmly establishes Ms.
Cole as a polished pop-jazz stylist of conservative temperament who is a hybrid of her father, Ella Fitzgerald and the young Aretha Franklin.


Why Minorities Need Special Help
Recently the media has highlighted the position of some people that racially and ethnically defined programs deprive them of benefits.
The article on the Legal Education Access Program at Touro College  [ "L.I. Law Schools Aim for 'Diversity' With New Intensity," May 16 ]  included a comment by a white male that the program "gives an academic advantage to minorities." We are struggling with our complex reactions to this contention.
We are fully aware that many whites were victimized by prejudice in the past.
For example, earlier in this century Irish-American immigrants were confronted with signs posted by employers declaring, "Irish and Dos Need Not Apply." Further, people of all races are discriminated against on the basis of class, sexual preference, physical ability, weight and many other physical and psychological characteristics, most of which are beyond their control.
These and all forms of oppression are atrocities which must be abolished.


On Sunday; Doing Lunch, And Dinner, And the Dishes
THERE are 250 million Americans and every one is convinced he can run his own business, typically a restaurant.
This upscale suburb has been so besieged, village officials recently declared an eight-month moratorium on new restaurants.
Too many were failing, leaving vacant storefronts.
"People think anyone can open a restaurant," said Nick Falcone, co-owner of two restaurants with his brother Glenn, a Pasta E Pesce here and in Plainview.
"They come for dinner at 8, they see the big show, they see Glenn working the front, real smooth, they hear soft music, they say, 'We got to do this. We got to get a restaurant in Great Neck, make a million.' "


SAINT HILLARY
Michael Kelly's portrait of Mrs.
Clinton was evenhanded and fair, while at the same time offering a revealing and fascinating exploration of "the politics of virtue."
But the same can't be said of Anita Kunz's cynical portrait of "Saint Hillary."


E. C. McPherson, J. B. Trevor 4th
Eugenie Chester McPherson, the daughter of Mrs.
Gregory A. Sharp of Northford, Conn., and Stephen M. McPherson of New York, was married yesterday to John Bond Trevor 4th, the son of Mrs.
Eugene Quinn of Washington and Mr.
Trevor 3d of Lake Placid, N.Y.
The Rev.
David Ames performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church on Fishers Island, N.Y.
The bride, 27, is the assistant to the executive director of Planned Parenthood of Rhode Island in Providence.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Colorado.
Her father is a managing director of Ward Howell International Inc., an executive search concern in New York.
Her mother, Penelope Sharp, is an environmental consultant in Northford.


NIGERIANS IN VOTE FOR CIVILIAN RULE
After nearly a decade of military rule, Nigeria held its first free presidential election today against a backdrop of social unrest and disillusionment.
The exhilaration many Nigerians felt in 1986, when Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida promised a swift return to elective civilian rule, has been supplanted by rising anger and anxiety over the sluggish pace of change.


At Work; Poor Women, Rich Dreams
WHEN Donna Nicolardi, a former public school teacher, applied for a Small Business Administration loan to start a business, she was asked for a five-year projection.
"They wanted to see a business plan, but I did not know how to do one," Ms.
Nicolardi said.
"When I contacted companies to do the plan, they wanted more money than I had."
But now, thanks to a 14-month course for unemployed and low-income women, Ms.
Nicolardi, 40, will get her chance.
She hopes to master the basics of business ownership and make a go of her company, A+ Kidlings Inc., which specializes in educational books and games and toys that "help children learn moral lessons and self-esteem."


The Creative Ferment Behind the Glass Boxes
Has the hour arrived for a manifesto?
Is it time for a book to rouse architects from their recessionary torpor and chart a new course for their art?
Twenty-seven years have passed since Robert Venturi's "Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture" outlined a program for post-modernism.
Meanwhile, a new generation of architects, born after World War II, has edged onto the stage.
Where is the document that declares what they stand for?
"Architecture Culture: 1943-1968" will have to do until the real thing comes along.
The book, just published, is hardly a rabble-rousing tract.
As its starchy title makes plain, this is a scholarly work: a "documentary anthology" of writings by architects and critics, selected and annotated with great intelligence and care by Joan Ockman, 40, a professor at Columbia University's Graduate School of Architecture, Preservation and Planning, co-publishers of the book with Rizzoli.
Still, the book carries a sly but potent ideological charge.
Robert Venturi called his book a "gentle manifesto." Ms.
Ockman has produced a crypto-manifesto: a smart, gutsy polemic in prim academic wrappers.


Demonstrations By the Masters
MORE than 100 years after Longfellow wrote his poem celebrating the village blacksmith, no fewer than 11 blacksmiths will bend and twist red-hot iron this summer at the Peters Valley Craft Center.
They will show their students how to form Colonial-style hardware and candelabra in the early 19th-century forge.
In other studios, potters, fiber artists, woodworkers and jewelry makers will demonstrate traditional and innovative methods for creating contemporary crafts.
Peters Valley is offering 70 workshops this summer.


The Executive Computer; Shopping Lessons From (Gasp!) the Air Force
FOR anyone familiar with the horror stories of Air Force procurement -- $500 ashtrays, $700 toilet seats and $1,000 hammers -- it was easy to be apprehensive when the service announced in 1991 that it was letting out a contract covering as many as 300,000 advanced personal computers.
Now, more than two years after the Air Force opened its Desktop IV competition with a vow that the contract would be a model for streamlined high-technology procurement, the first batch of computers is almost ready for delivery.


SAINT HILLARY
I didn't vote for Bill Clinton.
He seemed like another decent but misguided liberal, Southern governor.
But his wife terrifies me.
Her sophomoric babble reminds me of old soft-drink commercials that urge us to hold hands and sing songs on a mountainside.
The politics of meaning has a simple name: socialism.
The kind that's failing everywhere, including Sweden.
Isn't there someone who can save us from those two?
ARNOLD WECHTER Englewood, N.J.


Leigh Weatherly, Anthony Flint
Leigh Manning Weatherly, a daughter of Michael M. Weatherly of Southport, Conn., and Eloise J. Weatherly of Baltimore, was married yesterday to Anthony Evans Flint, the son of George S. Flint of New York and Mary Alice Flint of Princeton, N.J.
The Rev.
Alastair Votaw performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Southport, Conn.
Ms.
Weatherly, 29, is keeping her name.
She is an editor at Academic Press in Cambridge, Mass., a subsidiary of Harcourt Brace.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is a founder of the Forschner Group Inc., an importer and distributor of Swiss Army products in Shelton, Conn.


Effort to Bar Plea Deals Is Under Fire
In November District Attorney Robert T. Johnson of the Bronx announced what appeared to be a brash attack on the status quo: no longer would he offer plea bargains to indicted felony suspects, no matter the cost to the court system.
Now, after nearly seven months, the granite walls of the Bronx County Courthouse have not tumbled down as many had feared.
Yet Mr.
Johnson's unorthodox approach has begun to strain the criminal justice system.


BUSINESS DIARY
THE ECONOMY On Those Worries About Renewed Inflation: Never Mind The Administration must have been greatly relieved at Friday's report on inflation -- or, at least in May, the lack of it.
Before the report, the White House kept saying how important low interest rates were in keeping the economy on the mend.
And it kept up the pressure on the Federal Reserve not to raise rates, fearing that if prices jumped again, the central bank might act quickly.
Then it turned out that producer prices were unchanged last month -- erasing, in many economists' minds, the specter of an inflationary surge.
Suddenly, the White House anxiety vanished, with President Clinton's chief economic adviser, Laura D'Andrea Tyson, even saying that she hadn't really been worried by the earlier increases in producer prices -- 0.6 percent in April, 0.4 percent in March.
Financial markets had obviously been worried, though, because interest rates fell sharply in heavy buying in the bond market.
A Crumbling Budget Plan Imagine a sizable block of stone.
Then imagine a horde of would-be sculptors attacking it with chisels and hammers.
And when, their passion spent, they pull back to pronounce their work complete, nothing is left but a pebble.
That seems the likely fate of President Clinton's ambitious economic plan.
Yes, something may still pass Congress, but how much of the original vision will remain?
The latest, and biggest, hunk of stone to crash to the floor was the proposed tax on the heat content of fuels, which Mr.
Clinton abandoned last week in the face of rising opposition.
This was to raise nearly a third of the $250 billion in sought-for new taxes, and any compromise that now emerges -- like a gasoline tax -- is sure to fall short.
When the pebble is finally thrown at the deficit, that monster probably won't even flinch.
Fly Now -- or Sue Later You dash to the gate, ticket in hand, but the plane is full.
To most people, this is cause for rejoicing, because the airline will hand you several hundred dollars to ease the pain -- and also probably get you on a plane in a couple of hours.
Most people would gladly sit and read for $100 or so an hour.
But there are, inevitably, some I'm-not-going-to-take-it types, and a Federal appeals court has ruled that if they're bumped, they can sue for damages.
But airlines are not about to alter their meticulously calibrated overbooking formulas -- only one traveler in 10,000 is grounded under protest.
And since punitive damages are not allowed, that one is unlikely to take on a legal crusade.
Boesky, Back From the Gutter The rich are indeed different.
They may say they're broke, but that's not quite what they mean.
After Ivan Boesky settled insider-trading charges, paying a $100 million fine, he gladly opened his wallet to show the bare, lonely leather.
Of course his wife, Seema, had a little left -- $100 million or so -- and Mr.
Boesky quickly demanded half.
Last week, as part of a divorce settlement, he got a bit less than that, but he did get $20 million, a $2.5 million house and -- so that he wouldn't have to dip into capital -- $180,000 a year in pocket money.
Less Deadly Lighters Each year, Americans buy half a billion butane lighters -- that's two for every woman, man and child.
It's that child that's the problem.
Children, being children, tend to play with lighters -- causing, each year, an estimated 5,000 fires, and 150 deaths.
So last week the Consumer Product Safety Commission ordered manufacturers to make lighters too difficult for most children under 5 to operate.
Now there's an idea: just make them too difficult for most adults to operate, too, and a few people might wind up giving their lungs a break. 'Diet Plate'?
Prove It!
What, exactly, does "diet plate" mean on a restaurant menu?
Right now, just about anything.
If your local diner wants to write "diet plate" next to a listing for steak, french fries and buttered roll, it's free to do so.
Or it can use a cute little heart symbol, suggesting that this meal can somehow substitute for a morning jog.
And it doesn't take much to convince customers, who are all too happy to believe that the good stuff is also the healthy stuff.
Now, the Food and Drug Administration wants a few more facts on the table.
Last week it announced new rules to require restaurants to back up any nutrition claims on menus.
"Low-fat," you say?
Give me the numbers.
Cite chapter and verse.
Reading menus could soon get pretty strenuous.
Wouldn't it be easier to go for that jog?
COMPANIES Heir a Bit Less Apparent Robert M. Haft had big plans for running the Dart Group -- to "let people make mistakes," to double earnings in four years.
But he may have rolled up his sleeves a bit too soon -- and it could be a costly mistake.
After all, his 72-year-old father, Herbert H. Haft, is still chairman of Dart, and from all appearances did not take kindly to his 40-year-old heir apparent's bold words.
It didn't help his mood to read in April that his son, who had built Crown Books into a power, had been "de facto chief executive" for two years.
Last week the elder Mr.
Haft moved to remove his son from the board -- and with 57 percent of the voting stock, he's likely to get his way.
Opening Up Cable TV It's easy to say that any upstart can get into cable television -- that true competition exists.
But if the little guys can't get HBO, say, or 24-hour sports, what chance do they have?
Not much.
But last week, in a big step toward more competition -- and, very likely, lower prices -- seven top cable companies settled a long antitrust investigation, agreeing to loosen the reins on popular programming.
True, recent legislation mandates much of this, but the pact appears to go further in requiring companies to license channels to rivals that transmit by satellite, microwave or, eventually, phone lines.
So the cable future is heading for your living room, and you may even save a few pennies when it gets there.
Rethinking an S.&amp; L. Deal As the Government rushed to unload insolvent savings and loans, it made some pretty strange deals.
Try this one: In 1988, regulators promised nearly $2 billion in subsidies to James M. Fail to create Bluebonnet Savings from 15 Texas S.&amp; L.'s.
You'd think Mr.
Fail was a solid citizen, and was investing sizable sums of his own.
Not quite.
He'd been indicted for fraud and was barred from doing business in Alabama.
And what came out of his pocket?
A cool $1,000, with the rest borrowed.
Bluebonnet, and Mr.
Fail, are thriving.
The Government, after five years, suddenly came to and said, "Wait a minute!" Last week, regulators sued Mr.
Fail for fraud, saying he had been less than candid about his past.
Lean Profits at Apple Computer Apple Computer is selling a lot more personal computers, but investors are enjoying it a lot less.
Apple said on Wednesday that its earnings would fall, and its shares plunged 10 percent -- ending the week at $43.75, off fully 25 percent since May 20.
The problem, oddly, is that Apple did just what it set out to do: grab more of the PC market.
With sales up 35 percent lately, it has joined I.B.M. at the top of the heap.
But everything conspired to slice away at profits: rivals cut prices, forcing a price war, and as low-end machines became more powerful, more people bought these less-profitable models.
And as computers go from being miracle machines to just another familiar commodity, buyers learn how to avoid paying a penny more than they have to.
Investing in the Printed Word The New York Times Company agreed last week to buy The Boston Globe, New England's largest newspaper, for $1.1 billion.
Both saw clear benefits in the deal: The Globe, owned by two family trusts, avoids any chance of a messy takeover battle when those trusts expire in 1996, while the Times Company extends its reach in the populous corridor from Maine to Washington.
Times stock lost $2.50 on Friday, to $24.375, the day after the announcement.
Affiliated Publications, The Globe's owner, gained 37.5 cents, to $13.625.
INTERNATIONAL France Gives In on Farm Cuts Leading nations have tried for years to find a consensus on world trade, but snags persist.
Here's a big one: The United States says that by subsidizing farmers, Europe holds an unfair edge in the market for oilseed products, but France has resisted cutting output.
It is no small matter, because oilseeds, used for vegetable oils and animal feed, are a huge business.
But last week, possibly feeling world pressure, France dropped its opposition.
Now France will have its hands full calming the irate, and highly vocal, farm lobby.
Club Med Goes to China This just about settles it.
China is joining the 20th century, with all its pains, all its well-scripted pleasures.
Club Med is coming to China.
A year-round resort, complete with golf course and casino, will be built on the island of Hainan.
Club Med clearly could not ignore the Asian appetite for vacations.
In addition to Chinese visitors, it expects many from Japan, Taiwan and Korea.
Japanese, in fact, now make up 6.2 percent of its customers.
No Aristide, No Oil In more poetic times, a face could launch a thousand ships.
These days, it's oil that makes things happen -- or at least that's what the United Nations is betting.
Last week the Security Council decided that since all else had failed, it would play a powerful economic card to pressure Haiti to restore the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide to power -- it planned to impose a worldwide ban on oil exports to Haiti.
The United States has had an oil embargo for over a year, but diplomats have said that only a global ban could get the attention of Haiti's military rulers.


What Do Clothes Mean To an Artist Anyway?
"FALL FROM FASHION" at the Aldrich Museum of Contemporary Art in Ridgefield is not about fashion, at least not in the haute couture or Seventh Avenue sense of the term.
It is rather a comment on clothing and its significance, as perceived by artists.
The show, which was organized by the museum's director, Barry A. Rosenberg, comes with a glossy catalogue.
Unfortunately, too many of its pages are virtually empty and, as if to compensate, the layout is dreadfully tricky.
What is more, the silver cover aims to be provocative by featuring a photograph of a bearded, ponytailed young man in a dowdy dress, along with the question "Are Today's Artists Hung Up on Clothing?"


Page Evans, Robert Schwartz
Mary Page Evans, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Beverley Evans Jr. of Wilmington, Del., was married yesterday to Robert Crandall Schwartz, a son of Karl Schwartz 3d of Virginia Beach, Va., and the late Katherine M. Schwartz.
The Rev.
Dr.
Adam Lewis performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church in Greenville, Del.
Mrs.
Schwartz, 27, is known as Page.
She is a master's degree candidate in liberal studies at Georgetown University.
She graduated from American University.


More Blizzard
To the Editor: I just want to report a very good flight experience over the blizzard weekend March 13-14, and to compliment Finnair for its handling of the flight from Helsinki to New York.


America the Illiterate
To the Editor:
It is with sadness that I read "U.S. Decline: A New Clue" (Viewpoints, May 30) about low test scores for "cultural literacy." But I had just read the town report of South Yarmouth, Mass., wherein the high school principal, Curtis S. Collins, commended his graduating students for their "high standards of academic excellence." This "excellence" was evidenced by their abysmally low Scholastic Aptitude Test scores -- 445 verbal and 476 in math, out of a possible 800.
Of this sad lot, 57 percent were to attend a four-year college.


POSTINGS: Browsers Welcome; House-Hunting, Via Video
It's a bit like an upscale Co-ops 'R' Us.
The first thing you notice is the window.
Angels, lots of angels, with gold wings, lyres and trumpets, hanging from strings, heralding from on high the delights of "full park views," "terrace in bloom," "charming CPW pre-war." Stripped in red across the glass, the list expands: "East Side"; "West Side"; "Downtown"; "Lofts"; "Town Houses"; "Weekend Retreats." A typical real-estate office?
No.
"Walk through apartments on video," the signs exhort, "Check out recent sales in your building," "See what your apartment is worth."


The Crooning Game
SOMETHING on the plate is moving.
There among the crisp greens, the handsome radishes and carrots and the proud trio of freshly fried samosas, served among the careful opulence of this fine midtown Indian restaurant, is a little black speck, no bigger than the head of a pin, and Chris Isaak doesn't like it.
No sir, he doesn't like it one bit.
The pompadoured, button-nosed, 36-year-old singer focuses his sharp blue eyes on the offending speck.
He leans in closer, then he turns his gaze upon the waiter, who has just deposited the plate and now stands expectantly at the table.
"Hey!" Mr. Isaak says. "This little guy's still alive."


Sangeeta Hingorani, Charles Birnbach
Dr.
Sangeeta Ram Hingorani, a daughter of Ram and Kamla Hingorani of Norwalk, Conn., was married last Thursday to Dr.
Charles David Birnbach, the son of Richard and Lily Birnbach of Great Neck, L.I.
Cantor David Benedict performed the ceremony at the Water Club in New York.
Dr.
Hingorani, who is keeping her name, graduated from Yale University and received a medical degree from Yeshiva University.
She is to begin a residency in pediatrics at Children's Hospital in Seattle later this month.
Her father is the president of A &amp; H Engineers, a civil engineering firm in New York.
Her mother is the president of Quality Homes, a real estate company in Norwalk.


Sports of The Times; Horrid Mets Can't Match Originals
WITH morbid fascination, I watched Pete Incaviglia of the Phillies hit a game-deciding three-run wallop all the way to Yonkers on Thursday and I could only think of Casey Stengel's phrase for mammoth home runs his pitchers allowed: "Over a building."
Then on Friday, two members of the Lenny Dykstra Chowder and Marching Society went out to Shea to watch Lenny scurry home with the winning run on an error.
All I could think of was Casey's sympathy for fledgling Mets fans: "The attendance got trimmed again."


Chicago U. Graduates Hear About Diversity
Ralph W. Nicholas, the William Rainey Harper Professor in Anthropology at the University of Chicago, told graduates at the university's 101st commencement that introducing multicultural perspectives in education was helpful but in many instances had been abused.
"Such distinctions can feed our curiosities and provide great delight in discovery," Professor Nicholas said.
"Unfortunately they are given exaggerated significance and made the basis for spurious claims of priority and superiority."


More Blizzard
To the Editor: I read the words of the disgruntled travelers in the Blizzard of '93 (Letters to the Editor, May 16) and felt I must show the other side.
Five of us, my sister, my daughter and two granddaughters and I, were traveling east from Salt Lake City on Saturday, March 13.
My sister and I were changing planes in Chicago and then going on to Newburgh, N.Y.
We were told we would get no farther than Chicago and when we arrived we should check with personnel there for information about a hotel room.
My daughter and her two children were to change in Chicago for Syracuse.


Mary Stiles, Mandell Ourisman
Mary Martin Stiles and Mandell Jack Ourisman were married yesterday at the Hotel Bel-Air in Los Angeles.
The Rev.
David J. Ourisman, a Methodist minister and a son of Mr.
Ourisman, performed the ceremony.
Mrs.
Ourisman is a political consultant to the Republican Party in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Texas.
She is a daughter of Aleen Martin of Mexia, Tex., and the late Dr.
Herbert Martin.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Foreigners Opening the Books
To the Editor:
While the Securities and Exchange Commission has won a battle, the United States is losing a war.
True, Daimler-Benz had agreed to abide by S.E.C. rules to obtain listing on the New York Stock Exchange.
But hundreds of major international companies have decided to conduct their financial business in London, Frankfurt, Zurich and elsewhere, rather than New York.
They refuse to be bludgeoned into accepting United States accounting rules.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
HUNTERS AND JUMPERS
The 64th annual Ox Ridge Horse Show will take place this week in Darien, running from Monday through Sunday at the Ox Ridge Hunt Club, 512 Middlesex Road.
Each day except Sunday there will be various classes of hunters and jumpers performing for ribbons and money prizes from 8 A.M. to around 5:30 P.M.
Ponies and young riders will be featured on Monday and Friday, when the A.S.P.C.A. medal class competition will be held.
Professional riders will have center stage on Wednesday, and equitation championships are scheduled on Saturday.


Elizabeth Brack, Mark E. Mullen
Elizabeth Mulveyhill Brack, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Reginald Kufeld Brack Jr. of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Mark Edward Mullen, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold Mullen of New Orleans.
The Rev.
Sandra Stayner performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Mullen, 27, is a freelance television-news and magazine reporter in San Francisco.
She graduated from Vanderbilt University.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Time Inc. in New York, the magazine publishing division of Time Warner Inc., and the chairman of the National Urban League.


On These Shores, Immigrants Find a New Wave of Hostility
TOLERANCE and intolerance toward immigration form a double helix in the American genetic code.
The United States, every civics textbook says, is a nation of immigrants, a refuge to the tired, the poor and the tempest-tossed.
But nativism, the political reaction against immigration, is a hardy strain.
It flourishes in times of economic and political uncertainty.
It is flourishing now.
Last week's wreck of the Golden Venture, the smugglers' ship that spilled nearly 300 Chinese immigrants seeking political asylum onto New York's shores, and the abuse of the asylum system by a key suspect in the World Trade Center bombing, have spurred anti-immigration bills in Congress.
They have raised fears that a flood of foreigners threatens the political and economic security of the United States.
In particular, they have amplified calls for restrictions on the system of political asylum.


Negotiations Stalled on Questions of Power and Prerogatives
As fellow Democrats, Mayor David N. Dinkins and Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone had every reason to try to wrap up negotiations over the city's troublesome budget quickly to avoid political problems in an election year.
But despite their best intentions, the two sides got caught in an eight-day marathon, snagged on small but thorny questions of institutional power and prerogatives.
Senior aides to Mr.
Dinkins and Mr.
Vallone said the biggest stumbling block was a bitter showdown between the Mayor and Council over who should control quasi-independent agencies.
That broad battle was fought out over a proposal from the Mayor for a small, obscure public corporation that would help finance new health centers.


LETTERS
To the Editor:
THE review of Russ Rymer's book, "Genie: An Abused Child's Flight From Silence" (April 25), attacks the group of caretakers who worked with Genie after the girl -- who had been confined to one room for her first 13 years -- was removed from the care of her parents and hospitalized.
Readers of the review may come away believing that the psychologists, linguists and social workers who cared for Genie were solely responsible for her failure to recover from her childhood abuse and for her present situation as a resident of a state institution for retarded adults.
A response is warranted.
This is the first time I have made any public statement on this case during the more than 22 years that have elapsed since it first came to light.


JUNE 6-12: No to Colt; Connecticut Gives Up Some Guns and Butter
A glaring conflict of interest in considering legislation is supposed to prompt lawmakers to excuse themselves from voting, but this one could not be avoided: Was Colt's Manufacturing Company of Hartford, 47 percent owned by the Connecticut state employee pension fund, a maker of assault weapons or not?
Should the company's best-selling rifle, the Sporter, be banned in the state where it is made?
Last week, by the barest of majorities and with much angst on the part of some legislators, Connecticut said yes.


A Jazz Festival and Its Musical Muses; Thelonious Monk -- A Propeller on a Skullcap That Spins With Quirky Energy
The 1993 JVC Jazz Festival, which runs from Friday to June 26, will be sleeker than in previous years.
With 20 concerts at six locations throughout Manhattan, the schedule is heavy in singers and tributes (to the likes of Thelonious Monk and Charlie Parker).
And because of rising costs, many smaller events, like the afternoon piano concerts, have been dropped.
But despite the leanness, the festival should still offer performances to satisfy the tastes of most jazz lovers.
Here, six noted authors tell why a performer or honoree on this year's program speaks to them.


Quartets in Recital at Silvermine Guild
THE executive director of the Silvermine Guild Arts Center, Brian Gormley, was talking about why the Chamber Music Series the center is sponsoring will be extraordinary.
"Firstly," he said, "we are bringing some of the country's finest young musicians to Silvermine. Secondly, intimacy: in our auditorium you can choose literally to read the music over the shoulder of the first violinist or pianist. Thirdly, warmth and informality: these concerts bring friends together in a casual atmosphere that is enhanced by a dessert reception in our galleries and an opportunity to meet the musicians after the performance."
Members of the audience will not be able to look over a pianist's shoulder at tonight's 7:30 concert, since the featured ensemble is the Lark Quartet, but perhaps one of the string players -- Eva Gruesser, Robin Mayforth, Anna Kruger or Astrid Schween -- will oblige.
In any case, they'll be playing quartets by Mozart, Bartok and Beethoven.
For reservations, or details of the three remaining monthly recitals featuring the Chester String Quartet, Music Amici and the Cavani Quartet, call the Guild at 966-9700.


When All of New York Is a Gallery to Browse
EVERYBODY knows that when summer comes and the city turns hot and sticky, dealers and artists head for Europe or the Hamptons, and the New York art world shuts down tight.
Right?
Wrong.
In recent years, summer has become a bustling time for art in the city.
Institutions large and small take advantage of the season's slower pace to present special events.
In the hot months, too, some prized sites come into their own, offering visitors a respite from the steaming city along with a varied experience of art.
These days, the city has become an art center for all seasons.


TOURS
Here is a sampling of tours by bus, van and foot that are scheduled during the summer in New York City.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today
"UPTOWN ELEGANCE: HARLEM'S OPEN HOUSE TOURS." A tour through the Mount Morris Park area, which has an array of Victorian homes and 19th-century churches, with stops at some, led by Michael Adams, president of Upper Manhattan Society for Progress Through Preservation.
Sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 10 A.M.
Fee: $28.
Information and meeting place: (212) 996-1100.
"FAMOUS MURDER SITES," Manhattan.
A tour of infamous spots, including the sites of Mafia hits.
Sponsored by Sidewalks of New York. 2 P.M.
Also meets on June 19.
Fee: $10.
Information: (212) 517-0201.
"HARLEM ON SUNDAY." A bus tour includes a church service with gospel music, the Hamilton Grange mansion, the Morris Jumel mansion, the Apollo Theater and the headquarters of George Washington.
Proper dress required for church service.
Sponsored by Harlem Spirituals.
Meets at 9 A.M.
Every Sunday throughout the year.
Fee: $29, $23 for children.
Reservations and information: (212) 757-0425.
"HISTORIC NEIGHBORHOODS OF FLATBUSH," Brooklyn.
A tour through the many styles of Victorian architecture dating between 1898 and 1907.
Sponsored by Flatbush Development Corporation.
Meets at 1:30 P.M.
Also on July 11 and Aug. 8.
Fee: $5.
Information: (718) 469-8990.
"POND PEEPERS," Central Park.
A tour of the park's pond, where creatures from crayfish to frogs to minute crustaceans live.
Sponsored by the Central Park Conservancy.
Meets at 2 P.M. at 110th street and Central Park West.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
Monday
"SOUL FOOD AND JAZZ," Harlem.
An evening bus tour that focuses on what life was like in Harlem in the 1920's.
Tour includes a soul food dinner and a visit to a cabaret.
Sponsored by Harlem Spirituals.
Meets at 7 P.M. every Monday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday throughout the year.
Fee: $65 includes dinner and cocktails.
Reservations and information: (212) 757-0425.
CENTRAL PARK TOURS.
A trolley tour of sites including Strawberry Fields, the Conservatory Garden and the Sheep Meadow.
Sponsored by Gray Line New York Tours.
Departs at 10:30 A.M. and 1 and 3 P.M., Monday through Friday, through Sept. 6.
Fee: $14; $12 for students and the elderly; $7 for children under 12.
Information: (212) 397-2600.
Tuesday
NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY TOURS, Manhattan.
A one-hour tour of the historic building.
Sponsored by the New York Public Library.
Meets Tuesdays through Saturdays at 11 A.M. and 2 P.M.
Free.
Information and group tours: (212) 930-0501.
Wednesday
"GARDENER'S GREEN THUMB TOUR OF BRYANT PARK," Manhattan.
A walking tour led by Michael Levine, the gardener of Bryant Park.
Mr.
Levine will discuss his work and that of the Bryant Park garden designer, Lynden B. Miller, as well as methods of maintaining a large ornamental garden in a busy urban park.
Sponsored by the Grand Central Partnership and the 34th Street Partnership.
Meets at 6 P.M. at the Lowell Fountain in Bryant Park, 42d Street and Avenue of the Americas.
Also on every Wednesday through Sept. 6.
Free.
Information: (212) 983-4142.
"GRAND CENTRAL TERMINAL TOUR," Manhattan.
A tour that focuses on the terminal's design and construction, with a stop in the noted whispering gallery, on the lower level.
Sponsored by the Municipal Art Society.
Meets at 12:30 P.M. on the main concourse.
Every Wednesday through Sept. 6.
Free.
Information: (212) 439-1049.
TIMES SQUARE TOUR, Manhattan.
A walking tour led by Beth McGuire, an actress and acting teacher, that focuses on the landmark theaters and the legends of Broadway.
Sponsored by the Municipal Arts Society.
Meets at 11 A.M. every Wednesday through Sept. 6.
Fee: $10; $8 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 439-1049.
Thursday
"MIRACLE TOUR OF 34TH STREET," Manhattan.
A walking tour, led by John Tauranac, an urban historian and mapmaker, or Alan Neuman, an architect and architectural historian, through the world's largest shopping area.
Sponsored by the Grand Central Partnership and the 34th Street Partnership.
Meets at 12:30 P.M. at the Fifth Avenue entrance of the Empire State Building.
Every Thursday through Sept. 6.
Free.
Information: (212) 868-0521.
Friday
"THE GRAND TOUR OF MIDTOWN," Manhattan.
A walking tour led by Justin Ferate, an urban historian, highlights the Grand Central district architecture and lore.
Sponsored by the Grand Central Partnership and the 34th Street Partnership.
Meets at 12:30 P.M. on the south side of 42d Street at Park Avenue.
Every Friday through Sept. 6.
Free.
Information: (212) 983-4142.
Saturday
"THE LEON TROTSKY-ABBIE HOFFMAN-MADONNA TOUR," East Village, Manhattan.
A walking tour that covers the radical past of Tompkins Square Park; the Young Lords, a 1960's political group, and the political activity of Madonna, whose first apartment in the area is now condemned.
Sponsored by Radical Walking Tours. 1 P.M.
Also on July 31.
Fee: $6.
Information and meeting place: (718) 492-0069.
GREENPOINT WALKING TOUR, Brooklyn.
A walking tour led by Patricia Olmstead of Urban Explorations will highlight landmarkhomes, churches, woodworking and furniture design industries and samplings of Eastern European culture.
Sponsored by the New York City: Yours to Discover tourism program.
Meets at 1 P.M.
Also on June 26.
Fee: $8.
Reservations and information: (718) 389-9044.
"GHOSTS AFTER SUNSET," Greenwich Village.
A walking tour past sites of public executions and Manhattan's largest cemetery, in Greenwich Village.
Sponsored by Sidewalks of New York. 6 P.M.; also June 26 and every Saturday through Sept. 6.
Fee: $10.
Information (212) 517-0201.
"THE PRIDE RIDE," Manhattan.
A bus tour focusing on gay and lesbian landmarks and legends.
Sites include homes of famous gay men and lesbians, the National AIDS Memorial and the Gertrude Stein monument.
Sponsored by Sidewalks of New York.
Meets at 2 P.M., June 19, 20, and 26 and at 6 P.M.
June 24 and 25 Fee: $30.
Reservations and information: (212) 388-2286.
"AMATEUR ASTRONOMERS ASSOCIATION," Great Kills Model Airplane Field, Great Kills Park, S.I.
A stargazing tour led by an amateur astronomer.
Telescopes will be available, but participants are encouraged to bring their own viewing apparatus.
Sponsored by Gateway National Recreation Area.
Meets at 8:30 P.M.; Also on July 24 and Aug. 21.
Information: (718) 351-6970.
WOODLAND NATURE WALK, Great Kills Park, S.I.
A tour led by a park ranger to highlight the flora and fauna of Great Kills woodland and the adjoining meadows.
Bring binoculars.
Sponsored by Gateway National Recreation Area.
Free.
Meets at 1 P.M.; also on Aug. 28.
Reservations and Information: (718) 351-6970.
June 20
"A WRITER'S WALK THROUGH GREENWICH VILLAGE." A walking tour led by Tom Farrington, a poet and actor, past the homes where poets, playwrights, fiction writers and journalists lived and gathered.
Sponsored by Sidewalks of New York.
Meets at 2 P.M. at the Washington Square Arch.
Fee: $10.
Information: (212) 517-0201.
"THE NEW BRYANT PARK," Manhattan.
A tour of the newly restored park with stops at the New York Public Library, Grand Central Terminal, Tudor City and the United Nations, led by Arthur Rosenblatt, associate director of the Bryant Park Restoration Corporation.
Sponsored by the 92d Street Y. 1 P.M.
Fee: $15.
Information and meeting place: (212) 996-1100.
"WALKING TOUR OF COMMUNITY GARDENS ON THE LOWER EAST SIDE." A walking tour through blooming azaleas, the end of the tulips and daffodils and beginning of irises and peonies.
Sites include the Green Oasis Garden, El Jardin del Paraiso and the Sixth Street and Avenue B Community Garden.
Sponsored by the Green Guerrillas.
Meets at noon at the Liz Christy Bowery-Houston Garden, northeast corner of Houston Street and the Bowery.
Also on July 18 and Aug. 15.
Suggested donation, $1.
Information: (212) 674-8124.
"THE MEADOWS, WOODS AND WATERS OF PROSPECT PARK," Brooklyn.
A walking tour focusing on how the park was designed be Frederick Law Olmsted and Calvert Vaux to create an idealized Victorian view of nature.
Sponsored by the Brooklyn Center for the Urban Environment.
Meets at 1 P.M. at the Tennis House, Park Drive West near Ninth Street entrance.
Free.
Information: (718) 788-8549.
LANDSCAPING FOR BIRDS, Egbertville, S.I.
A hike through the woods of High Rock in the Greenbelt in search of song birds.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. in the parking lot at the end of Nevada Avenue, off Rockland Avenue.
Free.
Information: (718) 667-6042.
NATUREWALK SERIES: TWIGHLIGHT TREK, Egbertville, S.I.
A three-hour early evening hike through the Greenbelt.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 5 P.M. in the parking lot at the end of Nevada Avenue, off Rockland Avenue.
Free.
Information: (718) 667-6042.
June 21 "MIDTOWN LOBBIES," Manhattan.
A walking tour past the classic and contemporary lobbies of midtown, led by Sylvia Laudien-Meo, an art historian.
Sponsored by the Municipal Art Society. 11 A.M.
Meets at the Urban Center, 457 Madison Avenue, at 51st Street.
Fee: $10; $8 for students and the elderly.
Also July 5, 19, Aug. 2, 16 and 30.
Information: (212) 439-1049.
ROOSEVELT ISLAND TOUR.
A walking tour, led by Eugenie Martin, director of Roosevelt Island Tours, that covers five parks, six designated landmarks, waterfront promenades and vistas of this planned community.
Sponsored by Roosevelt Island Tours.
Meets at 10:30 A.M. on the tram platform at the Roosevelt Island side.
Also on every Mondayand Thursday at 10:30 A.M. and Wednesday at 2:30 P.M. through Sept. 6.
Fee: $12.
Reservations and meeting place: (212)223-0157.
June 24
"GAY AND LESBIAN HERITAGE WALKING TOUR," Greenwich Village.
A walking tour through the cradle of the gay rights movement.
Sites include Stonewall, the oldest gay bar in New York City.
Sponsored by Sidewalks of New York.
Meets at 7 P.M. at the Washington Square Arch.
Also at 11 A.M. and 7 P.M. on June 25, 26.
Fee: $15.
Information: (212) 517-0201.
June 25
"TIMES SQUARE EXPOSE: CROSSROADS OF THE WORLD," Manhattan.
A walking tour through the theater district, led by Laurence Frommer, an actor.
Sites include the Palace Theater, which dates back to vaudeville; the historic Lyceum Theatre, and some of New York's grandest hotels, like the Paramount, the Edison and the Hotel Macklowe.
Sponsored by Times Square Business Improvement District.
Meets at noon at the Times Square Visitor and Transit Information Center.
Every Friday through Sept. 6.
Free.
Information: (212) 768-1560.
"CITY WALK: DOWNTOWN," Manhattan.
A walking tour led by Dorothy Lovitz focusing on history and architecture through TriBeCa and downtown Manhattan.
Sites include St.
Paul's Church, the Woolworth Building, Tweed Courthouse, World Trade Center and Battery Park City.
Sponsored by the Outdoors Club.
Meets at 1:30 P.M. in front of St.
Paul's church, northwest corner of Fulton Street and Broadway.
Fee: $2.
Information: (212) 876-6688.
June 26
"FROM NAPLES TO BIALYSTOCK TO BEIJING: A MULTI-ETHNIC EATING TOUR," Manhattan.
A walking tour of the Jewish East Side, Chinatown and Little Italy.
Food, drinks and gratuities extra.
Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours.
Meets at noon.
Fee: $9, $7 for students and the elderly.
Also Aug. 14.
Information and meeting place: (212) 439-1090.
"MODERN SKYSCRAPERS," Manhattan.
A walking tour led by Andrew Dolkart, an architectural historian, that spotlights a variety of styles from Beaux Arts designs like the Knox Building to Art Deco monuments like the Chrysler Building.
Sponsored by the Municipal Arts Society.
Meets at 10 A.M. at the fountain in Bryant Park.
Fee: $15.
Reservations and information: (212) 397-3809.
"UPTOWN PUBLIC ART," Manhattan.
A walking tour led by Judy Meighan, an art historian, highlighting monuments from the historic to heroic.
Sites include Columbus Circle, the Maine Monument and Grant's Tomb.
Sponsored by the Municipal Arts Society.
Meets at 1 P.M.
Fee: $30.
Reservations and information: (212) 397-3809.
"GREENPOINT: THE COMMUNITY AND MOST RECENT ARRIVALS," Brooklyn.
A walking tour of various community organizations and markets concluding with a party at an old firehouse recently converted to an artist loft.
Sponsored by Urban Explorations.
Meets at 1 P.M.
Fee: $8.
Information and meeting place: (718) 721-5254.
"MOONLIGHT WALK IN CENTRAL PARK," Manhattan.
An evening walking tour through the park led by Steve Garber, an author and naturalist, accompanied by a police escort.
A rare opportunity to see and hear nocturnal flora and fauna.
Sponsored by the 92d Street Y. Meets at 7 P.M.
Fee: $17.
Information and meeting place: (212) 996-1100.
"THE TREASURES OF COBBLE HILL," Brooklyn.
A walking tour led by Justin Ferate, an urban historian, highlighting the architecture of the area, including brownstones, carriage houses, experimental workers' housing and religious structures.
Sponsored by Brooklyn's History Museum.
Meets at 1 P.M. in front of the Independence Savings Bank on the southwest corner of Atlantic Avenue and Court Street.
Fee: $10 in advance; $12 on the day of the tour.
Reservations and information: (718) 624-0890.
June 27
"DI GOLDENE MEDINA: JEWISH ELLIS ISLAND." A tour of the museum and grounds of Ellis Island, emphasizing the Jewish experience, including a lecture on the history of American immigration.
Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours.
Meets at 11 A.M.; also on Sept. 5.
Fee: $15; $12 for students and the elderly (includes boat ticket, movie and tour).
Information and meeting place: (212) 439-1090.
"NOSHING TOUR OF THE EAST VILLAGE AND THE LOWER EAST SIDE," Manhattan.
A bus tour making 12 ethnic food stops.
The menu includes Polish blueberry blintzes, Russian breads, freshly made Italian mozzarella, Middle Eastern dried fruits, Viennese pastry, bagels and lox.
Sponsored by Lou Singer Tours.
Meets at 10 A.M.
Fee: $25 plus $18 for all food.
Reservations and information: (718) 875-9084.
"BLACK WOMEN'S HISTORY TOUR," lower Manhattan.
A tour that covers the contributions of black women to business, civil rights and publishing in the 18th and 19th centuries.
Sponsored by Black History Tours of Old New York.
Meets at 1 P.M.
Fee: $12, $5 for students.
Information and meeting place: (212) 299-7011.
"THE GARDEN CITY OF THE DEAD," Green-Wood Cemetery, Fort Hamilton Parkway and McDonald Avenue, Brooklyn.
Raven Hall, a historian, will lead a tour of the graveyard's mausoleums including those of Lola Montez, a singer-actress of the 1800's, and Walter G. Hunt, inventor of the safety pin.
Sponsored by Raven Hall.
Noon.
Meets at the Fort Hamilton gate near the corner of McDonald Avenue.
Fee: $5.
Information and meeting place: (212) 779-3051.
June 28
"THE OLD PENN STATION TOUR," Manhattan.
A walking tour led by Dennis Riga, an archeologist, exploring the remains of the old Penn Station.
Sponsored by the Grand Central Partnership and the 34th Street Partnership.
Meets at 12:30 P.M. at the 34th Street Partnership visitor information office in the Rotunda of Penn Station, the fourth Monday of each month.
Free.
Information: (212) 868-0521
July 3
GOVERNORS ISLAND.
A tour of the largest Coast Guard installation in the world, the homes of Ulysses S. Grant, Gen.
John J. Pershing, site of the 1988 Gorbachev-Reagan mini-summit and two early 19th-century forts.
Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours.
Meets at noon and 2:30 P.M.; fee: $12; $10 for students and seniors.
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 439-1090.
"GREENWICH VILLAGE II." A walking tour through the radical and historic Village.
Sites include the Rosenbergs' reported espionage apartment and the oldest gay and lesbian bookstore in the world.
Sponsored by Radical Walking Tours.
Meets at 1 P.M. in Sheridan Square in front of Village Cigars.
Fee: $6.
Information: (718) 492-0069.
SUNSET BEACH WALK, Crooke's Point, S.I.
A moonlight walking tour along the beach led by a park ranger.
Bring a flashlight.
Sponsored by Gateway National Recreation Area.
Meets at 8 P.M.
Reservations and Information: (718) 351-6970.
"UPTOWN CHURCHES," Manhattan.
A walking tour led by Francis Morrone, an architectural historian, focusing on churches designed by architects like Goodhue, Carrere, Hastings and Phelps-Stokes.
Sites include Notre Dame on Morningside Heights, St.
Paul's at Columbia, Riverside Church and Church of the Intercession.
Sponsored by the Municipal Arts Society.
Meets at 1 P.M..
Fee: $30.
Reservations and information: (212) 439-1049.
EXPLORE HISTORIC SETON FALLS, Seton Falls Park, the Bronx.
A walk examining the natural history of this park.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at 2 P.M. on East 233d Street, near Baychester Avenue, at Seton Falls Park.
Free.
Information: (718) 548-7070.
July 4
BARTOW-PELL MANSION TOUR, Pelham Bay Park, the Bronx.
A tour of the mansion museum and its gardens.
Meets at noon at the Bartow-Pell Mansion, off Shore Road.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Free.
Also July 18 and Aug. 1 and 15.
Information: (718) 548-7070.
July 6
BROOKLYN WATERFRONT TOUR.
A bus tour beginning in Polish Greenpoint, through Fulton Ferry and Brooklyn Heights to Red Hook, Seagate and Brighton Beach, ending in Sheepshead Bay.
Sponsored by Lou Singer Tours.
Meets at 10 A.M.
Fee: $25.
Reservations and information: (718) 875-9084.
July 7
THE CONSERVATORY GARDEN, Central Park.
A lunchtime tour led by Sarah Price, the garden's curator, focusing on its design and flora.
Sponsored by Central Park Conservancy.
Meets at noon at 105th Street and Fifth Avenue.
Free.
Information: (212) 860-1311.
July 10
"WAR AND REBELLION," Manhattan.
A walking tour past sites of noted political uprisings like Leisler's Rebellion of 1689, an American response to England's Glorious Revolution of 1688, which overthrew King James II; the "Negro Revolt" of 1741, in which accusations of arson led to the lynching of 30 black Americans, and the Draft Riots of 1863, spurred by the drafting of the Irish and the poor during the Civil War.
Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours.
Meets at 1 P.M.
Also on July 24 and Aug. 21.
Fee: $9, $7 for students and the elderly.
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 439-1090.
"NEW YORK JAZZ SCENE," Manhattan.
A tour led by Val Ginter, an urban historian and jazz performer, covering the jazz scene from the Apollo to the Paramount to the site of the former Cotton Club and the Savoy Ballroom.
Sponsored by the Municipal Arts Society.
Meets at 1 P.M.; Fee: $30.
Reservations and information: (212) 439-1049.
"WHO'S WHO IN GREENWOOD CEMETERY," Brooklyn.
A walking tour through the cemetery led by John Cashman, a Greenwood Cemetery historian.
Visit the graves of Currier and Ives, Duncan Phyfe and Leonard Bernstein.
Sponsored by the History Museum of Brooklyn.
Meets at 11 A.M.
Fee: $10 in advance, $12 on the day of the tour.
Reservations and information: (718) 624-0890
"NATURE WORK DAY: FRIENDS OF FORT TRYON PARK," Manhattan.
A raking and cleaning tour of the park lawns.
Sponsored by the New York City Audubon Society.
Meets at 11 A.M. at Margaret Corbin Circle, head of Fort Washington Avenue at 193d Street.
Fee: $4 Information: (212) 691-7483.
July 11
"LADIES' MILE AND FASHION ROW: RETAIL PALACES OF A BYGONE ERA," Manhattan.
A walking tour of what was the most fashionable mile at the turn of the century.
Sponsored by Bernie's Tours of New York.
Meets at 2 P.M. at the southwest corner of Avenue of the Americas and West 18th Street.
Fee: $5.
Information: (718) 655-1883.
CHINATOWN AND LITTLE ITALY, Manhattan.
A walking tour led by Joyce Gold, highlighting the changing scene in these ethnic neighborhoods.
Meets at noon in front of the Manhattan Savings Bank, Canal Street and Bowery.
Sponsored by Manhattan History.
Fee: $12.
Information: (212) 242-5762.
"IN THE FOOTSTEPS OF THE LENAPE," Crooke's Point, S.I.
A tour led by a park ranger, focusing on what Indians called the "Lenape," or "real man," and how these people lived in harmony with nature.
Sponsored by Gateway National Recreational Area.
Meets at 1 P.M.
Free.
Reservations and information: (718) 351-6970.
"ISLAMIC ARCHITECTURE AND THE MOSQUE AT 96TH STREET," Manhattan.
A tour of the mosque highlighting the history of Islam and how its culture is reflected in its architecture.
The tour will be followed by a walk through Carnegie Hill and a visit to a Russian Orthodox Church for contrast and comparison.
Sponsored by Urban Explorations.
Meets at 1 P.M.
Also Sept. 5.
Fee: $15; $12 for students and the elderly.
Information and meeting place: (718) 721-5254.
THE WOOLWORTH AND MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS, Manhattan.
A walking tour led by Barry Lewis, an architectural historian, highlighting the evolution of the skyscraper with both Gothic- and neo-Classical-inspired examples.
Sponsored by the Museum of the City of New York.
Meets at 1 P.M.
Fee: $15.
Reservations and information: (212) 534-1672.
July 14
"AFTERNOON TOUR OF THE RUSSIAN TEA ROOM," Manhattan.
A tour of the 65-year-old Tea Room, focusing on its history and art collection.
Sponsored by the 92d Street Y. Meets at 3 P.M.
Fee: $35.
Information and meeting place: (212) 996-1100.
YANKEE STADIUM TOUR, the Bronx.
A walking tour through the dugout, clubhouse and press box.
Sponsored by the New York Hall of Science.
Meets at 2:30 P.M.
Fee: $8.50; $5.50 for children aged 3 to 17 (under 3 are free).
Reservations and information: (718) 699-0005.
July 17
"FROM EMERALD ISLE TO ELLIS ISLAND: IRISH ELLIS ISLAND." A tour of the island with a special emphasis on the Irish immigrant experience.
Tour includes a talk on the history of American immigration.
Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours.
Meets at 11 A.M.
Also Aug. 21.
Fee: $15; $12 for students and the elderly (price includes boat ticket, movie and tour).
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 439-1090.
"THE BROOKLYN BRIDGE TO BROOKLYN HEIGHTS." A walking tour across the Brooklyn Bridge and into the city's first suburb focusing on the history, architecture and people.
Sites include Plymouth Church, Walt Whitman's childhood home, the A. A. Low Mansion, and the Brooklyn Historical Society.
Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours.
Meets at 4 P.M.
Also Aug. 14.
Fee: $9, $7 for students and the elderly.
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 439-1090.
July 18
"HISTORIC UPPER WEST SIDE," Manhattan.
A walking tour led by Warren Shaw, a historian and writer, focusing on the architectural, literary and social history of this neighborhood.
Sites include a giant Buddhist statue dedicated to the dead of Hiroshima and the last working stable in New York City.
Sponsored by the 92d Street Y. Meets at 1 P.M.
Fee: $15.
Information and meeting place: (212) 996-1100.
"GREENWICH VILLAGE III." A walking tour focusing on the history of Greenwich Village.
Highlights include the black history of Washington Square Park and the seven-day gay and lesbian sit-in at N.Y.U.
Sponsored by Radical Walking Tours.
Meets at 1 P.M. in front of Judson Memorial Church at 55 Washington Square South.
Fee: $6.
Information: (718) 492-0069.
BUTTERFLY ATTRACTIONS, Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
A tour of a Prospect Park meadow that is expected to be filled with butterflies.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Enter the park at Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue and meet at the Prospect Park Boathouse. 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 360-2774.
July 22
"TOUR AND BREAKFAST AT THE REGENCY HOTEL," Manhattan.
A walking tour of the luxurious hotel focusing on its architecture and history.
Sponsored by the 92d Street Y. Meets at 9:30 P.M.
Fee: $30 (includes breakfast).
Information and meeting place: (212) 996-1100.
July 24
"IMMIGRANT NEW YORK," Manhattan.
A walking tour through the Jewish East Side, Chinatown, Little Italy and what used to be called Little Germany, Little Ireland and Little Africa.
Sites include the Transfiguration Church, the Negro Burial Ground, Stabile Bank and Jarmlowsky's Bank.
Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours.
Meets at 1 P.M.
Also Aug. 28.
Fee: $9, $7 for students and the elderly.
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 439-1090.
"SUMMER BIRD WALK," Jamaica Bay, Queens.
A walking tour through the Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge, one of the most important wildlife refuges in the northeast, encompassing 155 acres.
Bring binoculars.
Sponsored by Gateway National Recreation Area.
Meets at 10 A.M.
Free.
Reservations and information: (718) 318-4340.
TRIBECA, Manhattan.
A tour through the area's galleries, landmarked buildings and waterfront parks.
Sponsored by Urban Explorations.
Meets at 2 P.M.
Also Aug. 7.
Fee: $12, $10 for students and the elderly.
Information and meeting place: (718) 721-5254.
"McKIM, MEAD &amp; WHITE'S NEW YORK," Manhattan.
A tour, led by Andrew Dolkart, an architectural historian, focusing on the designs of the architecture firm.
Sites include the Columbia Univerisity campus, Striver's Row in Harlem, the Morgan Library and an early Tiffany's store in midtown.
Sponsored by the Municipal Arts Society.
Meets at 1 P.M.
Fee: $30.
Reservations and information: (212) 439-1049.
"INWOOD HILL PARK: MANHATTAN'S HIDDEN TREASURE." A walking tour through this sprawling park on the Hudson.
Sites include Indian rock shelters, and oyster shell middens.
Sponsored by the New York Open Center.
Meets at 11 A.M. at the New York Open Center, 83 Spring Street, SoHo.
Fee: $12.
Information: (212) 219-2527.
UP THE HILL TO TOMPKINSVILLE, Staten Island Institute of Arts and Letters, 75 Stuyvesant Place, St.
George.
A tour of Victorian mansions, modest colonial homes, a Gothic revival church and turn-of-the-century store fronts in upper Tompkinsville, Fort Place and St.
George. 1 to 3:30 P.M.
Meet at the institute.
Fee: $5.
Information: (718) 727-1135.
July 25
"MILLIONAIRE'S MILE: FIFTH AVENUE MANSIONS," Manhattan.
A walking tour led by Joyce Mendelsohn, an urban historian, focusing on the exteriors of opulent homes designed by architects like Carrere, Hastings and McKim, Mead &amp; White.
Includes family histories of the Whitneys and the Vanderbilts.
Sponsored by the 92d Street Y. Meets at 11 A.M.
Fee: $15.
Information and meeting place: (212) 996-1100.
WASHINGTON SQUARE ARCH AND GREENWICH VILLAGE.
A walking tour led by Arthur Marks, an urban historian, will focus on the significance of the arch built to commemorate the centennial of Washington's inauguration.
Sponsored by the Museum of the City of New York.
Fee: $15 Meets at 1 P.M.
Reservations and information: (212) 534-1672.
July 27
"THE GUGGENHEIM REVISTED," Manhattan.
A walking tour led by Jacob Alspector, senior associate architect in charge of the museum's restoration and expansion project, that will focus on the expansion of the building, designed by Frank Lloyd Wright.
Sponsored by the 92d Street Y. Meets at 10 A.M.
Fee: $20.
Information and meeting place: (212) 996-1100.
"BIRD WATCHING WALK," Queens.
A walking tour led by Starr Saphir that concentrates on shore birds, waterfowl and land birds of the Jamaica Bay Wildlife Refuge.
Sponsored by the New York City Audubon Society.
Meets at 10 A.M. at Audubon headquarters building.
Fee: $4.
Information: (212) 691-7483.
July 31
"IRISH NEW YORK," lower Manhattan.
A walking tour through the former Little Ireland district, between Chatham Square and Astor Place.
Sites include Old St.
Patrick's Cathedral, the founding site of the Ancient Order of Hibernians, Al Smith's childhood home and the former site of Tammany Hall.
Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours.
Meets at 1 P.M.; fee: $9, $7 for students and the elderly.
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 439-1090.
"NEW YORK OLD AND NEW," Manhattan.
A walking tour from City Hall, through the Financial District, to Battery Park.
Sites include Trinity Church, Federal Hall, Castle Clinton and Hanover Square.
Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours.
Meets at 1 P.M.; fee: $9, $7 for students and the elderly.
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 439-1090.
"BEYOND KIELBASA: POLISH GREENPOINT," Brooklyn.
A walking tour led by Annie Hauck-Lawson through the butcher shops, bakeries, food markets and other establishments that turned this once-German neighborhood into today's thriving Polish community.
Sponsored by Brooklyn's History Museum.
Meets at 11 A.M.
Fee: $10 in advance, $12 on the day of the tour.
Reservations and information: (718) 624-0890.
BRONX GEOLOGICAL HIKE, Van Cortlandt Park, the Bronx.
A walk exploring the geological formations of the park.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meets at Broadway and Mosholu Avenue; 11 A.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 430-1890.
Aug. 1
"THE LOWER MANHATTAN HISTORIC SKYSCRAPER TOUR," Wall Street.
A walking tour, led by Alfred Pommer, focusing on the little-known historic architecture downtown.
Sponsored by N.Y.C.
Cultural Walking Tours.
Meets at 2 P.M. on the northeast corner of Murray Street and Broadway.
Also on Aug. 8, 15, 22, 29.
Fee: $10.
Information: (212) 979-2388.
"WALKS AND TALKS: MEDICINAL PLANTS," Central Park.
A tour led by the Urban Park Rangers focusing on the healing herbals in many of the plants grown in Central Park.
Sponsored by the Central Park Conservancy.
Meets at 2 P.M.
Also on Aug. 18.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
"MOON MAGIC," Central Park.
An evening tour led by the Urban Park Rangers, highlighting stars, planets and the moon.
Bring binoculars.
Sponsored by the Central Park Conservancy.
Meets at 7:30 P.M. at 81st Street and Central Park West.
Information: (212) 427-4040.
Aug. 4
"CITY WALK: GRAMERCY PARK," Manhattan.
An evening walk led by Dorothy Lovitz through this area famous for its literary and social clubs and a lush private park owned by residents.
Sponsored by the Outdoors Club.
Meets at 6 P.M. in front of the Calvary Church, northeast corner of 21st Street and Park Avenue South.
Fee: $2.
Information: (212)876-6688.
Aug. 7
"ELLIS ISLAND." A guided tour of the museum and grounds with a talk on the history of American immigration.
Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours.
Meets at noon.
Fee: $15; $12 for students and the elderly (price includes boat ticket, movie and tour).
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 439-1090.
"SWAMP WHITE OAK FOREST WALK," Swamp White Oak Forest, NorthWest corner of Miller Field.
S.
I.
A tour of the forest focusing on the importance of this forest as a habitat for plants and animals.
Bring binoculars.
Sponsored by Gateway National Recreational Area.
Meets at 10 A.M.
Free.
Reservations and information: (718) 351-6970.
"DOWN AND DIRTY," Jamaica Bay, Queens.
A dig in and around the garden of Ecology Village led by two resident gardeners.
Learn tips and shortcuts; you may even go home with some freshly picked vegetables.
Sponsored by Gateway National Recreational Area.
Meets at 10 A.M.
Free.
Reservations and information: (718) 338-4306.
Aug. 8
"HARLEM: CULTURAL CAPITAL OF BLACK AMERICA." A walking tour led by James S. Kaplan, an economic historian, and Robert Wilson, former commissioner of the New York Division of Real Property.
Held in conjunction with the Harlem Week Festival, this tour will examine how Harlem became the cultural and political capital of black America at the turn of the century.
Sponsored by the 92d Street Y. Meets at 1 P.M.
Fee: $15.
Information and meeting place: (212) 996-1100.
CONEY ISLAND, Brooklyn.
A walking tour led by John Manbeck, an urban historian, tracing the development of Coney Island from a beach resort and racetrack area to an organized amusement park.
Sponsored by the Museum of the City of New York.
Meets at 1 P.M.
Reservations and information: (212) 534-1672.
Aug. 11
"INSIDE THE RAINBOW ROOM," Manhattan.
A tour of the famous restaurant, focusing on its history and recent architectural renovations.
Sponsored by the 92d Street Y. Meets at 3 P.M.
Fee: $30, includes refreshments.
Information and meeting place: (212) 996-1100.
HANDSPUN AND HANDWOVEN, Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences, 75 Stuyvesant Place, St.
George.
A weaver, Carol Higgins, demonstrates carding and spinning of yarns to produce finished textiles with a display of small looms.
Lunch included. 12:30 P.M.
Fee: $20.
Information: (718) 727-1135.
Aug. 14
"UPON THIS ROCK: HISTORIC CATHOLIC NEW YORK," lower Manhattan.
A walking tour celebrating the Feast of the Assumption.
Sites include St.
Peter's, Transfiguration and St.
James's churches as well as places of American saints and Roman Catholic hangings.
Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours.
Meets at 1 P.M.
Fee: $9, $7 for students and the elderly.
Reservations and meeting place: (212) 439-1090.
Aug. 15
"EDITH WHARTON'S NEW YORK," Gramercy Park.
A walking tour past Wharton's birthplace, including a view of the church where she was married; led by Joyce Mendelsohn, an urban historian.
Sponsored by the 92d Street Y. Meets at 11 A.M.
Fee: $17.
Tickets: (212) 996-1100.
"MAE WEST 100th BIRTHDAY MEMORIAL TOUR," Manhattan and Brooklyn.
A bus tour celebrating the actress's centennial.
Sites include her old home on West End Avenue, theaters where she performed and her crypt in Brooklyn.
Sponsored by Sidewalks of New York.
Fee: $30.
Reservations and information: (212) 388-2286.
"UNDER THE BOARDWALK: CONEY ISLAND MEMORY WALK," Brooklyn.
A walking tour led by John Kriskiewicz, an urban historian, that explores the heyday of amusement parks like Luna Park, Steeplechase and Dreamland by viewing period photographs and seeing where these parks once stood.
Also includes Brighton Beach.
Sponsored by Brooklyn's History Museum.
Meets at 10 A.M. fee: $10 in advance, $12 on the day of the tour.
Reservations and information: (718) 624-0890.
UPPER WEST SIDE AND RIVERSIDE PARK, Manhattan.
A walking tour of the architectural styles of the area: neo-Classical, Beaux Arts, Art Deco and Flemish.
Sites include the Ansonia, the Dakota, and Riverside Park.
Sponsored by Urban Explorations.
Meets at 1 P.M.
Fee: $12; $10 for students and the elderly.
Information and meeting place: (718) 721-5254.
Aug. 18
QUILTING, Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences, 75 Stuyvesant Place, St.
George.
Primrose McVay of the Staten Island Quilters Guild demonstrates quilting, discusses the history of quilts and displays sketches, tools and quilting books.
Fee: $20.
Information: (718) 727-1135.
Aug. 21
A ST.
GEORGE WALKING TOUR, Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences, 75 Stuyvesant Place, St.
George.
Historical walk and exploration of the architecture of three Fort Hills estates that show the Victorian Tudor Revival, Spanish Colonial, Collegiate Gothic, Art Deco, Colonial Revival, and Italianate styles. 1 to 3:30 P.M.
Meet at the institute.
Fee: $8.
Information: (718) 727-1135.
COMMUNITY GARDENS OF GREENWICH VILLAGE AND THE LOWER EAST SIDE.
A walking tour of the gardens, which provide a place of repose and perhaps a sense of purpose to New York City residents.
Sponsored by Urban Explorations.
Meets at 1 P.M.
Fee: $12; $10 for students and the elderly.
Information and meeting place: (718) 721-5254.
EARLY RISERS' BIRD WALK, Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
A walk to observe and discuss the robins, warblers, orioles and towhees about to head south for the winter.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Enter the park at Lincoln Road, and Ocean Avenue, and meet at the Prospect Park Boathouse. 7 A.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 360-2774.
Aug. 22
PELHAM BAY NATIVE AMERICAN HISTORY, Pelham Bay Park, Section 2, Orchard Beach, the Bronx.
A walk along the shoreline of the park to explore the lives of the Siwanoy Indians who used to live there.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meet at the Environmental Center at 2 P.M.
Information: (718) 430-1890.
Aug. 29
SUMMER STAR TREK, Pelham Bay Park Section 2, Orchard Beach, the Bronx.
Rangers search out summer constellations, planets and other celestial objects with a telescope.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meet at the Pelham Bay Park Environmental Center. 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 430-1890.


Foreigners Opening the Books
To the Editor:
In "Benz Opens Its Books for U.S. Investors" (Viewpoints, May 30), Susan Woodward argues persuasively in favor of complete disclosure from all corporations that participate in United States capital markets, regardless of their nationality.
But while most will agree that enhancing the quality and availability of meaningful information about a market will improve its operation and iron out "imperfections," I take issue with Ms.
Woodward's belief that shareholders who have greater access to accounting information necessarily make better decisions than their poorly informed brethren in markets abroad.


Summer's Most Unexpected Island Getaway
Our friend needed to sit by a lake.
He also needed to write.
Mostly he needed to sit by a lake and write.
We rented his studio in Manhattan and discovered an off-the-beaten-path vacation spot that had the nicest people in it.
We should not have been totally surprised by the joys of summer in New York City.
My wife and I live at the edge of the city, and we consider ourselves more urban than suburban, slipping into the city in all seasons.


In the Region: Westchester; First-Timers Find a Co-op's the Best Bet
LAST YEAR, when Judy Rubinstein decided to move to lower Westchester County, she didn't think she would wind up in a co-op.
"I was opposed to co-ops," she said.
But after looking at about a dozen, she bought a one-bedroom in Yonkers.


Whose Hillary?
The most embarrassing photograph so far this year is the one of Dan Rather madly embracing Connie Chung at a news conference announcing their new dual anchorship of the "CBS Evening News." Rather's clinch reduced the professional breakthrough of a journalist to the frivolous crowning of a prom queen.
And his words about their future roles didn't exactly bail him out.
Rather explained that he would now more often "get out to report on stories" while Chung minded the desk back home.
He proudly referred to his new partner as "Miss Congeniality."
Couldn't he have at least settled for Ms. Congeniality?
The awkwardness of Rather's behavior toward a woman suddenly sharing his power was conspicuous but not anomalous.
It is just another example of the Hillary Rodham Clinton syndrome.
The new First Lady may or may not achieve her policy goals of realizing health care reform and a new spiritual "politics of meaning." But she has already succeeded in dramatizing how many Americans, and not just men, are still flummoxed by women occupying traditionally male turf.
So much for three decades of "consciousness raising."
Few people seem to respond to Hillary Clinton as if she were remotely human.
She is alternately deified and vilified as nun or Lady Macbeth, Florence Nightingale or Yuppie From Hell.
If she is not going to play First Wife, then she'll be forced to play another female role from stock, like it or not.
THE TRUTH IS THAT FOR ALL WE KNOW about Hillary Rodham Clinton's political beliefs and career, she remains an enigma as a person.
As is her right, she has kept her private personality private.
Yet her very blankness has made her the country's Rorschach test.
Though she has indulged in some calculated image making -- baking cookies, reclaiming her maiden name, changing her hair style to that of an efficient medical bureaucrat -- the public's responses have been as wildly excessive as a Rather embrace, saying far more about the uneasy public than they do about her.
And stranger still, the prevailing national characterization of Hillary Clinton changes radically every few weeks, taking on a life of its own independent of even her attempts to define it.
Predictably the first role Hillary had to play was created by political opponents and the usual Men Who Don't Get It.
Like every woman who challenges the male status quo -- whether Eleanor Roosevelt, Anita Hill or Madonna -- she was immediately rumored to be a lesbian, as if that were a crime against men even if it were true.
Then the First Lady became what Katha Pollitt in The Nation labeled "a quasi-pornographic obsession" among male journalists, both liberal and conservative, who portrayed her as "the overbearing wife with a finger in every slice of government pie," an "unelected consort" in a "quasi-monarchical relationship" and a lamp-throwing Delilah, emasculating her weak husband. (As strong women must be closet lesbians, so their spouses must be portrayed as wimps.)
But no sooner had Hillary the Unimpeachable Closet President been unveiled than that role became passe.
As the Administration's first 100 days ended, the First Lady gave out interviews to promote her coming health care plan.
The resulting stories, now mostly assigned to women instead of the men who established the sexist line of the winter, molded a few scraps of unrevealing personal information into a new statue: Hillary the Superwoman, the working mother who does it all and has it all.
The creation of this persona during one May week felt almost like a conspiracy.
Hillary is a "perpetual A student" (People) and "ever the best girl in class" (Time), preparing for her new life by reading "43 White House biographies" and memorizing every medical statistic.
Yet even as she outworks her young staff and places her own phone calls, she attends to traditional First Lady duties ("Ceremonial events . . . don't stop because there is a deadline on managed competition," Time said) and finds time to attend her daughter's soccer games by day and scramble her eggs at night.
"She's the most traditional mother I know," First Friend Linda Bloodworth-Thomason testified.
Others vouch for the perfection of the First Marriage, rumored to be teetering only weeks earlier.
Hillary is her husband's "most trusted confidante" and "best friend." The Clintons touch more times in two hours than the Bushes did in four years, declared both Vanity Fair and Time (whose Hillary profiles shared the same author).
"Perhaps in addition to the other items on her agenda, Hillary Rodham Clinton will define for women that magical spot where the important work of the world and love and children and an inner life all come together," Time concluded.
Why should she?
Isn't this First Lady's policy agenda enough work, and the work on which she should be judged?
As Connie Chung's precursor, Linda Ellerbee, reiterated at a recent panel discussion about Hillary Clinton, "the Superwoman myth is dangerous," setting up inhuman expectations that no mortal can meet.
Hillary the icon, the ideal working mother and wife, is as false (and punishing) an image as the caricature of Hillary as a killer-lawyer too busy grabbing power to answer a phone call from Chelsea's school nurse.
The Hillary hagiography, like the Hillary demonology, is designed to serve a political agenda.
I IMAGINE ANOTHER HILLARY RODHAM Clinton.
One who must skip some of her daughter's soccer games (and is too exhausted to feel guilty about it).
One who angrily tells her husband to get that damn cat out of her face but declares a truce over late-night pizza after her work is done.
One who knows she can't whip the nation's dentists into submission and still have time to bake cookies (even with live-in help).
One who has deep longings that no one, not even the ubiquitously peeping Bloodworth-Thomason, is privy to.
But what do I know, and why should I care?
What really matters is if Hillary Clinton is going to get me insurance to pay for the psychotherapy such fantasizing may eventually require, and do so without raising my taxes or repealing my right to the shrink of my choice.
That we'll soon find out.
But we may have to wait for history to tell us exactly who Hillary Rodham Clinton is.
As speculation continues to run riot in the meantime, two things are certain.
If Hillary Clinton were really politically ambitious, she never would have taken on a no-win assignment like health care, which will leave half the country mad at her no matter what her plan is.
And if Hillary Clinton were really Delilah, she never would have let Cristophe cut Samson's hair.


A Crafts Fair With a Special Perspective on New York


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Bayport  $135,000  319 Fairview Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, den, finished basement, fireplace; taxes $5,700.
Bohemia  $155,000
423 8th Street  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 25-year-old colonial; dining room, new eat-in kitchen, basement, skylights, oak floors, 1-car attached garage; taxes $4,200.
Levittown  $133,000
64 Honeysuckle Road  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, 1-car detached garage, 60- by 100-foot lot; taxes $3,600.
Moriches  $155,000
594 Moriches Middle Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 5-year-old contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, deck, inground pool; taxes $4,500.
Ronkonkoma  $119,000
33 Ozark Street  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 30-year-old ranch; eat-in kitchen, basement, attic; taxes $2,500.
Sayville  $146,000
394 Wyandanch Road  3-bedroom, 1 1/22-bath, 29-year-old ranch; dining room, den, basement; taxes $4,500.
OTHER AREAS Mamaroneck, N.Y.  $260,000
3 Washington Square  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old co-op; entry hall, dining room, modern kitchen, terrace, doorman, beach rights; maintenance $993.
Avon, Conn.  $211,000
30 Hemlock Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 13-year-old contemporary on cul de sac; screened porch, new deck, 1 acre; taxes $4,480.
Alpha, N.J.  $126,800
745 Pursel Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 56-year-old ranch; covered back porch, move-in condition, full basement; taxes $2,664.


A Far-Reaching Resonance
To the Editor:
Your story on "Children of Fate: Life and Death in a Sicilian Family"  [ "Reaching Back for Images of a Family Scarred by Life," May 23 ]  points out that it won the prize for best documentary at the Sundance festival.
It should also be noted that the film captured a Silver Centaur, just behind the Gold, at the Third Petersburg International Documentary festival in February.
I attended that festival and was struck, as were many others, at the Russians bringing off the event at all, what with their assorted economic and other ailments.


Perspectives: The MacArthur Portfolio; New Ownership for Unsold Apartments
SHUDDERS reverberate through the spines of many Lincoln Towers residents when they contemplate the prospect of a new Lincoln West thrown up between themselves and the Hudson River.
But Daniele D. Bodini doesn't feel that way at all.
Mr.
Bodini -- his first name is pronounced dan-YELL-ee -- is the new owner of 1,110 apartments in Lincoln Towers (1,081 residential, 29 professional).
He is confident that values are going up, and he thinks they'll go higher if Donald Trump puts up expensive new apartments at Lincoln Towers' western doorstep.
Many resident owners probably think that way, too.


Binay Ranjan Sen Is Dead at 94; Led U.N. Drive Against Hunger
Binay Ranjan Sen, whose horror at the famine deaths of nearly a million Bengalis inspired him to forge a United Nations campaign against world hunger, died on Thursday in Calcutta.
He was 94.
He died of bronchial pneumonia, his family said.


Chicago Takes Phoenix Right to Grand Canyon
Reflecting on the Chicago Bulls' latest victory, Coach Phil Jackson said, "At some point in the game, I didn't think there was any way we were going to lose, regardless of what happened."
That statement typifies the Bulls' attitude throughout the playoffs.
They have the confidence of a championship team, and the talent and experience to go with it.
And by defeating the Phoenix Suns, 111-108, in Game 2 of the National Basketball Association championship series, the Bulls continued their impressive march toward what seems to be an inevitable third straight title.


These Mets May Be Old, But They Can Still Win
Reggie Jackson didn't come.
Neither did Catfish Hunter or Tom Seaver or Willie Mays.
The crowd at Shea Stadium was sparse, and the Oakland A's roster was so short that the A's needed to use a player -- Bill North -- who had not even been on their 1973 World Series team.
None of that mattered, though, to the 1973 New York Mets.
Yesterday, those Mets managed to do what they couldn't in Game 7 of the 1973 World Series -- they beat the Oakland A's.


Majmudars Turn Cup Into Family Affair
The resemblance emerges on the court and off it.
Gina and Kunj Majmudar not only bear similar features as brother and sister, they both have powerful forehands and error-free games that have dominated their opponents in the New York City Mayor's Cup All Scholastic tournament at the U.S.T.A.
National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows, Queens.
This is Gina's fourth Mayor's Cup at the varsity level, and her third chance to defend her championship title.
She first won the tournament in 1990 as a freshman at New Dorp High School in Staten Island.
She says it was her most difficult final ever; she beat her sister, Mona, then a senior.


English Tourism
To the Editor: Having made a week's visit to London earlier this year, my wife and I were interested in William E. Schmidt's report in the Travel Advisory ("Consumer Group Says Stonehenge Is a 'Disgrace,,' " March 21) about conditions at Stonehenge and the Tower of London.
While time did not permit us a visit to Stonehenge, we did spend an informative and enjoyable morning at the Tower of London.
This was due in large part to our yeoman warder guide who deftly mixed facts and morbid humor in his recitation of the tower's grisly history.
In terms of the crown jewels, what was upsetting was not the "cattle-pen queueing system" (familiar after all to veterans of Disney World and Universal Studios) but being rudely herded past the jewels once you got inside.
Surly guards continually muttered "No stopping," "Keep it moving," and even "No staring."


Japan Holds Its Royal Wedding


Giuliani Finds Well-Wishers in Queens
Dressed in red, khaki and blue and pressing the themes of crime, drugs and educational failure, Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor, traversed Queens yesterday with a promise to "straighten this city out" by increasing arrests of drug dealers, reducing crime and slashing the size of city government.
His trip marked one of his most extensive street campaign efforts to date, and drew a largely positive response in a borough that backed him with more than 60 percent of the vote in the 1989 election.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-23  SOMALIA ATTACK HITS ARMS DEPOTS  A United Nations military force led by the United States destroyed arms depots and captured 200 Somalis in retaliation against a warlord blamed for an attack in which 23 peacekeepers were killed.  1  U.N.
MANDATE IS EXPANDED  News analysis: In launching its Somalia strike, the United Nations has expanded its peacekeeping mandate while raising the issue of whether U.N. efforts must always depend on U.S. firepower.  16


A View of the Water Whets the Appetite
SHINING water, bobbing boats and spectacular sunsets are the floor show at East Hampton Point, this season's most talked-about new restaurant.
This East Hampton newcomer might have the Island's best water views.
Certainly it ranks in the top three, along with Starr Boggs in Westhampton Beach and the Crescent in Bayville.


Microsoft and 2 Cable Giants Close to an Alliance
Three dominant technology and entertainment companies are on the verge of joining forces to create the equivalent of software for cable television -- an operating system that would combine the worlds of computing and television and perhaps shape how much of popular culture is delivered.
Time Warner Inc., the largest entertainment company; Tele-Communications Inc., the largest cable television company, and the Microsoft Corporation, the largest software company, are expected to announce by the end of the month that they will form a company, tentatively called Cablesoft.
This new venture, its creators hope, will lead the way in establishing a standard for the transmission of the coming generation of interactive programs.


Rambles in a Remote Italian Valley
THE Valgrisenche is almost entirely surrounded by the Italian Alps -- mountains that have kept this verdant valley remote, preserving the culture and the French patois from the days when its rulers were French.
In the most northwesterly corner of Italy, the Valgrisenche lies almost flush with the French border, a remnant of the ancient state of Savoy, an area culturally and linguistically French but held by Italy at various times from the 16th century onward.
French Savoy was ceded to France by the Italian region of Piedmont in 1860.
Tucked away between the celebrated Olympic ski resorts of the French Savoie such as Val d'Isere and Tignes to the west and Italy's popular Gran Paradiso national park to the east, it is often overlooked, attracting the few hikers and cross-country skiers in the winter who know its quiet old villages, profusion of Alpine wildflowers, pure air and good trails.
My husband and I drove up the Valgrisenche last July, on our way to the Gran Paradiso; the park border runs along the mountains separating the valley from the Val di Rhemes to the east.
We had come to hike and decided to spend a few nights in each of the valley's three hamlets.
Our first stop was Planaval, whose old stone farmhouses, with slate roofs and wooden balconies, are tightly clustered below a waterfall-streaked cliff.
Planaval is set among its fields, like a medieval village in its perfect simplicity: it consists only of a church, a few houses and one small hotel a moment's walk from the village.


Brian O'Donoghue, Madeline Cuomo
Madeline Cerise Cuomo, a daughter of Gov. and Mrs.
Mario M. Cuomo of Albany and Holliswood, Queens, was married yesterday to Brian John O'Donoghue, a son of Justice and Mrs.
James F. O'Donoghue of Bayside, Queens.
Msgr.
John L. Jones performed the ceremony at the Cathedral of the Immaculate Conception in Albany.
Mrs.
Cuomo-O'Donoghue, 28, is an associate at the New York law firm of Shea &amp; Gould.
She graduated from the State University at Albany and received her law degree from Albany Law School.


Fighting on 2 Levels; AIDS Institute Chief Has Disease
Never mind that Nick Rango had just got out of the hospital.
He propped his leg on a stool, remarking matter-of-factly at the swelling from blood clots.
Then he pressed on with the meeting the other day in his Greenwich Village apartment, this one to review AIDS prevention programs.
None of his nine staff members at the session mentioned the matter outright, but an undercurrent ran through the meeting and all meetings Dr.
Rango has these days: Nicholas A. Rango, this man who coordinates AIDS policy in New York State, has AIDS himself.


Two Documentaries, Two Different Takes on AIDS
To have AIDS is often to deny it.
Lesions are covered up.
Employers are told that nothing serious is wrong.
It is a lie repeated to oneself as well: Life is not slipping away.
Perhaps all the more important, then, that along come two television documentaries about subjects who confront not just their own AIDS but also their imminent deaths.
The two films are similar in themes -- each a video diary of the inexorable decline from AIDS.
Yet they are opposites in tone -- one a relentless, brutal account of the ravages and humiliations of the disease by a pair of gay lovers; the other a spiritual, less graphic chronicle by a soft-spoken Canadian physician -- a kind of "Mister Rogers Explains AIDS" approach.


Labor Draws the Line in Decatur
UNTIL the resistance began at the Caterpillar plant here, Lance Vaughan first installed a set of small hydraulic hoses on the huge off-highway trucks that he helps to assemble, and then a big outside hose.
Now he installs the big one first, and reaches awkwardly around it to attach the others, losing production time in the process.
This is not sabotage.
The instructions furnished by Caterpillar's engineers specify the inefficient procedure, Mr.
Vaughan says.
Normally, he ignores such instructions and makes a note to himself to tell the engineers to fix the mistake.
Now, he no longer speaks up.
Withholding initiative, he works "to the rules" furnished by the company.


Lack of Money Imperils Indian Cultural Center
With a Federal grant and a bold vision, the Native American Center for the Living Arts was designed by its founders to look like a giant turtle, its house-sized head glaring defiantly toward the brink of the American Falls several hundred yards away.
But now the Government money is gone, and the 12-year-old Turtle, as the American Indian cultural center and museum is known, is facing an increasingly uncertain future.
Its debts mounted steadily until May 20, when unpaid electric bills reached $102,000 and utility workers cut off most of its power.


Postal Service Can't Stop Rocking
FOR rock-and-roll collectors or those not sated by the half-billion Elvis Presley stamps distributed this year, the United States Postal Service is issuing seven stamps on Wednesday featuring Elvis (yes, again) and six other paragons of pop.
(Country fans take note: Last Wednesday the Postal Service issued a 29-cent stamp featuring Hank Williams.)


Shriver and Garrison Get in On-Court Spat
An on-court flareup between PAM SHRIVER and ZINA GARRISON-JACKSON yesterday overshadowed their quarterfinal match at the Edgbaston tournament in Birmingham, England, which Garrison-Jackson won, 4-6, 6-3, 6-2.
During the match, played on an indoor court because rain made the grass courts unplayable, Shriver fired the ball at Garrison-Jackson and swore at her opponent's fans.
"She acted like a bitch," Garrison-Jackson said.
"I couldn't believe that she didn't get a warning." Garrison said that she was sure Shriver was "a good person at heart."


Ways to Make the Most of the Strawberry Season
THE local strawberry crop is late this year, as it was last year, making the lush, ripe berries more welcome than ever.
The season is now in full swing.
Farm stands and markets throughout the region are overflowing with berries by the quart.
Pickers take to the fields, and even some supermarkets have caught on and are selling locally grown strawberries from fields that perfume the air.


Call It The DNA Bug
The skeptics said it couldn't happen.
No way could DNA from the time of the dinosaurs last undegraded into the modern age of splashy genetic technology.
But they have been proved wrong by a group of California-based scientists, who last week reported success in extracting genetic material from a weevil that lived 120 million to 135 million years ago.
The weevil was trapped in a tree's resin at a time when dinosaurs roamed the Earth.
The resin hardened into amber.
And there, preserved through the ages, the bug's DNA remained.


Using a Computer to Diagnose Illnesses
ONE afternoon a 37-year-old man showed up in the emergency room of a Connecticut hospital complaining of shortness of breath, a sense of impending doom and heart palpitations.
He had been unable to work for a week because of extreme uneasiness.
The attending doctor recommended he be transferred to a psychiatric hospital.
But the doctor was talked out of the transfer after he was asked a series of questions, not by another doctor but by a computer program called PsychPro.
The program was developed by a New Haven company to use artificial intelligence to assess mental health problems and suggest treatment; in this case the patient was released with a prescription for Alprozolam, a drug for treating panic attacks.
Doctors' Suspicions
The developer of PsychPro, Dr.
William M. Glazer, a professor of psychiatry at Yale, said that "doctors have been very suspicious of these kinds of things because they fear these computerized tools are going to control them, and take away their independence." He said that to some extent the fear was justified.


Jacqueline Wein, Thomas LaMacchia
Jacqueline Sara Wein, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Wein of Bellmore, L.I., was married yesterday to Thomas F. LaMacchia, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. LaMacchia of Cincinnati.
The Rev.
James Covington, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the Woodbury (L.I.) Country Club.
The bride and the bridegroom, both 26, graduated from Princeton University.
Ms.
Wein, who is keeping her name, was until recently the membership coordinator for Opera America, a service organization in Washington for North American opera companies.
Her father is an engineer in New York.


Date Rape's Other Victim
One in four college women has been the victim of rape or attempted rape.
One in four.
I remember standing outside the dining hall in college, looking at a purple poster with this statistic written in bold letters.
It didn't seem right.
If sexual assault was really so pervasive, it seemed strange that the intricate gossip networks hadn't picked up more than one or two shadowy instances of rape.
If I was really standing in the middle of an "epidemic," a "crisis" -- if 25 percent of my women friends were really being raped -- wouldn't I know it?
These posters were not presenting facts.
They were advertising a mood.
Preoccupied with issues like date rape and sexual harassment, campus feminists produce endless images of women as victims -- women offended by a professor's dirty joke, women pressured into sex by peers, women trying to say no but not managing to get it across.


Gilda Romanelli, Mark E. Haranzo
Gilda Romanelli and Mark E. Haranzo, associates in the New York law firm of Putney, Twombly, Hall &amp; Hirson, were married yesterday.
Archbishop Renato R. Martino, the Papal Nuncio to the United Nations, performed the ceremony at St.
Peter of Alcantara Church in Port Washington, L.I.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Arts and Leisure/Section 2
The renovated Jewish Museum is newly trendy in a multicultural age.
Book Review/Section 7
"Days of Grace: A Memoir," by Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad, is an athlete's farewell and a meditation on tennis, politics, religion and AIDS.
Business/Section 3
Having lost the strike weapon, labor is turning to the slowdown to fight new demands by companies for givebacks.
The battle is inconclusive so far, but the outcome could affect all American workers, unionized or not.
Editorials and Op-Ed/Section 4 Magazine/Section 6
In their claims of a date-rape epidemic on campus, it is argued, feminists are subverting their own cause.
Real Estate/Section 10*
With occupancy rates low, New York City hotels seek out niches.  SportsSunday/Section 8
Jack Nicklaus hopes to recapture the past at the U.S.
Open next week.
Regional Weeklies/Section 13+ Styles of The Times/Section 9
Out and organized: As the national gay movement shies away from the subject of homosexuality among the young, some gay teen-agers are determined to open the subject up.
Television/Section 12*
Travel/Section 5
Europe on foot, through the villages of an Italian valley; hiking Britain end to end, and on Madeira's mountain trails.
The Week in Review/Section 4
The economy, unable to predict what Bill Clinton will accomplish or where his budget and health plans will go, is in a daze.
Employment Advertising/Section 11*


A Week of Springtime for the Republicans
STILL smarting from their loss of the White House, Republicans triumphantly seized on their victories last week in the Texas Senate race and the Los Angeles mayoral race as evidence that their party had hit the comeback trail.
They grandly pronounced that the voters had repudiated President Clinton and that last year's loss was a rejection of George Bush, not the Republican Party.
The results even spurred jubilant talk about taking back the Senate in 1994 and making big inroads into the Democratic majority in the House.


Susanna Porter, James Clark Jr.
Susanna Lansing Porter, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hoy H. Porter of Saratoga Springs, N.Y., was married yesterday in Sag Harbor, L.I., to James Mott Clark Jr., the son of Mrs.
Clark of Baltimore and the late Mr.
Clark.
The Rev.
Christine B. Rannie Grimbol, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the home of Cheryl Merser and Michael Shnayerson, friends of the couple.


Memorabilia From Out of the Wild Blue Yonder
OTTO KALLIR, A COLLECTOR OF aeronautical material, was not discouraged back in 1907 when, at age 13, a letter he wrote to the Wright brothers went unanswered.
Years later, as an art dealer in Manhattan, the Viennese native acquired 50 letters, photographs and documents signed by Wilbur and Orville Wright.
Kallir, who founded the Galerie St.
Etienne in 1939 and was responsible for discovering Grandma Moses and introducing the paintings of the Austrian Expressionists Egon Schiele and Gustav Klimt to the United States, died in 1978.
The Wright manuscripts are among 210 flight-related offerings from his estate that will be auctioned tomorrow at Sotheby's in New York.
The holdings, which Sotheby's describes as the most comprehensive such collection to go on the block in 25 years, are expected to fetch about $800,000.


Corrections
The Streetscapes column on page 8 of the Real Estate section today misstates the location of a railroad boiler house that once served Grand Central Terminal.
It was on the north side of 49th Street between Park and Lexington Avenues.


NEW JERSEY GUIDE
MATCHBOX CONVENTION
Forty years ago, Jack Odell created a brass prototype of a small Road Roller and put it in a matchbox-sized container so his daughter could take it with her to school.
It was the genesis of Matchbox Originals, which have become collectors' items and will be celebrated at a convention today in Iselin.


Corrections
A picture on the Mutual Funds page last Sunday, with a profile of John J. Kaweske, manager of the Financial Industrial Income fund, was published in error.
It showed Jack Mussey, manager of the Newport Tiger fund.
Mr.
Kaweske is pictured at right.


Miss Bonamo And Dr. Philbin
Katherine Mary Bonamo, the daughter of Katherine K. Bonamo of Westfield, N.J., and Dr.
John J. Bonamo of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Daniel Michael Philbin Jr., a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Philbin of Sherborn, Mass.
The Rev.
Matthew D. Looney performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Holy Trinity Church in Westfield.
Mrs.
Philbin, 26, is an associate research analyst, in Westport, Conn., with the Bases Group, a market-research company.
She and her husband graduated summa cum laude from Yale University, where they were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a master's degree in linguistics from Brown University.


Manager's Profile; Jack Mussey
Fund: Newport Tiger, the oldest Pacific region mutual fund; $170 million in assets; upfront sales charge of 5 percent.
Manager since the fund's 1989 inception.  (Sponsor: Newport Fund Management, Richmond, Va.)


Toyota Tries for the Light Fantastic
ACTUALLY, Isao Tsuzuki is more than just an engineer.
He was in charge of the entire project when Toyota decided to create the fourth generation of its Supra sports car and to make it one of the hotter sets of wheels on anybody's road.
To that end, Tsuzuki's team reduced the new car's weight by 310 pounds, despite the addition of standard dual air bags, bigger wheels and tires, and a heavier antilock brake system.


A Jazz Festival and Its Musical Muses; Gal Costa -- Forget Snow Tires; Go Dancing
The 1993 JVC Jazz Festival, which runs from Friday to June 26, will be sleeker than in previous years.
With 20 concerts at six locations throughout Manhattan, the schedule is heavy in singers and tributes (to the likes of Thelonious Monk and Charlie Parker).
And because of rising costs, many smaller events, like the afternoon piano concerts, have been dropped.
But despite the leanness, the festival should still offer performances to satisfy the tastes of most jazz lovers.
Here, six noted authors tell why a performer or honoree on this year's program speaks to them.


Science Fiction
THE HAMMER OF GOD (Spectra/Bantam, $19.95), by Arthur C. Clarke, is a novel expanded from a short story published last fall in a special issue of Time magazine entitled "Beyond the Year 2000." Nobody but Mr.
Clarke could write such a cheerful tale about an asteroid on a deadly collision course with the earth.
As Mr.
Clarke points out in the text itself and in an informative afterword, the scenario he imagines is by no means unlikely.
Many scientists now believe that a collision with an asteroid precipitated the climatic changes that killed off the dinosaurs some 65 million years ago.
In this century alone, at least three encounters with smaller chunks of cosmic debris have caused localized devastation on a scale matched only by nuclear explosions.
Concern over future encounters has prompted the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to propose an international survey program to keep track of all asteroids and comets whose orbits might someday intersect the earth's.
NASA's suggested name for this program, the Spaceguard Survey, is borrowed from a fictional effort described in Mr.
Clarke's classic novel "Rendezvous With Rama," which was published in 1973.


SAINT HILLARY
Bill Clinton feels that government is better able to create jobs and real economic growth than the private sector.
His wife feels that government is an appropriate vehicle for the transmission of spiritual values.
When will we learn that more government is not the answer?
If anything, our growing expectation that it should and can solve all of society's problems may have exacerbated them.
MARY K. JORDAN New York, N.Y.


A Fitting Tribute to Nation's History
IF historical accounts are to be trusted, the process of any revolution is as much about bureaucratic wrangling as is it about fire-and-brimstone rebellion.
The brave slogans and the colorful banners and flags waving in the wind are the foundations of popular myths.
In the French and American Revolutions, the rebels worried as much, if not more, about law and justice than about actual battles.


POP
Tomorrow
LEONARD COHEN, the Paramount, Seventh Avenue at 33d Street, Manhattan.
The melancholy, monotone-voiced poet of the late 1960's, who wrote "Suzanne" and "So Long, Marianne," has matured into a gallows-humored, monotone-voiced songwriter who cackles tidings of doom for the 1990's. 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $40.
Information: (212) 465-6741.
June 18 to 26
THE JVC JAZZ FESTIVAL.
Likely highlights include: BETTY CARTER, Friday at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
The jazz singer Betty Carter and the baritone saxophonist Gerry Mulligan are two improvisers who turned be-bop into their own languages of risk and triumph.
Tickets: $17.50 to $35.
Information: (212) 247-7800.
TITO PUENTE, Saturday at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
The percussionist leads his Latin Jazz Ensemble, and the singer Celia Cruz belts driving, deep-rooted salsa songs.
Tickets: $17.50 to $42.50.
ILLINOIS JACQUET, June 20 at 2 P.M. at Damrosch Park, Lincoln Center.
The tenor saxophonist Illinois Jacquet's Big Band plays plush arrangements laced with sultry and raucous saxophone solos.
With the drummer Arthur Taylor's Wailers, a hard-hitting hard-bop group.
Free.
JON FADDIS, June 22 at 8 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
The trumpeter Jon Faddis leads a big band with another trumpeter, Wynton Marsalis, as guest soloist; a promising young saxophonist, Joshua Redman, opens the concert with his quartet.
Tickets: $17.50 to $38.
"BIRD AND MONK," June 22 at 8 P.M. at Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, Manhattan.
An all-star jam session with music by Charlie Parker and Thelonious Monk, with performers including Clark Terry and Red Rodney on trumpet, Gary Bartz and Charles McPherson on saxophones, and Jaki Byard, Barry Harris and Hilton Ruiz on pianos.
Tickets: $20 and $25.
JIMMY SCOTT, June 23 at 7:30 P.M. at the Winter Garden, World Financial Center, West Street south of Vesey Street, lower Manhattan.
The jazz singer fills every sustained note with suspense.
Free.
ART BLAKEY TRIBUTE, June 23 at 8 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
A tribute to the drummer Art Blakey, featuring more than a dozen alumni of his Jazz Messengers, among them Wynton Marsalis, Freddie Hubbard and Donald Byrd on trumpet and Benny Golson, Donald Harrison, Jackie McLean and Bobby Watson on saxophones.
Tickets: $17.50 to $35.
KEITH JARRETT, June 24 at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall.
The pianist Keith Jarrett, the bassist Gary Peacock and the drummer Jack DeJohnette play a concert of standards.
Tickets: $17.50 to $37.50.
"A LULLABY FOR BIRDLAND," June 25 at 8 P.M. at Carnegie Hall, featuring musicians associated with the fondly remembered jazz club, among them George Shearing and John Lewis on piano, Lee Konitz and Phil Woods on saxophones, and the Count Basie Orchestra.
Tickets: $17.50 to $40.
GILBERTO GIL, June 26 at 8 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
The Brazilian singer and songwriter, who has an affinity for Caribbean and African music, is to be joined by the singer Gal Costa.
Tickets: $17.50 to $38.
Festival information: (212) 787-2020.
June 22
LYLE LOVETT, the Paramount, Seventh Avenue at 33d Street, Manhattan.
Honey-voiced, sincere-sounding and completely untrustworthy, Lyle Lovett can be achingly tender, or twisted and wry.
His Large Band dips into all sorts of musical Americana, from gospel to country to western swing, while Mr.
Lovett deadpans.
Roseanne Cash, a country-based songwriter who anatomizes heartbreak and resilience, opens the shows. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $40.
Information: (212) 465-6741.
June 22-July 3
WHAT IS JAZZ?
The Knitting Factory, 47 East Houston Street, SoHo, (212) 219-3055.
A 12-night series, with three bands a night, that counters the conservative JVC Jazz Festival with up-to-the-minute jazz and improvisational music.
Opening night -- with groups led by the saxophonists Tim Berne and Carlos Garnett and the drummer Gerry Hemingway -- is extremely promising; so are groups led by the vibraphonist Bill Ware (June 23, 8 P.M.), the saxophonist Ned Rothenberg (June 24, 10:30 P.M.), the saxophonist David S. Ware (June 29 at 9:15 P.M.) and the duo of Ray Anderson on trombone and Bob Stewart on tuba (July 3 at 10:30 P.M.).
Other nights offer both familiar and unknown quantities.
Sets are at 8, 9:15 and 10:30 P.M.; admission is $12 nightly.
Information: (212) 219-3055.
June 23
MERLE HAGGARD, Tramps, 51 West 21st Street, Chelsea.
Country's great chronicler of barroom romanticism and working-class resentment also has a heart-tweaking voice and a jazzy band. 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $25 in advance and $30 at the door.
Information: (212) 727-7788.
June 26
P.
J.
HARVEY, the Academy, 234 West 43d Street, Manhattan.
In obsessive, finely detailed songs that suddenly leap from delicacy to blare, Polly Jean Harvey sings about desire, power and other primal aspects of love. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $16.50.
Information: (212) 249-8870.
July 2 and 3
MICHELLE SHOCKED, Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village.
With an old-fashioned twang in her voice and an up-to-date skepticism about history, Michelle Shocked interrogates and reinvigorates a folky heritage. 7:30 and 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (212) 228-7880.
July 3 and 4
JUAN LUIS GUERRA, Radio City Music Hall.
Taking local styles from all over his native Dominican Republic, synching them with global pop and adding lyrics with a lighthearted, sometimes surreal sense of romance, Juan Luis Guerra has become a superstar across the Spanish-speaking world.
His songs are so catchy they can break the language barrier. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30 to $40.
Information: (212) 632-4000.
July 12 to 14 and 16 to 17
TINA TURNER, Radio City Music Hall.
The powerhouse belter and proud sex symbol of soul, rock and pop returns with two strong opening acts: Lindsey Buckingham, the guitar-loving pop songwriter who reinvented Fleetwood Mac in the 1970's, on July 12 and 13, and Chris Isaak, the mournful-voiced songwriter whose hit "Wicked Game" is only part of a carefully wrought repertory, July 14, 16 and 17. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30 to $40.
Information: (212) 632-4000.
July 20 to 24 and July 26
WHITNEY HOUSTON, Radio City Music Hall The hitmaker who prompts the musical question: how many notes can she fit into the single syllable of I? 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30 to $50.
Information: (212) 632-4000.
Aug. 4
NEW ORDER, Brendan Byrne Arena, East Rutherford, N.J.
The march-or-dance rhythms and humming bass lines suggest hope and pleasure; the glum-faced vocals and enigmatic words promise despair and uncertainty, and the combination fills stadiums with sensitive young souls. 7:30 P.M.Tickets: $25 and $35.
Information: (201) 935-3900.


Tight-Money Tactics of Depression Era Return
To the Editor:
"The Federal Reserve Prepares for a Rate War" (Business Day, June 1) reports that the Federal Open Market Committee on May 18 gave Alan Greenspan, Federal Reserve Chairman, "leeway to raise short-term interest rates, now 3 percent, by up to one-half of 1 percent before the next meeting in early July."
If this information, leaked from the supposedly secret meeting of the Federal Reserve's main policy-making committee, proves correct, it strongly indicates the Fed's policies of tight money will continue at the peril of the United States economy.


The Evil Empire, Continued
BLACK HUNDRED The Rise of the Extreme Right in Russia.
By Walter Laqueur.
Illustrated. 317 pp.
New York:  HarperCollins. $27.50.


True Role Model Is Patrick Ewing
To the Sports Editor:
With Michael Jordan's alleged gambling legacy, coupled with Charles Barkley's Nike-sponsored message to parents, the inevitable question of "Where are the role models in professional athletics?" has once again been raised.


Running Away to Sea: A Brief but Shipshape Trip
IT was time for a sea change.
Terra firma had grown too familiar.
The little ad caught my eye.
"Windjammer cruises from Mystic, Conn.," it said.
"That's the ticket," I said to myself, and added, "Shiver me timbers." I have no idea what that means.
Somehow it sounded right.
I called the number listed and communicated my interest to an answering machine that greeted me by saying, "Ahoy there." Presently a pamphlet arrived offering a variety of accommodations and departure dates on the Mystic Clipper.
There were five-day, three-day and two-day voyages to choose from.
We signed on for a weekend sail, sending off $518 for two berths.


Albania Fears 'Ethnic Cleansing' May Spread to Kosovo Next
On the other side of the border checkpoint in the wooded mountains a half hour's drive from this ragged town, a village of neat white houses is all that is visible of Kosovo, a Serbian province largely populated by ethnic Albanians.
All is quiet except for birdsong, and few guards are about, yet, Albania fears that Kosovo is the flashpoint that could plunge the Balkans into all-out war.


NOTES
"It comes full circle," Ginger Rogers said at a party last weekend for the Los Angeles premiere of "Crazy for You." In 1985, the actress directed the two leads in the production, Karen Ziemba and James Brennan, in "Babes in Arms."
She pointed out that "a lot of people don't remember that I originated the role on Broadway." In 1930, she played the ingenue in "Girl Crazy," from which many of the "Crazy for You" songs were taken.


Police Were Fewer Than Romanians Feared
For most of the last half century, Romanians lived in terror of the state intelligence service, the Securitate, under the Communist regime that held sway until the end of 1989.
It now appears that the service was much smaller than previously believed.
According to a new Romanian intelligence chief, Ion Talpes, the Securitate had 16,000 full-time officers on the payroll at the time President Nicolae Ceausescu was overthrown and executed in December 1989.


Ann Browning, E. L. Packard
Ann Browning, a retired real-estate agent at Sulzberger-Rolfe Inc. in New York, was married on Monday to E. Lawrence Packard, a golf-course architect.
The Rev.
Ann Richards performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
Mrs.
Browning-Packard graduated from the University of Arizona.
She is a daughter of Helen Browning of Belleair Bluffs, Fla., and the late Alfred O. Browning.


Brazilian Goes Home
Saying he was too upset to continue in a preview to the 1994 World Cup, the Brazilian soccer player JULIO CESAR returned home after $150,000 in cash and watches were stolen from his hotel room, a team spokesman said yesterday.
While Brazil played Germany to a 3-3 tie Thursday in the U.S.
Cup '93 at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium in Washington, someone was taking cash and valuables from both teams' hotel rooms.
Two other Brazilian players -- CARECA and VALBER -- lost a total of $8,300 in thefts at the team's hotel in Silver Spring, Md., the spokesman, FRANCISCO MARCOS, said.


Navratilova Will Play
After an embarrassing defeat by a qualifier this week at Edgbaston, England, MARTINA NAVRATILOVA has changed her mind and decided to return to Eastbourne for next week's grass-court tournament.


Alisa Beth Terry And Ian Eagle
Alisa Beth Terry, the creative director for Piccoli &amp; Piccoli, a television production company in New York, was married yesterday evening to Ian Eagle, a sports announcer at WFAN-AM radio in Astoria, Queens.
Rabbi Barry Greene officiated at the Hilton at Short Hills, N.J.


Correction
An essay on May 30 about rediscovering a Jewish heritage while traveling omitted part of a sentence.
It should have read: "I doubt I will ever yearn to belong to a group of people all singing, as it were, from the same hymnal."


South Africa Has Hard Problems to Solve Before '94 Election
AFTER three centuries of subjugation, eight decades of struggle and three years of promises, it may seem presumptuous to suggest that South African blacks are not "ready" to elect their own government.
Yet the suggestion abounds, and not just from white holdouts who dread the final surrender of their political monopoly.
There are three main arguments for the premise that the date tentatively set for South Africans of all races to cast their ballots -- April 27, 1994 -- is premature.
One is that negotiators are far from agreeing on just what it is voters will be voting for.
The second is that more time is needed for voter education to prepare blacks for their new franchise.
The third is that much of the country is carved into violent and intolerant political fiefdoms where, until order is imposed, there is little chance of an election being free and fair.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SPORTS MEMOIR WILLIE'S GAME An Autobiography.
By Willie Mosconi and Stanley Cohen.
Macmillan, $20.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 13, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
47
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
2
4
DARKEST HOUR, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The concluding volume in a series about the Cutlers, a plantation-owning family.
3
17
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
3
THE MAGIC OF YOU, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A 19th-century British minx sets her cap for an American sea captain.
5
72
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
6
61
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
7
6
SHADOWFIRES, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A woman is stalked by her supposedly deceased husband.
8
7
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Pocket, $5.99.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
9 *
3
THE CAT WHO WASN'T THERE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) Jim Qwilleran contends with crimes in Scotland.
10
1
TOMORROW'S PROMISE, by Sandra Brown. (Harlequin, $4.50.) A woman learns that her husband, long missing in action, may be alive.
11 *
2
SHADOWS, by John Saul. (Bantam, $5.99.) An evil influence brings horrors to a school for gifted children.
12
1
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
13
1
TURTLE MOON, by Alice Hoffman. (Berkley, $5.99.) Two damaged adults and a troubled child strive valiantly to achieve happiness.
14
24
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The investigation of a woman's death involves the American-Japanese rivalry.
15 *
8
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Kinsey Millhone investigates a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
7
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
2
4
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President.
3
6
NOT FOR SALE AT ANY PRICE, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $5.95.) America's problems.
4
501
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
5
87
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
6
17
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
7
108
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
8
5
WHERE THE BLUEBIRD SINGS TO THE LEMONADE SPRINGS, by Wallace Stegner. (Penguin, $11.) Essays on the American West.
9 *
17
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) Social life and sexual fantasies.
10 *
14
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Examples of waste.
11
18
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
12 *
22
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on self-esteem.
13
132
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
14
21
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) Factors affecting the environment.
15 *
32
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.50.) A war against women.
16 *
14
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) Navy memoirs.
17 *
4
WRITTEN BY HERSELF,
edited by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $15.) Writings by women.
18 *
4
BARBARIANS AT THE GATE, by Bryan Burrough and John Helyar. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The 1988 battle for control of RJR Nabisco.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
96
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) A collection of some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
10
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK: Volume 2, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) More tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
121
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
4
138
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 29, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Charlie Rose Never Runs Out Of Things to Say
This is the Charlie Rose story that has been making the rounds: The tall, droopy-eyed talk show host had just left Sylvia's, the barbecue-belt outpost in Harlem.
Shambling down the sidewalk after lunch, he was stopped by a street vendor in sneakers and a backwards baseball cap who had some advice: "Sometimes you need to let the guests talk."
Mr.
Rose has heard that before.
"I know I interrupt too much," he says.
Even Mike Wallace of "60 Minutes," a fan of Mr.
Rose's, says there are moments when "I want to shout at the screen, 'Shut up, Charlie!' "


U.S. Pushes for a Smoking Ban on Flights Abroad
Responding to complaints and new worries about the effect of second-hand smoke, the Clinton Administration is working to speed the day when smoking is banned on all international flights into and out of the United States.
Currently, United States airlines allow smoking on all international flights, except to Canada.
An international agreement adopted by a United Nations agency urges that smoking be banned on all flights between countries by 1996, but it has no enforcement provisions.
So the Administration has begun trying to negotiate regional or bilateral agreements that would ban smoking for passengers and crew members without putting United States airlines at a disadvantage.


Zachary Young and Nancy Paula Tabs
Nancy Paula Tabs, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Tabs of New York was married yesterday evening to Zachary Young, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey Young of Westfield, N.J.
Rabbi Arnold Gluck performed the ceremony at the Pierre Hotel in New York.
Ms.
Tabs, 25, is keeping her name.
She is a senior property underwriter for the ITT Hartford Insurance Company in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Brandeis University.
Her father is the executive vice president of finance of Fortunoff, the retail chain, in Westbury, L.I.


A German Town's Past Is Gemutlich and Gothic
WHEN Germany was divided, until 1800, into more than 300 states, even small cities mattered: Landshut, today a bustling town 45 minutes' train ride from Munich, was once the chief residence of a branch of the ruling house of Bavaria.
Just far enough to have stayed itself, just prosperous enough to look as picturesque as ever, it is a lively reminder of an earlier, more gemutlich phase of history, and the perfect place for a day trip.
Just as important, Landshut came through World War II without major damage.
Today, its churches are intact, and so are the town palace and the fortress on its hill.
The main street, the Altstadt, with its sinuous line of gabled houses painted a variety of colors -- from a sober gray or beige to pink, ochre, green or blue -- takes the visitor straight back to the Germany of the Brothers Grimm.


It's Not Fake Anything, It's Real Polyester
The associations are many: mobsters, lounge lizards, wise guys in general.
These 100 percent polyester double-knit shirts by Roberto Carlo, an English company, call for pointy-toed shoes and slicked-back hair.


SAINT HILLARY
My dictionary defines a saint as "a person who is exceptionally meek, charitable, patient, etc." Likening Hillary Clinton to a saint is about as valid use of language as calling taxes "investments." BRUCE GOLDMAN Richmond


Technology; Staying Bright-Eyed in the Wee Hours
STEPHEN D. ALLMAN is an expert on night life, and not because he's a party animal.
For many years he worked odd hours and crazy schedules, first in the always-twilight environment of a Navy submarine and later as an engineer on the graveyard shift in nuclear power plants.
When he became manager for a San Diego Gas and Electric Company power plant in early 1988, though he saw no obvious problems, he knew from experience that as attention flags in the wee, wee hours, dangerous mistakes become more likely.


Sipping Moselle on a Lazy Afternoon
I HAD parked my car in the municipal lot along the riverbank in the center of town, and when I returned from lunch there was a parking ticket stuck under the wiper balde.
What was the fine?
A few marks?
It was worth it.
We had eaten in one of the kitschy tourist restaurants in Bernkastel, Germany, but the meal had been perfect: a fat, fresh trout lightly poached with a few herbs, a couple of small boiled potatoes and a Lauerburg riesling from the Wehlener Sonnenhur vineyard.


A Quiet Liberation for Gay and Lesbian Employees
SHE is a successful stockbroker in a Midwestern city, recently turned 40, and a lesbian.
Sure, she said, she would be willing to talk about being gay in corporate America, but she hasn't come out at her prominent brokerage and would prefer not to have her name used.
Then she paused, and laughed.
"Actually, I guess I'm in the process of coming out," she said.
"A notice from Commando Queers came through our fax machine a couple of days ago." Even before that fax passed through the hands of secretaries and clerks, she figures, her co-workers knew.
But they didn't ask and she didn't talk about it.


Carol A. Clark, Robert J. Fucigna
Drs.
Carol Ann Clark and Robert Joseph Fucigna were married yesterday in Bayonne, N.J.
Msgrs.
John Fagan and Emmet Fagan, uncles of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at St.
Vincent de Paul Church.
Mrs.
Fucigna is a resident in obstetrics and gynecology at the St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in New York.
She graduated from Chestnut Hill College.
She and her husband received medical degrees from the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, in Newark.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Clark of Bayonne.


Quartets in Recital at Silvermine Guild
THE executive director of the Silvermine Guild Arts Center, Brian Gormley, was talking about why the Chamber Music Series the center is sponsoring will be extraordinary.
"Firstly," he said, "we are bringing some of the country's finest young musicians to Silvermine. Secondly, intimacy: in our auditorium you can choose literally to read the music over the shoulder of the first violinist or pianist. Thirdly, warmth and informality: these concerts bring friends together in a casual atmosphere that is enhanced by a dessert reception in our galleries and an opportunity to meet the musicians after the performance."
Members of the audience will not be able to look over a pianist's shoulder at tonight's 7:30 concert, since the featured ensemble is the Lark Quartet, but perhaps one of the string players -- Eva Gruesser, Robin Mayforth, Anna Kruger or Astrid Schween -- will oblige.
In any case, they'll be playing quartets by Mozart, Bartok and Beethoven.
For reservations, or details of the three remaining monthly recitals featuring the Chester String Quartet, Music Amici and the Cavani Quartet, call the Guild at 966-9700.


Greta Gustavsson, Edward Shugrue 3d
Greta Marie-Sievert Gustavsson, a daughter of Melba Winer of Del Ray Beach, Fla., and the late Erik Gustavsson, was married yesterday to Edward Lincoln Shugrue 3d, the son of Sarah E. Corbin and Mr.
Shugrue Jr., both of Boston.
The Rev.
Robert D. Williams, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Marble Collegiate Church in New York.
Mrs.
Shugrue is a senior marketing manager in New York for L'Oreal, the cosmetics company based in Paris.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Solomon Winer of Del Ray Beach.


Clinton's Health-Care Plan: It's Still Big, but It's Farther Away
THE shimmering vision of health-care reform, a central promise of President Clinton's campaign, seems to be receding into the distance as Administration officials and members of Congress wrestle with problems like taxes and the Federal budget deficit.
The soaring ambition of Mr.
Clinton's health plan has been brought down to earth by certain political laws of gravity, and no one is more worried than the 500 policy analysts who labored for Hillary Rodham Clinton's Task Force on National Health Care Reform, dissolved May 30 with no assurance about the use to which their work will be put.


In the Region: Westchester; Recent Sales
Bedford, N.Y.  $159,000
405 Bedford Road  3 bedroom, 1 1/2 baths, 43-year-old colonial; handyman's special; entry hall, dining room, sun room, fireplace; taxes $4,072.
Greenburgh, N.Y.  $140,000
120 Hartsdale Avenue  2 bedroom, 2 bath, 38-year-old co-op; foyer, dining room, modern kitchen, terrace, indoor parking; maintenance $564.
Mamaroneck, N.Y.  $260,000
3 Washington Square  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old co-op; entry hall, dining room, modern kitchen, terrace, doorman, beach rights; maintenance $993.
Avon, Conn.  $211,000
30 Hemlock Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 13-year-old contemporary on cul de sac; screened porch, new deck, 1 acre; taxes $4,480.
New Canaan, Conn.  $970,000
225 Lambert Road  3-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 77-year-old colonial; guest house, barn with tackroom and loft, 3 terraces, 2.6 acres; taxes $6,849.
New Milford, Conn.  $217,500
140 Long Mountain Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new colonial; tiled bathrooms, 0.75 acre; taxes $2,652.
OTHER AREAS Alpha, N.J.  $126,800
745 Pursel Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 56-year-old ranch; covered back porch, move-in condition, full basement; taxes $2,664.
Colonia, N.J.  $160,000
37 North Lincoln Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 37-year-old split level; new roof and water heater, parquet floors, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,411.
Bayport, L.I.  $135,000  319 Fairview Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, den, finished basement, fireplace; taxes $5,700.


New Winery Makes an Auspicious Debut
ROBERT PELLEGRINI is nearly 55.
His wife, Joyce, is 55.
At that age many people are thinking about retirement.
But the curtain rises on a new life for the couple, from Cutchogue, on Saturday, when their nearly $2 million winery and estate, Pellegrini Vineyards, opens to the public.
Pellegrini Vineyards, on the 36-acre site of the old Island Vineyards, joins eight other wineries on Route 25, or Main Road, which by now deserves to be called Grape Alley.
The boutique winery faces the traffic, with nearly all its 30 acres of mostly low-lying vines lying to the rear and heading off in neat rows into the north-northwest.
The winery was designed by two architects from Cutchogue, Thomas Samuels and Nancy Steelman.


Newark's Jews
To the Editor:
Your Posting on May 30 headed "Sanctuary's Fate in the Balance" about Congregation Oheb Shalom's old sanctuary at 32 Prince Street in Newark is not entirely accurate.
There are indeed other remnants of the earliest Jewish community of Newark -- among them the former Temple B'nai Jeshurun at the corner of High Street and Waverly Avenue.
Actually, Congregation Oheb Shalom was an outgrowth of Congregation B'nai Jeshurun.


Miss Andrews, Mr. Murphy
Whitney Leigh Andrews, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William F. Andrews of Middlebury, Conn., was married there yesterday to Paul Clarke Murphy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew P. Murphy Jr. of Gibson Island, Md.
The Rev.
Dennis Calhoun officiated at the Middlebury Congregational Church.
The Rev.
John Regan, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Murphy is a director of client services at Lifetime Learning Systems, an educational marketing company in New York.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Virginia.
Her father is the chairman of the Amdura Corporation in New York, a hardware manufacturer.
He is a former chairman of the Singer Sewing Machine Corporation in Stamford, Conn.


Gutter Replacement: Project for Two People
REPLACING worn-out aluminum or galvanized gutters with vinyl ones is usually a relatively easy job for two people.
Generally, the main criterion is easy access to the roof.
Vinyl gutters cost about the same as aluminum but are easier to join, require no maintenance other than cleaning and are sturdy enough to resist denting from a ladder leaning against them.


FILM
June
"LAST ACTION HERO." Arnold Schwarzenegger spoofs his image in one of the summer's biggest movies, the one that tied up traffic in Times Square this spring.
An 11-year-old boy lands inside a movie starring his larger-than-life hero, Jack Slater (guess who?).
Expect to see more of the recent, less violent Arnold, true to those kinder, gentler values he picked up during the Bush era.
Directed by John McTiernan ("Die Hard").
Opens June 18.
"SLEEPLESS IN SEATTLE." Tom Hanks is a widower who lives in Seattle with his young son.
Meg Ryan is a Baltimore journalist who falls in love when she hears them on a radio call-in show.
Directed by Nora Ephron (who wrote "When Harry Met Sally"), this willfully sentimental movie is expected to sew up the romantic-comedy business for the summer.
Opens June 25.
"THE FIRM." Tom Cruise stars as an ambitious Ivy League lawyer who innocently lands in a Memphis firm that fronts for the Mafia (so how smart can he be?) in this thriller based on John Grisham's best-selling novel.
Directed by the unbeatable Sydney Pollack ("Tootsie" and "Out of Africa," so let's forget about "Havana").
Opens June 30.July
"SNOW WHITE AND THE SEVEN DWARFS." Someday her video will come, but for now here's the re-release of the 1937 original.
Opens July 2.
"IN THE LINE OF FIRE." Clint Eastwood stars as a Secret Service agent who couldn't save J. F. K. Now he's out to save the current President from a mad killer (John Malkovich) and determined to create a new tag line from the movie, "That's not gonna happen." (Say it with a snarl.) Directed by Wolfgang Petersen ("Das Boot").
Opens July 9.
"FREE WILLY." Good advance word (if you consider making grown-ups cry a good sign) on this story of an orphaned boy named Jesse and the orca whale named Willy he tries to free.
The Hollywood buzz is calling this the big family film of the summer.
Opens July 16.
"AMONGST FRIENDS." This first film by Rob Weiss won raves as a "Mean Streets Jr." at the Sundance Film Festival.
Five friends from a wealthy Jewish and Italian section of Long Island become involved with the mob.
Opens July 23.
"CONEHEADS." Straight from the planet Remulac, via the old days of "Saturday Night Live," the Conehead family (Dan Aykroyd, Jane Curtin, and Michelle Burke as their teen-age daughter, Connie) make a life for themselves in Paramus, N.J.
Opens July 23.
"POETIC JUSTICE." Before Bill Clinton signed up Maya Angelou as the Inaugural poet, John Singleton (writer and director of "Boyz N the Hood") signed her up to write poems for his ambitious, offbeat second film.
Janet Jackson stars as a reclusive poet and hairdresser named Justice who falls in love with a postal worker (Tupac Shakur).
Opens July 23.
"RISING SUN." Sean Connery is the only Los Angeles detective who understands the Japanese character, and Wesley Snipes is the partner he leads through a murder investigation involving a powerful Japanese corporation.
If you've read the Michael Crichton novel (the one he hates to hear called a Japan-bashing book), be prepared for a change: same murder, different murderer.
Directed by Philip Kaufman ("The Right Stuff").
Opens July 30.
"ROBIN HOOD: MEN IN TIGHTS." Mel Brooks spoofs the Robin Hood legend and tries to do for swashbucklers what he did for westerns in "Blazing Saddles" and monster movies in "Young Frankenstein." Opens July 30.
August
"THE FUGITIVE." In this remake of the television series, Harrison Ford stars as Dr.
Richard Kimble, falsely accused of murdering his wife, on the lam and searching for the one-armed man.
Opens Aug. 6.
"HEART AND SOULS." This is described as a fantasy-comedy, and considering the plot, thank goodness.
After Charles Grodin, Alfre Woodard, Kyra Sedgwick and David Paymer are killed in a bus accident, their spirits attach themselves to a newborn baby, who growns up to be Robert Downey Jr.
Directed by Ron Underwood ("City Slickers").
Opens Aug. 6.
"THE MAN WITHOUT A FACE." The first film directed by Mel Gibson.
He stars as an outcast man with a badly scarred face (that's one way to change an image), who befriends an unhappy 12-year-old boy.
Opens Aug. 20.
"MANHATTAN MURDER MYSTERY." This is the film Woody Allen was directing last summer when the story of his messy personal life exploded in the tabloids.
Diane Keaton replaced Mia Farrow and Anjelica Huston replaced a much younger actress as Mr.
Allen's on-screen love interest.
The title explains the plot, but the real mystery is how moviegoers will react to the post-scandal Woody.
Opens Aug. 20.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
TATTERHOOD AND THE HOBGOBLINS: A Norwegian Folktale.
Retold and illustrated by Lauren Mills.
Little, Brown. $15.95. (Ages 5 to 9) The barren queen eats both the beautiful flower and the weed and, as a result, has two daughters, one tame and beautiful, the other wild and strange.
Wild Tatterhood is given to the hobgoblins on her 12th birthday, and only appears as the princess she truly is after many adventures and by her own choice.
The watercolor illustrations are pretty .


To Arms! To Arms! White Fly is Here
THE goal now is to keep the garden blooming through the sunny months.
If all goes well, everything should be nearly weedless and trouble free.
This does require a few extra hours outdoors, but all too often uninvited troubles appear.
One of the most discouraging is white fly.
These tiny insect pests seem to appear out of nowhere, and almost every kind of soft succulent leaf is to their liking.
They keep away from a few annuals like impatiens and begonias, but vegetable gardeners know this nuisance well, especially on squash and tomato plants.


When Tour Groups Face Changing of the Guide
AN expert guide or star lecturer is often the selling point for a tour.
It is sometimes a dicey one: the expert may fall ill or for another reason be unable to go.
When this happens, what is the responsibility of the travel company selling the trip?
And what are the rights of the traveler?
These questions, among the many that unfold in the chasm between a brochure and an actual trip, have tangled answers.


2-Century Tradition of Pottery In a Tiny North Carolina Town
THE pottery tradition of Seagrove, N.C., which stretches unbroken back to the 1750's, has flourished in the past two decades, with more than 50 potteries now operating within 20 miles of this tiny rural town.
Although scores of early American potteries produced functional items from their local clay, most were displaced during the 20th century by inexpensive manufactured goods.
The Seagrove potteries were an exception.
Spurred by a lively wholesale trade, they hung on through the 1920's and 30's before demand declined and they dwindled to only five in the 1960's.
A revival began in the 1970's, however, fueled by a renewed market for handcrafted items.
Today, some of Seagrove's potteries are owned by eighth and ninth generation artisans, others have been started by newcomers from out of state.
Many operate out of weathered log cabins scattered only minutes from town.


Creative Juices
IN SUMMER, THE URGE TO EAT LIGHT, however powerful, is easily sabotaged.
A pristine tumble of greens, for instance, becomes a rich meal when tossed with a traditionally made vinaigrette and topped with oil-baked croutons, cold meat or cheese.
A light summer soup turns hefty with a dollop of cream.
And the addition of a butter or olive oil sauce can tranform the leanest, poached fish into a dietary hazard -- leaving the diner feeling as logy as a hot, humid night.
To eat light, while still savoring the fresh, vivid flavors of summer, is a conundrum.
Grilling, sans sauce, and salad, hold-the-dressing, are tantamont to dining interruptus.
Cooking with infused vinegars and oils is one solution to the season's predicament.
Using vegetable juice is an even more versatile approach -- with less damage to the beach physique.


Saratoga
Unlike the Queen of England, who presides annually at Royal Ascot, modern Presidents of the United States do not frequent the track.
Over the years, though, many Presidential families have visited Saratoga Springs, whose race track was called America's Ascot when it opened more than a century ago.
And they have discovered this resort's habit, even as it evokes the old, of anointing the new.
As Abraham Lincoln pondered the siege of Petersburg, his son Bob came to Saratoga to celebrate his graduation from Harvard and found this ancient oasis agog over a new race course.
Plans were afoot to create the country's finest carriage road, to be decorated with Victorian "cottages," many of which sparkle on today's six-lane Union Avenue.
Union Hall, where he stayed, became the Grand Union, one of the largest hotels in the world. (It was torn down several decades ago.)


Q and A
Civil War Battle Sites
Q.
Are there any group tours specifically focused on Civil War battlefields in Pennsylvania and Virginia? -- Rosalind Hall, Douglaston, Queens.


Ms. Edelbrock, Mr. Fogg
Anna-Karin Edelbrock, an assistant editor at Woman's Day Magazine in New York, was married yesterday to William Viles Fogg, an associate at the New York law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore.
Judge John Carey of the Westchester County Court in White Plains officiated at the University Club in New York.
Mrs.
Fogg, 27, graduated from the University of Nebraska.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul D. Edelbrock of Scottsbluff, Neb.
Her father, now retired, was a building contractor in Scottsbluff.
Her mother, Katherine Edelbrock, teaches sixth grade at the Bluffs Middle School there.


Sunshine Loyalists Perturb Sir Charles
Charles Barkley is not guilt-ridden.
In one season, he christened Phoenix's new arena with a conference title, gave Madonna a reason to visit town and inspired local junior high school students to shave their heads.
Cross him once, though, and he will knock a city on the seat of its pants (see Philadelphia).


Lee White, Sergio Galvis
Mary Lee White was married yesterday to Sergio Jordan Galvis, like her, a lawyer in New York.
The Rev.
John F. Halborg officiated at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
The bride, who is known as Lee, is an associate in the New York law firm of Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam &amp; Roberts who works in the counsel's office of the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
She graduated summa cum laude from Princeton University and received a law degree from Columbia University.


For Some, Job Sharing Offers a Solution
SYNERGY -- defined by Webster as interaction so the total effect is greater than the sum of individual effects -- is taking place among employees in companies that allow two or more employees to share one full-time job.
This is the case with at least two Westchester companies, Nynex and Career Blazers, both in White Plains.


CRUISES
Here is a sampling of cruises in the New York metropolitan region.
Rates and times are subject to change.
Extended Cruises
OUT O'MYSTIC SCHOONER CRUISES INC., 7 Holmes Street, Mystic, Conn.
Exit 90 from Interstate 95 at Mystic.
"Sneak away" sails aboard the Mystic Clipper and the Mystic Whaler go to destinations like Sag Harbor, Greenport and Dering Harbor, L.I.; Newport, R.I.; Block Island; Cuttyhunk and Martha's Vineyard.
Rates range from $39 for a lunch sail to $589 for a five-day sail.
Information: (800) 243-0416.
VOYAGER CRUISES, Steamboat Wharf, downtown Mystic, Conn.
Exit 90 from Interstate 95 at Mystic.
The Voyager, a reproduction of a 19th-century packet schooner, carries 20 passengers.
Ports of call include Newport, R.I., Block Island and Sag Harbor, L.I.
Rates range from $199 for a two-day cruise to $379 for a three-day cruise; there is a $20-a-day discount for children and the elderly.
Information: (800) 243-0882.
SYLVINA BEAL WINDJAMMER CRUISES, 120 School Street, Mystic, Conn.
Exit 90 from Interstate 95 at Mystic.
The schooner Sylvina W. Beal, in operation since 1911, sails to Essex, Conn.; Block Island and Newport.
R.I., and Sag Harbor, L.I.
Rates range from $165 for a two-day cruise to $355 for a three-day cruise.
Information: (800) 333-6978
MAJESTIC CHARTERS, 44 Water Street, Mystic, Conn.
Exit 90 from Interstate 95 at Mystic.
The Majestic, a clipper-bow Alden ketch of teak and mahogany construction, sleeps seven comfortably for charters only.
Some of the more popular destinations are Block Island; Montauk, L.I.; Newport, R.I.; Essex, Conn., and Martha's Vineyard.
Rates are $2,500 a week bare-boat and $3,500 crewed.
Information: (203) 572-1111.
Short Cruises
CIRCLE LINE CRUISES, leaving from Pier 83, Hudson River at 43d Street, Manhattan.
Three-hour, 35-mile cruises around Manhattan, passing landmarks including the Statue of Liberty, Ellis Island and the United Nations.
Daily sailings are available hourly from 9:30 A.M. to 3:30 P.M. (except 12:30 P.M.) and at 7 P.M., with additional cruises on Saturdays and Sundays.
Tickets: $18 for all cruises ($9 for children under 12).
Information: (212) 563-3200.
PETREL, operated by Sail Away New York,, Battery Park.
The Petrel, built in New York in 1938, is a 70-foot yacht, formerly owned by the Coast Guard and a favorite sailboat of President John F. Kennedy.
Sails of 45 minutes to two hours, daytime and evening, in New York Harbor and around the Statue of Liberty are available through October.
Sailings begin at noon, Mondays through Fridays and at 1 P.M. on Saturdays and Sundays; fees range from $8 to $25.
Information: (212) 825-1976.
THE PIONEER, leaving from the South Street Seaport, Pier 16, at the East River, is a two-masted schooner from 1885.
Daily departures are at 12:30, 3:30 and 7 P.M.
Admission: $15; $5 for children 2 to 12; $11 for other students; $12 for the elderly.
Reservations and information: (212) 669-9416.
THE SEAPORT LINE, offering rides on the Andrew Fletcher, a paddle boat, from Pier 16 and the East River.
Ninety-minute sightseeing cruises leave daily, 11 A.M. and 1, 3 and 5 P.M.
One-hour cocktail cruises are Wednesdays and Sundays at 7 and 8:30 P.M.
Sightseeing and cocktail cruises are $12 each;$11 for the elderly; $10 for students; $6 for children 2 to 12.
Cruises with dancing to recorded music and a disk jockey are on June 18 and 25 at 7 and 9:30 P.M.; tickets are $18.
Information: (212) 385-0791 or (212) 233-4800.
WORLD YACHT, leaving from Pier 81, Hudson River at 41st Street, Manhattan.
Daily dinner cruises year-round along the West Side of Manhattan from 7 to 10 P.M., boarding at 6 P.M., Sundays through Thursdays, $62; Fridays and Saturdays, $69.50.
Lunch cruises from noon to 2 P.M., boarding Mondays through Saturdays at 11 A.M.; $27.50; $16 for children under 12.
Sunday brunch cruises from 12:30 to 2:30 P.M., boarding at 11:30 A.M.; $39.95;$25 under 12.
Reservations and information: (212) 630-8100.


On Picture-Perfect Day, a Norman Rockwell Museum Opens
The sun was shining brightly, of course.
The sky was blue and the weather was temperate.
There were Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts, Kiwanians and Rotarians, antique fire engines and a four-clown band.
It was an all-American day.
A Norman Rockwell day.
The occasion was a giant slice of mom and apple pie served up to the nation today at the grand opening of the Norman Rockwell Museum, a $9.2 million complex on 36 acres overlooking the Housatonic River.
The site is about two miles from Main Street in Stockbridge, the picture-postcard Berkshire town where Rockwell lived and worked from 1953 until his death on Nov. 8, 1978.


SURFACING
HOME -- Don't-do-it-yourselfers: This new breed of tradesman, whose specialty is assembling "do it yourself" furniture (a la Ikea and Home Depot) and electronic equipment, has become as essential to unhandy homeowners as plumbers and electricians.
LOOKS -- The hairless man: Hairlessness, from head to toe, may be emerging as the look of choice, given the prominence of Michael Jordan and Charles Barkley as style icons, as well as the latest batch of Calvin Klein models, with hardly a body hair -- chest, leg or otherwise -- among them.
MUSIC -- "Grunge Lite": This compilation from C/Z Records, due out next month, is nothing short of grunge's death knell.
It features Muzak-esque versions of songs by Nirvana and other grunge groups.


A Museum Finds Its Time
Fashion seems to have caught up with the Jewish Museum, again.
For a while, during the mid-1960's, it outshone the Modern and the Whitney and the Guggenheim as the New York institution most committed to the cutting edge in art, organizing exhibitions of up-and-comers like Robert Rauschenberg and Jasper Johns and Kenneth Noland, and the show credited with launching Minimalism, "Primary Structures."
Then its trustees decided to turn away from a program that had little or nothing to do with Jews and Judaism.
When the director of the museum, Sam Hunter, resigned in 1967, he cited as the cause of his discontent the "increasing emphasis on Judaica at the expense of contemporary art." Thereafter the museum, while becoming more central to the Jewish community, often seemed like a backwater in the bustling New York art scene; for many in the art world, it virtually ceased to exist.
But now, when widening ethnic rifts shape urban politics and multiculturalism dominates intellectual debate, the institution's emphasis on ethnic identity and social history has become downright trendy.
The museum that reopens today in expanded quarters in the French Gothic Warburg mansion on upper Fifth Avenue, its home since 1947, seems almost perfectly in step with the latest multicultural theories.


Travel Medicine
To the Editor: In the Practical Traveler column on travel medicine (May 16), Betsy Wade said that "the traveler must be sophisticated or persistent" in order to get the right immunizations.
An experience of mine says that the traveler must be both.
Several years ago, a minor complaint brought me to the office of the best primary care physician I have ever had.
A report in the Travel Advisory in the previous couple of months had said that polio was present in a country to which my husband and I would soon be traveling.


U.N. SAYS ATTACK DEALT HEAVY BLOW TO SOMALI FACTION
United Nations officials say that a military force led by the United States destroyed arms depots, captured 200 Somalis and damaged a radio station in an assault early Saturday morning against a faction blamed for an attack last weekend in which 23 Pakistani peacekeepers were killed.
Early this morning, a second assault by American warplanes was staged against the headquarters of the faction's commander, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, who has been accused of ordering the ambush and of killing the 23 peacekeepers and wounding 59 others.
General Aidid has denied responsibility for the ambush.


Waterfalls Offer Relief for the Body, Renewal for the Soul
Ever since Moses struck the rock, and it gushed forth, bringing cooling water to the blistered desert landscape, the waterfall has stood for all things good.
It stands for creativity, abundance and life, for relief from drought and the burning of the sun, for the cessation of thirst, both physical and spiritual.
The Makers of the Tarzan movies instictively understood the waterfall's powerful message.
Every Tarzan movie builds toward the eye-popping moment when the arrogant white hunter, at the head of a long line of native bearers, breaks through the sweltering jungle and, deafened by the roar, beholds stock film of Victoria Falls.
This is the moment when the audience realizes that there are some things even bigger than bwana's greed and ambition.
It is the moment when nature reclaims its due and humbles the puny fellow in the ridiculous pith helmet.


Loroupe Leads Rarely Tardy Kenyans
Tecla Loroupe's vivid memories of her Kenyan school days served her well in New York.
Like a schoolgirl who knows exactly what's in store if she's late for the opening bell, the 20-year-old Kenyan fairly flew through Central Park yesterday to get to the finish on time to win the 22d annual Advil Mini Marathon.
Behind her were a score of elite runners straining for success and some 5,500 other women, many of whom couldn't have cared less about the dramatic duels at the head of the chase or even about their own times in the 10-kilometer race.
Schuwalow Finishes Strong
For those who did care, however, the victory could hardly have been more impressive.
Loroupe, who ran stride for graceful stride with Lisa Ondieki of Australia before breaking away between the fourth and fifth miles, covered the hilly 6.2-mile course in 32 minutes 31 seconds, 18 seconds ahead of Carolyn Schuwalow of Australia, who surged ahead of a tiring Ondieki in the last few hundred yards.


EASTERN CAMBODIA MOVES TO SECEDE
Civilian and military leaders of the Vietnamese-installed Government said today that most of the eastern half of the country was seceding and would form an "autonomous zone" outside the jurisdiction of the United Nations peacekeeping force here.
The announcement was made as the United Nations ordered virtually all its civilian peacekeepers out of three large eastern provinces, where Government soldiers have threatened them at gunpoint in recent days.


Long Exodus Nears End for H.I.V.-Infected Refugees From Haiti
Frantz Lieumain considers himself one of the lucky ones.
Were it not for a judge, he would still be with 142 other Haitian political refugees infected with the virus that causes AIDS, waiting in a camp at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base in Cuba for a plane to take them to the United States.
Instead, Mr.
Lieumain was one of about 50 H.I.V.-infected Haitian refugees who earlier this spring were brought to the United States for medical treatment on the orders of Judge Sterling Johnson Jr. of Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
And he hopes to be at Miami International Airport to greet his friends and former tentmates when they start arriving here on Monday, less than a week after Judge Sterling expanded the order to include all those in Guantanamo.


The Heroism Of Anonymous Men and Women
Documentary photographers are many but their jobs are few.
In America, at least, photojournalists with long lists of awards to their names have trouble finding assignments, especially assignments that deal with difficult and depressing subjects.
It may be that television news is so full of harrowing events that magazines are putting their money on reassurance.
People can get bad news and appeals for pity for free; why would they pay extra at the newsstands?
At all events, in a field where some sort of mass venue is essential, many "concerned photographers" find themselves playing to small audiences, devising projects primarily for books, or shifting into the business of celebrity portraiture.
Sebastiao Salgado is an exception.
Not only has he been showered with awards, he has also been lionized by museums and widely published in the last few years.
In 1991, his work seemed to be everywhere.
This is a testament in part to his talent, which is undeniable and impressive, in part to the importance of his subjects and his evident sympathy for them, and in part to a comfortingly old-fashioned esthetic and belief in the goodness of humanity and its capacity to survive.
Even his photographs of famine in the Sahel, the drought-plagued region south of the Sahara, generally played up the dignity, the classical grace and resignation of the starving rather than the horrors of their plight.


Ingrid Simon, Christopher Innes
Ingrid Paige Simon, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel K. Simon of New York, was married last evening to Christopher John Innes, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John K. Innes of Thousand Oaks, Calif.
Rabbi Richard Chapin performed the ceremony at the Rainbow Room.
Mrs.
Innes, 22, is a vice president of a transportation-management consulting company owned by her mother, Barbara S. Simon Inc. in New York.
Her father is a senior partner at Serko &amp; Simon, a law firm in New York.


BENEFITS
For Inwood House
MONDAY -- A dinner-dance will benefit Inwood House, a counseling and housing program for pregnant teen-agers in New York.
A 7 P.M. cocktail party at the Puck Building, Lafayette and Houston Streets, will be followed by a sit-down dinner at 8 and a buffet supper at 9.
Carrie Mae Weems, a photographer, will be honored; B. J. Crosby, a gospel and jazz singer, will perform, and Dave Brown and the Versatiles will provide the music for dancing.
Tickets, $300, or $125 for the buffet and dance alone, from (212) 355-6363.


The Deadly Sins/Anger; The Fascination Begins in the Mouth
HERE would be no point to sin if it were not the corridor to pleasure, but the corridor of anger has a particularly seductive, self-deceiving twist.
More than any of the other sins, anger can be seen to be good, can perhaps even begin by being good.
Jesus himself was angry, brandishing his whip and thrillingly overturning tables: coins, doves flying, the villainous sharpsters on their knees to save their spoils.
It would seem to run in the family; by far the angriest character in the Old Testament is God.
Of all the sins, only anger is connected in the common tongue to its twinned, entwined virtue: justice.
"Just anger," we say.
Impossible even to begin to imagine such a phrase made with the others: try as you will you can't get your mouth around the words "just sloth," or "just covetousness," to say nothing of the deadly breakfast cereal that sticks to the ribs for all eternity, "just lust."


Golf Tourney and Strike Carry On at Country Club
As the Buick Classic golf tournament entered its fifth day at Westchester Country Club here, opinions differed sharply over the effect of a 10-month-old strike by 65 of the club's waiters, bartenders, cooks, busboys and dishwashers.
Thomas A. Williams, chairman of the Classic and of United Hospital Medical Center in Portchester, which sponsors the event, said that the presence of picketing workers had not altered the tournament's atmosphere.
"Everything is on course," he said.
"We're drawing just as many spectators as usual. The strike hasn't affected the mood. It's not an issue that seems to be on people's minds." 'No Disruptions'
Robert C. James, executive director of Westchester Country Club, said, "The tournament has gone on as planned, with no disruptions."


DAVID GEFFEN, STILL HUNGRY
It was enlightening to review the May 16 Letters column and observe David Geffen correcting a remark he made about Steve Ross, commenting on what he clearly intended to say, not what he was accurately quoted as saying, in Bernard Weinraub's article "David Geffen, Still Hungry" (May 2).


14 Can Compete Again
SCOTT HAMILTON, BRIAN BOITANO and VIKTOR PETRENKO, the last three Olympic men's figure skating champions, are among 14 professional skaters cleared to resume international competition, including next year's Winter Games.
The reinstatements by the International Skating Union were decided upon during the council's meeting in Wurzberg, Germany.
Each skater had previously been reinstated by his own country's national governing body.


Carita Anderson, Christopher Shelkin
Carita Anderson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carl W. Anderson of Bay Terrace, Queens, was married yesterday to Christopher C. Shelkin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Shelkin of Bay Terrace, S. I. The Rev.
William Kelly, a minister of the Allied Congregational Mission, officiated at the Sans Souci restaurant in Sea Cliff, L.I.
Rabbi Irwin Lowenheim took part in the ceremony.


Jackson Leaves The Hunt For Hunted
Darrin Jackson left a defending World Series champion, a team two games out of first place in its division.
He joined the second-worst team in baseball, a club so far down in the standing, it would take an amazing run just to get out of last place.
He says he's happy about it.


Hoping to Reclaim a Page From His Past
As the first round of this week's 93d United States Open at the Baltusrol Golf Club in Springfield, N.J., approaches, Jack Nicklaus is hoping that rekindled memories of some of his best golf ever will help him produce the best that he has left.
No theater in golf has illuminated the Nicklaus legend more than Baltusrol's Lower Course.
The last two times the Open was held over the arduous A. W. Tillinghast-designed layout, Nicklaus won by breaking the championship 72-hole scoring record.


Pastor Fugard Warns of Judgment Day
Of all the questions that are asked in the course of "Playland," the latest drama by the South African playwright Athol Fugard, one is bound to leap out at you: "What is it that makes a man feel sorry?"
Philosophically, the provocative line stands out on its own merits.
Why does one man repent and not another?
But it also goes to the very heart of Mr.
Fugard's drama, which can currently be found at Stage II of the Manhattan Theater Club.
In that respect, I wish it didn't call so much attention to itself.
Mr.
Fugard is skirting sermons here, and a playwright as accomplished as he shouldn't have to state his concerns this overtly.


Wall Street; Kelley Rocks on an Oil-Patch Roll
IN Louisiana, the discovery of oil and gas in a third well in the Ouiski Bayou field has been like a slice of industry folklore.
But on Wall Street, it's been a tumultuous battle over the unknown, as analysts argue about the size of the unseen.
Since late April, when the Kelley Oil Corporation announced its discovery, shares in the company have more than doubled in price, reaching a high last week of $29 a share and closing Friday at $24.50.
The limited partnership in which the company serves as general partner, Kelley Oil &amp; Gas Partners Ltd., has also seen its publicly traded shares jump, from $16.75 before the announcement, to a high last week of $21.75.


Chiefs Add Two Stars and 5 Rings
In the crazy mathematics of the National Football League, part of it due to free agency, the Kansas City Chiefs have come up with their own equation for possible success.
It goes something like this: 4 + 1 = 1.
By teaming quarterback Joe Montana, who came to the Chiefs in a trade with San Francisco and has four Super Bowl rings, with running back Marcus Allen, who signed last week as a free agent from the Los Angeles Raiders and has one Super Bowl ring, in the same backfield, Kansas City hopes to get a Super Bowl championship.


SANTERIA FAITHFUL HAIL COURT RULING
For six years, ever since the City Council outlawed animal sacrifices to discourage the opening of a Santeria church here, Enoelia Martinez has been nervous about the future of her store, where she sells religious articles.
But when she heard Friday that the Supreme Court had unanimously declared the city ordinances unconstitutional, her fears evaporated.
"This is very good for me," she said as she stood behind the counter of her shop, Botanica La Luz.
The shop is just down the street from the empty lot whose purchase by the Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye set in motion the case that has established that First Amendment freedoms extend to the rituals of the Afro-Caribbean religion.


SAINT HILLARY
It's great to hear someone other than a Republican activist for the religious right speak out on the differences between right and wrong, fair and unfair and even good and evil ("Saint Hillary," by Michael Kelly, May 23).
Even though she wasn't elected to lead our country, Hillary Rodham Clinton is doing just that, in spite of her critics.
STEVEN SCHRAGIS New York, N.Y.


OUTINGS
Here is a sampling of outings in the New York metropolitan region during the summer season.
Dates and times are subject to change.
Today
BEACH EXCURSIONS, Jones Beach, Long Beach and Fire Island, L.I.
Round-trip excursions on Long Island Railroad.
Weekends through Labor Day.
Leaves from Penn Station, Flatbush, Brooklyn, and Jamaica, Queens.
Round-trip fare: $8 to $10.50.
Information: (718) 217-5477 or (516) 822-5477.
FRIDAY FEST, Main Mall, 1 Garden Street, Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
Live music and fresh fruits and vegetables for sale every Friday from 8:30 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Music from noon to 2 P.M.
June through September.
Free.
Information: (914) 471-9424.
HUDSON VALLEY HIGHLIGHTS, 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, Manhattan.
A visit to both the Beekman Arms, the oldest landmark inn in America, and the neoclassical Mills Mansion, with a wine tasting, and brunch.
Meet at the 92nd Street Y. 8:15 A.M.
Return 7 P.M.
Fee: $68, includes brunch.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
CELEBRATION OF SUMMER, Boscobel Restoraton, Garrison-on-Hudson, New York.
The Hudson Valley Folk Ensemble performs in the rosegarden of this museum of decorative arts.
Museium hours: 9:30 A.m. to 5 P.M.
Music: 2:30 to 4:30 P.M. $5; $4 for the elderly; $2.50 12 and under.
Information: (914) 265-3638
STRAWBERRY FESTIVAL, Matarazzo Farms, Route 519, R.D. 1, Belvedere, New Jersey.
The 12th annual strawberry festival with hayrides, strawberry picking, vineyard and cellar tours, live entertainment and games for the children. 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (980) 475-3872.
BELMONT TRACK PACK, Long Island Rail Road one day trip to the races.
The "Track Pack" includes roundtrip rail fare, clubhouse admission, luncheon at the Garden Terrace Restaurant and a post-parade program.
Through July 26 except Tuesdays.
Leaves from Penn Station, Flatbush, Brooklyn, and Jamaica, Queens.
Track Pack: $30.
Information: (718) 217-5477 or (516) 822-5477.
June 16
NATIVE AMERICAN INDIAN POWWOW, Matarazzo Farms, Route 519, R.D. 1, Belevedere, New Jersey.
Native American Indian Performers, craftspeople, storytellers, educational seminars, music, and food. 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Also June 17 and 18.
Admission: $6; $4 for children.
Information: (980) 475-3872.
INTERNATONAL BACH FESTIVAL, Staller Center for the Arts, State University at Stoneybrook, L.I.
A series of concerts and pre-concert panels that highlight the international musical styles adapted by Bach.
June 16 and 19, panel 7 P.M., concert, 8:30 P.M.; June 26, panels, 2 and 7 P.M., concert 8:30 P.M.; June 27, at the Chelsea Center, East Norwich, L.I., panels 2 and 3 P.M., concert 4:30 P.M.
Concerts: $12, $15 and $22; panels, free.
Information: (516) 632-7239.
Tickets: (516) 632-7230 or (516) 632-7227.
STRAWBERRRY FESTIVAL, Greig Farm, Pitcher Lane, Red Hook, N.Y.
Strawberry picking contests, hayrides, a chicken barbecue and strawberry milkshakes.
June 12, 13, 19, 20, 26 and 27.
Free.
Information: (914) 758-1234.
OWL PROWL, Theodore Roosevelt Sanctuary, 134 Cove Road, Oyster Bay, N.Y.
A live presentation with owls followed by a walk in the wooded habitat of local owls. 7:30 to 9:30 P.M.
Tickets: $5.
Information: (516) 922-3200.
June 17
SATURDAY COUNTRY HIKE, South Mountain Reservation, West Orange to Millburn, New Jersey. 8 mile scenic hike with a lunch break at Hemlock Falls.
The hike ends in Millburn where food and buses to New York City are available.
Meets 9:45 A.M. at the statue in front of the Port Authority Bus Terminal Ticket Windows, 40th Street and 8th Avenue. $2 hike fee; $10 round trip bus fair.
Information: (212) 876-6688.
PHILLIPSBURG MANOR ANNIVERSARY, Route 9, North Tarrytown, N.Y.
An exhibition and celebration of the manor's 300th anniversary with dutch food, country dancing, a parade and other activities, all reminiscent of the late 1600's. 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $6; $5 for the elderly; $3 for children 6 to 17; children under 6 free.
Information: (914) 631-8200.
BEYOND THE FERRY, Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences, 75 Stuyvesant Place, S.I.
A fully guided roundtrip Staten Island ferry ride and tour of the Institute, box lunch included.
Meet at the South Ferry waiting room at 10:45 A.M.; return 1:30 P.M.
Fee: $20; $18 for the elderly.
Information: (718) 727-1135.
FATHER'S DAY WEEKEND CELEBRATION, Matarazzo Farms, Route 519, R.D. 1, Belvedere, New Jersey.
Wine tasting, vineyard and cellar tours and strawberry picking with a free gift for dads. 1 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Also June 20.
Free.
Information: (908) 475-3872.
June 19
NISSEQUOGUE RIVER CANOE TRIP, Smithtown, L.I.
A guided canoe ride along the Nissequogue River.
Sponsored by the Theodore Roosevelt Sanctuary.
Mid-morning to afternoon, depending on the tides.
Ages 12 and up.
Fee: $25.
Call for registration and meeting place: (516) 922-3200.
June 20
LANDSCAPING FOR BIRDS, Egbertville, Staten Island.
A hike through the woods of High Rock in the Greenbelt in search of song birds.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meet at 2 P.M. in the parking lot at the end of Nevada Avenue, off Rockland Avenue.
Free.
Information: (718) 667-6042.
NATUREWALK SERIES: TWIGHLIGHT TREK, Egbertville, S.I.
A three hour early evening hike through the Greenbelt.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meet at 5 P.M. in the parking lot at the end of Nevada Avenue, off Rockland Avenue.
Free.
Information: (718) 667-6042.
June 25
OLDE TYME CIRCUS, Museum Village, 130 Museum Village Road, Monroe, N.Y.
The last remaining traveling circus with high wire acts, elephants, dancing horses with bareback riders, and clowns.
Museum hours: 10 A.M. to 2 P.M.
Circus performances: 5:30 P.M. and 8 P.M.
Admission: $7; $6 for children 4-12; free under 4.
Information: (914) 782-8247.
June 26
STORM KING ART CENTER, Old Pleasant Hill, Mountainville, N.Y.
Maureen Megerian, associate curator of the center, leads a tour of the current works on display at the sculpture park, 3 P.M.
Admission: $5; $3 for students and the elderly; children under 5, free.
Information: (914) 534-4457.
June 27
MANSIONS OF THE RICH AND FAMOUS.
A Long Island Rail Road day trip to the Vanderbilt Mansion, Old Westbury Gardens and the John S. Phipps Mansion on Long Island, lunch included.
Leaves from Penn Station, Flatbush, Brooklyn, and Jamaica, Queens.
Also August 1 and September 12.
Tour Price: $44; $33 for children 5 to 11.
Information: (718) 217-5477.
WEST SPRINGFIELD CRAFT FAIR, 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue, Manhattan.
Bus tour to the Springfield, Massachusetts Craft Fair.
Meet at the 92nd Street Y at 8:30 A.M.
Return 9 P.M.
Fee: $48.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
July 1
AUDUBON ECOLOGY WORKSHOPS, National Audubon Society Educational Center, 613 Riversville Road, Greenwich, Conn.
Week long workshops in environmental studies of the natural habitats and ecosystems of New England.
July 4 to August 14.
Fee: $495 per person; room and board included.
Information: (203) 869-5272.
July 3
MOSTLY MOZART FESTIVAL, Planting Fields Arboretum, Oyster Bay, L.I., Route 106 North, to Northern Boulevard.
Gerard Schwartz will conduct the Mostly Mozart Festival Orchestra with Joshua Bell on violin at 8 P.M.
Sponsored by Friends of the Arts.
Tickets: reserved tent, $30 and $35; lawn, $20.
Information and Reservations: (516) 922-0061.
EXPLORE HISTORIC SETON FALLS, Seton Falls Park, Bronx.
A walk examining the natural history of this park..
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meet at 2 P.M. on East 233rd Street, near Baychester Avenue, at Seton Falls Park.
Free.
Information: (718) 548-7070.
BLACKSMITHING, Madam Brett Homestead, 50 Van Nydeck Avenue, Beacon, N.Y.
Blacksmith Jim Stapleford will demonstrate forging, hammering, and will create utensils such as forks, trivets and spatulas. 1 to 4 P.M.
Also July 4.
Admission: $5.
Information: (914) 896-6897.
MUSIC AT STORM KING ART CENTER, Old Pleasant Hill Road, Mountainville, N.Y.
The Jorge Heilpern Quintet will play music indigenous to Central and South America. 3 P.M.
Admission: $5; $3 for students and the elderly; children under 5, free.
Information: (914) 534-4457
July 4
BARTOW-PELL MANSION TOUR, Pelham Bay Park, Bronx.
A tour of the Bartow-Pell Mansion Museum, its gardens and its history.
Meet at noon at the Bartow-Pell Mansion, off of Shore Road.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Free.
Also July 18, August 1 and 15.
Information: (718) 548-7070.
July 5
TWILIGHT GARDEN WALKS, Montgomery Place, River Road, Route 9G, Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y.
A walk through the formal gardens of Montgomery place led by landscape curator Timothy Steinhoff, during the sunset and full moon. 7 to 9 P.M.
Also August 2 and 31.
Admission: $4.
Information: (914) 758-5461.
July 6
BEAR MOUNTAIN SQUARE DANCE, Bear Mountain State Park Ice Rink, Palisades Interstate Parkway, Exit 19.
Slim Sterling calls the dances every Tuesday through August with instruction beforehand. 7:30 P.M.
Admission: $2; $1 for children under 12.
Information: (914) 786-2701.
July 10
WINTERTHUR AND LONGWOOD GARDENS, Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences, 75 Stuyvesant Place, S.I.
Bus tour to Brandywine Valley to visit Longwood Gardens and Henry F. DuPont's former residence, the Winterthur Museum, home to a collection of 15th to 19th century decorative arts. 7 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Meet at the Institute.
Fee: $60.
Information: (718) 727-1135.
BRIGADE OF THE AMERICAN REVOLUTION, Van Cortlandt Manor, South Riverside Avenue, Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.
A revolutionary encampment fully recreated complete with soldiers, skirmishes, camp followers, music and trades of the late 1700's.
Also July 11. 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $7; $3 for children.
Information: (914) 631-8200.
July 17
EIGHTEENTH CENTURY DINNERS, Van Cortlandt Manor, South Riverside Avenue, Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Tour the manor in the afternoon then sit down to an eighteenth century meal complete with music, games, wines, ales and ciders. 5 P.M. to 8:30 P.M.
Also July 17, 18, and 31; August 1, 14, 15, 28 and 29.
Dinner and tour: $40.
Information: (914) 631-8200
HAMPTONS/MONTAUK EXCURSION, Long Island Rail Road One Day Getaway.
A 300 mile tour through the Hamptons, including the Southampton Historical Museum, shopping in Southampton, the Montauk Lighthouse and a luncheon at Justin's Southside Restaurant.
Train Leaves Penn Station 8:50 A.M.
Returns 8:16 P.M.
Also August 14, September 5, September 18 and October 2.
Fee: $42.
Information: (718) 217-5477.
July 18
ANTIQUE CAR SHOW, Montgomery Place, River Road, Route 9G, Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Vintage automobiles on display throughout the lawns of Montgomery Place, with tours of the mansion available. 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Show Admission: $5.
Mansion Tours: $2.
Information: (914) 758-5461.
UPPER CARMENS RIVER TRIP, Islip, L.I.
Guided canoe tour on the river.
Sponsored by the Theodore Roosevelt Sanctuary.
Mid-morning to afternoon depending on the tides.
Ages 12 and up.
Fee: $25.
Call for registration and meeting place: (516) 922-3200.
MUSEUM TOUR, 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue.
A tour of Pepsico's sculpture garden (with works by Rodin, Moore, Calder, Smith and Nevelson), the Neuberger Museum of Art, and the Caramoor Museum (with a large collection of European and Asian art) with an outdoor concert by the Tokyo String Quartet.
Take a picnic lunch.
Meet at the 92nd Street Y. 9 A.M.
Return 9 P.M.
Fee: $68.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
BUTTERFLY ATTRACTIONS, Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
A tour of a Prospect Park meadow that is filled with butterflies.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Enter the park at Lincoln Road and Ocean Avenue and meet at the Prospect Park Boathouse. 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 360-2774.
July 24
UP THE HILL TO TOMPKINSVILLE, Staten Island Institute of Arts and Letters, 75 Stuyvesant Place, S.I.
A tour of Victorian mansions, modest colonial homes, a Gothic revival church and turn of the century store fronts in upper Tompkinsville, Fort Place and St.
George. 1 to 3:30 P.M.
Meet at the Institute.
Fee: $5.
Information: (718) 273-5683.
ARTIFACTS ON DISPLAY, Museum Village, Museum Village Road, Exit 16 off Route 17 West, Monroe, New York.
Rare 19th century American artifacts from the museum's collection will be on display through September 16.
Museum Hours: Wednesday to Friday, 10 A.M. to 2 P.M.; Saturday and Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $8; $6 for the elderly; $5 for children 6-15; under 6 free.
Information: (914) 782-8247.
ANTIQUE BOAT RENDEVOUS, Mystic Seaport, 50 Greemansville Avenue, Mystic, Connecticut.
A parade of wooden sail and motorboats, from the 1800's to the 1950's on the Seaport's waterfront, with boats docked at the Seaport before and after.
Seaport Hours: 9 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Admission: $15; children 6-15 $7.50; under 5 free.
Information: (203) 572-5317.
July 25
RIVERBLUES FESTIVAL, 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue.
A day trip by bus to Philadelphia's annual music festival held at Penn's Landing on the waterfront, with blues bands and southern cooking.
Meet at the 92nd Street Y. 11 A.M.
Return 8 P.M.
Fee: $58.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
July 31
PEAK OF SUMMER HIKE, Storm King Art Center, Old Pleasant Hill Road, Mountainville, N.Y.
A five mile moderate to strenuous hike in Black Rock Forest, the highest point in the Hudson Highlands.
Meet at the Storm King Art Center, 10 A.M.
Free.
Information: (914) 534-3190.
THE LADIES OF CLERMONT, Clermont State Historic Park, 1 Clermont Avenue, Germantown, N.Y.
Actresses portraying seven generations of Livingston women will discuss life on the Clermont estate and in New York society.
Noon to 4 P.M.
Also August 1.
Free.
Information: (518) 537-4240.
COUNTRY ANTIQUE SHOW AND SALE, Montgomery Place, River Road, Route 9G, Annandale-on-Hudson, N.Y.
Attended by dealers from all over the Northeast. 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $5.
Tours of historic Montgomery place: $2.
Information: (914) 758-5461.
BRONX GEOLOGICAL HIKE, Van Cortlandt Park, Bronx.
A walk exploring the geological formations of the park.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Meet at Broadway and Mosholu Avenue; 11 A.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 430-1890.
FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT'S FALLINGWATER, Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences, 75 Stuyvesant Place, S.I.
Bus tour led by Wright expert, Perry Gunther, to "Fallingwater", a house designed by Wright, in Mill Run, Pennsylvania.
Tour includes lecture, overnight lodging, meals and transportation.
Meet at the Institute at 6:30 A.M.
July 31; return 10 P.M.
August 1.
Fee: $190.
Information: (718) 727-1135.
August 1
DRESSES OF YESTERYEAR, Madam Brett Homestead, 50 Van Nydeck Avenue, Beacon, N.Y. 20 dresses from as early as 1712 and a cloak spun dyed and woven in the homestead. 1 to 4 P.M.
Admission: $5.
Information: (914) 896-6897.
BALLOONING FESTIVAL, 92nd Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue.
A bus tour to Reading, N.J. for the largest balloon race in North America with parachuting, airshow acrobatics, wing walkers, and musical entertainment.
Meet at the 92nd Street Y. 10 A.M.
Return 10 P.M.
Fee: $55.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
BAREFOOT GRAPESTOMPING PARTIES, Matarazzo Farms, Route 519, R.D. 1, Belvedere, N.J.
The evening includes a hot buffet, wine tasting, hay rides, and barefoot grape stomping.
Friday evenings through December.
Fee: from $22.50 to $24.50, meal included.
Information: (908) 475-3671.
August 7
INTERNATIONAL FOOD FESTIVAL, The Main Mall, 1 Garden Street, Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
The fifth annual food festival with traditional music, dance, and costumes, and 45 booths with food from around the world. 11:30 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (914) 471-9424.
10TH ANNUAL 1930'S WEEKEND, Clermont State Historic Site, 1 Clermont Avenue, Germantown, N.Y.
Croquet tournament, lawn games, refreshments, period entertainment and an antique car show.
Noon to 6 P.M.
Also August 8.
Tournament fee: $9; $15 for a two-person team.
Information: (518) 537-4240.
STORYTELLING FESTIVAL, Sunnyside, Sunnyside Lane, off Route 9, Tarrytown, N.Y.
Readings, puppetry and folk stories of African American, Hispanic and Native American cultures.
Sponsored by American Booksellers Association. 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission: $7; $3 for children 6-17; under 6 free.
Also August 8.
Information (914) 591-8763.
August 11
HANDSPUN AND HANDWOVEN, Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences, Auditorium, 75 Stuyvesant Place, S.I.
Weaver Carol Higgins demonstrates carding and spinning of yarns to produce finished textiles with a display of small looms.
Lunch included. 12:30 P.M.
Fee: $20.
Information: (718) 727-1135.
August 18
QUILTING, Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences Auditorium, 75 Stuyvesant Place, Staten Island, N.Y.
Primrose McVay of The Staten Island Quilters Guild demonstrates quilting, discusses the history of quilts and displays sketches, tools and quilting books.
Fee: $20.
Information: (718) 727-1135.
August 21
A ST.
GEORGE WALKING TOUR, Staten Island Institute of Arts and Sciences, 75 Stuyvesant Place, S.I.
Historical walk and exploration of the architecture of three Fort Hills estates which demonstrate Victorian Tudor Revival, Spanish Colonial, Collegiate Gothic, Art Deco, Colonial Revival, and Italianate styles. 1 to 3:30 P.M.
Meet at the Institute.
Fee: $8.
Information: (718) 727-1135.
PECONIC RIVER CANOE TRIP, Theodore Roosevelt Sanctuary, 134 Cove Road, Oyster Bay, N.Y.
A guided canoe trip down Long Island's longest river.
Ages 12 and up. 9 A.M. to 3 P.M.
Fee: $25.
Registration: (516) 922-3200.
ANTIQUE MARINE ENGINE EXPOSITION, Mystic Seaport, 50 Greemanville Avenue, Mystic, Conn.
An exhibition of pre-World War II Marine engines with demonstrations and engine models from the U.S. and Canada.
Also August 22. 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Admission to Seaport and exhibit: $15; $7.50 for children 6-15; under 5 free.
Information: (203) 572-5317.
EARLY RISERS BIRDWALK, Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
A walk to observe and discuss the robins, warblers, orioles and towhees about to head south for the winter.
Sponsored by the Urban Park Rangers.
Enter the park at Lincoln Road, and Ocean Avenue, meet at the Prospect Park Boathouse. 7 A.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 360-2774.
BLUEGREASS AND PEACH FESTIVAL, Matarazzo Farms Route 519, R.D. 1, Belvedere, New Jersey.
The day will include a sweet corn taste-off, chicken barbecue, games for children and the bands, Silk City Quartet, 99 Years, and the Buffalo Hollow Bluegrass Band will play throughout the day. 12 noon to 7 P.M.
Also August 22.
Admission: $6; $3 for children 12 and under.
Information: (908) 475-3872.


HOLIDAY SIGHTS
Here is a sampling of holiday activities this summer in the New York metropolitan region.
Dates and times are subject to change.
June 14
FLAG DAY PARADE, City Hall to Pearl Street, lower Manhattan. 11:30 A.M.
Sponsored by Fraunces Tavern Museum.
July 2
INDEPENDENCE DAY CELEBRATION, Bear Mountain State Park, Route 9W, Bear Mountain, N.Y.
Billed as the world's biggest bring-your-own barbecue, with a performance by the Rockland County Concert Band at 8 P.M. and fireworks afterward. 5 to 9 P.M.
Free.
Information: (914) 786-2701.
July 3
THE GREAT AMERICAN FOURTH OF JULY FESTIVAL, St.
James General Store, 516 Moriches Road, north of Route 25A, St.
James, L.I.
Through July 5.
Crafts, entertainment, music, raffle and children's activities.
Noon to 4 P.M.
Free.
Information: (516) 862-8333.
STARS AND STRIPES REGATTA, South Street Seaport, Fulton and South Streets, lower Manhattan.
The seaport plays host to some 100 sailboats and crews in the annual two-day, two-race event in New York Harbor through July 4.
Sponsored by New York Newsday.
Races start at 11:30 A.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 669-9424.
INDEPENDENCE WEEKEND AT MYSTIC SEAPORT, Route 27, Mystic, Conn.
A re-creation of an 1870's Fourth of July, including historic re-enactments, patriotic ceremonies and a parade.
Through July 4; 9 to 5 P.M.
Seaport admission: $15; $7.50 for children 6 to 15; free under age 6.
Information: (203) 572-5315.
INDEPENDENCE DAY WEEKEND FESTIVAL, Brighton Park, between Illinois and Indiana Avenues, Atlantic City.
Art, crafts, antiques and collectibles.
Through July 5. 10 to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (609) 344-7855.
AMERICA'S BIRTHDAY CELEBRATION, Vanderbilt Museum, 180 Little Neck Road, Centerport, L.I.
The Long Island Brass Guild performs at the picnic area at 8 P.M.
Admission: $15.
Picnic dinners may be ordered for $10 a person.
Information: (516) 262-7827.
July 4
26th ARMY BAND CONCERT, Fort Hamilton, Fort Hamilton Parkway at 101st Street, Bay Ridge, Brooklyn. 7:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 630-4820.
INDEPENDENCE DAY CELEBRATION, Richmondtown Restoration, 441 Clarke Avenue, at Arthur Kill Road, Staten Island.
Old-fashioned ice-cream social, speeches in the tradition of 1860's and pie-baking contest. 1 to 6 P.M.
Admission: $4; students, $2.50 for the elderly and children from 6 to 18; free under age 6.
Information: (718) 351-1611.
MACY'S "TIME FOR HEROES" FIREWORKS CELEBRATION, Lower Hudson River.
A half-hour display starting at 9:20 P.M.
The musical score will be broadcast on WPLJ-FM, 95.5, at 9:20 P.M.
Best viewing in Manhattan: West Side from the World Financial Center to West 12th Street.
JULY 4 CELEBRATION, Sagamore Hill National Historic Site, 20 Sagamore Hill Road, Oyster Bay, L.I.
Reopening of the Theodore Roosevelt home and gala celebration, including concert and parade. 1:30 to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (516) 922-4788.
"A SALUTE TO NEW YORK CITY," Great Lawn, Central Park.
Kurt Masur conducts the New York Philharmonic in Copland's "Fanfare for the Common Man;" Charles Ives's "Variations on America," as transcribed for orchestra by William Schuman; Gershwin's "Rhapsody in Blue," and Leonard Bernstein's Symphonic Dances from "West Side Story." During the concert there will be a fireworks display by the Grucci family. 8 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 875-5709.
FOURTH OF JULY PARADE, Travis, S.I.
Parade begins at Victory Boulevard and West Shore Expressway and proceeds on Victory to Glen Street, Cannon Avenue, Victory Boulevard and East Service Road.
Noon.
Information: (212) 374-5176.
SOUTH STREET SEAPORT CONCERT, Pier 16, at the East River, lower Manhattan.
The Artie Shaw Orchestra will perform at 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 669-9400.
FIREWORKS CRUISE, Circle Line, leaving from Pier 83, 43d Street at Hudson River, Clinton. 7 to 10:30 P.M.
Tickets: $30; $15 for children under 12.
Information: (212) 563-3200.
FIREWORKS CRUISE, World Yacht, leaving from Pier 62, 23d Street at Hudson River, Chelsea.
A cruise including a five-course dinner and viewing of the fireworks. 7 to 11 P.M.
Tickets: $179.
Information: (212) 929-7090.
ALL-NIGHT WALKING TOUR, lower Manhattan.
A walking tour led by Warren Shaw, a historian and writer, celebrating Independence Day with a candlelight procession through the streets around City Hall.
Sites include the first United States Capitol and Golden Hill.
The tour ends with a Staten Island Ferry ride at sunrise.
Meets at 2 A.M. on the steps of City Hall, Broadway at Duane Street. $15.
Sponsored by the 92d Street Y. Information: (212) 996-1100.
"BOOM BOX PARADE," Jillson Square to Memorial Park, Willimantic, Conn.
WILI-AM, 1400, plays an hour of marching-band music while thousands of people march with their radios blaring. 11 A.M. to noon.
Information: (203) 456-1111.
July 5
"NEW YORK'S MOST HISTORICAL PARADE," Wantagh, L.I.
Celebrating the 350th year anniversary of the Town of Hempstead.
The parade will begin at 10 A.M. from Park Avenue, proceed north on Wantagh Avenue and end at Beech Street School.
Information: (516) 571-4391.
Sept. 6
LABOR DAY PARADE, Fifth Avenue from 44th to 72d Street, Manhattan. 11 A.M.
WEST INDIAN DAY PARADE, Eastern Parkway from Utica Avenue to Washington Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn. 10 A.M.
"IMMIGRANT LABORS, IMMIGRANT TRIUMPHS." A Labor Day tour focusing on the role of immigrants and of the labor movement in Manhattan.
Sites include the 10th Ward Hotel, the Jewish Daily Forward building and the sweatshops of yesterday and today.
Sponsored by Big Onion Walking Tours.
Meets at 1 P.M.
Fee: $9, $7 for students and the elderly.
Information and meeting place: (212) 439-1090.


Mutual Funds; The China Factor in Asia Funds
SPURRED on by China's movement farther and farther from a controlled economy, "China funds" have been popping up fast -- so fast that only one among four new China-flavored mutual funds and three new closed-end China funds has celebrated its first birthday.
Their timing seems auspicious.
Late last month, the International Monetary Fund reported that, at $1.7 trillion, China's economy is four times larger than previously believed and the third-largest in the world, behind the United States and Japan.


Kirsten Johnston, Piers C. A. Barker
Kirsten Anne Johnston, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Brownell Johnston of Huntington, L.I., was married there yesterday to Piers Christopher Andrew Barker, a son of Drs.
John and Rosalind Barker of Lakefield, Ontario, Canada.
The Rev.
John Jurik performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Lutheran Church.
Mrs.
Barker, 22, is a financial consultant at Andersen Consulting in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University, as did her husband.
Her father is a tax partner with Arthur Andersen, a tax and accounting firm in New York, and an associate professor of taxation at New York University.


Corrections
The picture caption on the cover of the Television section today misstates the time for "Brides of Christ," a three-part mini-series tonight on Arts &amp; Entertainment.
It begins at 8.


The Neighbors Are Up in Arms


Problems in Housing The Mentally Ill
For the thousands of ex-mental patients living in the squalor of New Jersey boardinghouses, the "450 Plan" of the state mental health system must seem a cruel joke ("Helping the Mentally Ill Rejoin the Community," May 23).
While 450 people receive all the attention of the state's vast mental-health bureaucracy, the casualties of this failed system are now officially abandoned -- warehoused by the hundreds in just a few communities -- vegetating without programs, crushed together in claustrophobic buildings, preyed upon by criminals and drug dealers and spending time in county jails and hospitals.


Why Not More Safety In Car Inspections?
I read with interest your May 23d article about Connecticut's success in selling special interest license plates.
Fine!
But there is another side of our Department of Motor Vehicle activity which is woefully inadequate: car inspections.
Connecticut does test annually for emissions.
But there is no mandatory testing for lights or brakes.
I talked to my representative and senator about this and was told to contact Commissioner Goldberg.
His reply to me was that nothing could be changed without an act of the legislature.


Shannon O'Neill, Michael Gallagher
Shannon Pia O'Neill, a daughter of Richard and Gail O'Neill of New York, was married yesterday to Michael Francis Gallagher, a son of Daniel and Terese Gallagher of White Plains.
The Rev.
John F. Quinn, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
Mrs.
Gallagher graduated from Villanova University and received a law degree from Fordham University, from which her husband graduated and also received a law degree.
She is an associate with the law firm of Coleman &amp; Rhine in New York.


SAINT HILLARY
At first glance, the article on "Saint Hillary" seemed like a tongue-in-cheek exercise.
But no; reading on, it proved to be a serious, albeit superficial brief for the secular sanctification of the First Lady.
True saints had their share of human frailties, but Michael Kelly could find nary a flaw in Mrs.
Clinton's ideological maneuverings.
FRANCES C. IANORA Emerson, N.J.


In Stamford, Before or After the Show
THE Stamford Center for the Arts in downtown Stamford has proved a magnet, with various restaurants opening in the immediate vicinity over a very short period of time.
Directly across from the center is Peppino's Ristorante, which is handy for theatergoers who want to dine before or after a performance.
In fact, on a performance night recently, the first question the friendly and helpful head waiter asked us was if we were going to the theater.
We made the mistake of saying no, and consequently waited and waited for our first course while tables all around us were served briskly.
It pays to be in a hurry.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
PRODUCTIVITY THEME
A conference on enhancing productivity, profitability and financial stability is to be held Friday from 8 A.M. to 1:30 P.M. at the Marriott Hotel, 670 White Plains Road in Tarrytown, organized by the Westchester County Association.
"Improving Your Bottom Line: Innovative Strategies and Techniques" is the title of the program, and it is aimed at corporations, nonprofit organizations and government agencies.
A light breakfast, lunch and printed materials are included in the fee of $60.


Q and A
Roommates in a Co-op Question: I own a Manhattan co-op that for years was used only as a pied-a-terre by my immediate family and for visiting out-of-town friends and relatives.
My daughter then occupied it for about a year with no problems.
After she moved out last summer the building management refused access to my California cousin to whom I had lent my apartment for a month.


At Cliburn Competition, A Pianist's Recognition
HIS own modest hope was to "make a good impression," Andrew Armstrong said shortly before taking part in the recently concluded Ninth Van Cliburn International Piano Competition in Fort Worth, Tex.
But the 19-year-old pianist, the youngest of the 36 participants and one of only 6 Americans, did far better than that.
He became one of 12 semifinalists, won the $4,000 Jury Discretionary Award and attracted the attention of Van Cliburn himself.


Tried and True, With a Twist
NAMES: Leeza Gibbons and John Tesh.
IDENTITY: Hosts, along with Mary Hart, of "Entertainment Tonight."


Monica Feinberg, Jeffrey Cohen
Monica Lesley Feinberg and Jeffrey Charles Cohen, doctoral students at Columbia University, she in English literature and he in philosophy, were married last evening in New York.
Rabbi Paul Steinberg performed the ceremony at Temple Rodeph Sholom.
The bride, 28, graduated summa cum laude from Yale University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Harvey B. Feinberg of New York.
Her father is a psychiatrist.


Public &amp; Private; A Political Correction
Discussions of political correctness on campus always puzzle me a bit, because they usually have as their starting point a view of the academy, in fact the world, that is contrary to established reality.
That is, that into this calm pool of egalitarian rational discourse comes the bigfoot of racial and gender politics, ready to stomp down anyone who offends, diverges, challenges liberal orthodoxy.
The stomping part I understand.
But that calm egalitarian pool?
Oh, phooey, boys and girls.


Brown Eight Makes It a Triple Play
The Brown men's varsity won the Herschede Cup, the top prize at the National Collegiate Rowing Championships here this afternoon, and thus captured rowing's triple crown, becoming the first eight ever to accomplish that feat.
As at the two other key events of the season, the Eastern Sprints and the Intercollegiate Rowing Association regatta, the Bears broke away from their foremost rival, Pennsylvania, this time prevailing over the Quakers by 2.83 seconds.


Behind SUNY's Choice for New President
THE lengthy and open process that led to the appointment here last month of Bill Lacy as the next president of the State University of New York at Purchase caused a serious rift between nearly half the members of the presidential search committee and the College Council, the college's board of trustees, who are legally entrusted with such appointments.
At issue was not so much the council's choice of Mr.
Lacy, a former president of Cooper Union in Manhattan and the American Academy in Rome, but its dealings with the search committee itself, an advisory group representing all segments of the college.


Island's Theaters Look To a Revitalized Season
WHEN the Bay Street Theater Festival opened in Sag Harbor last July its founders knew that they wanted to "revitalize the theater experience on the Island."
Period.


Data Bank/June 13, 1993


'Menace II Society' Stakes a Claim to Bleak Turf
When two black teenagers, Caine and O-Dog, walk into a Korean grocery at the start of "Menace II Society," the store owner and his wife see a dangerous pair.
Quite possibly, the audience does, too.
O-Dog's pants are slung fashionably low, showing several inches of his boxer shorts; the boys shuffle in as if they own the place, and O-Dog opens his quart bottle of beer while walking toward the cash register.
They look and act like what they are -- members of the hip-hop generation, where attitude is everything -- but the Koreans obviously think they are about to be robbed.
It takes no time for the difference between Caine and O-Dog to become clear, though, and for viewers to realize that the violent, provocative "Menace II Society" is about seeing beyond stereotypes.
O-Dog (Larenz Tate) shoots the grocer because the man has said, "I feel sorry for your mother." Then he kills the wife.
Caine (Tyrin Turner) doesn't kill anyone until days later, and then only as revenge for his cousin's murder.
Though Caine grew up in Watts, the son of a drug-addicted mother and a drug-dealing father, he had never killed before.
"I never had a reason," he says.


In the End, Distortion Triumphed Over Lani Guinier's Writings; Seeking Compromise
To the Editor:
Lani Guinier is a fine scholar with the courage to follow an argument to the limit of its logic.
That very disposition made her an unwise choice to head the agency responsible for shaping and enforcing civil rights policy.


Streetscapes: Readers' Questions; A Park Ave. Boiler House and a Pair of Town Houses
This is another in a series of columns answering questions from readers about New York's changing streetscapes. 4-6 East 68th Street
Q.
We have an unidentified, undated photograph album showing a pair of, presumably, New York town houses for which we think Herter Brothers was the interior decorator.
Can you tell us the location and anything else about the buildings? . . .
Alice Cooney Frelinghuysen, associate curator, Department of American Decorative Arts, Metropolitan Museum of Art.


A 2d Generation Visits Fresh Air Camp
For Raheem Bowman, a 10-year-old from Manhattan, the Fresh Air Fund camping program is a family tradition.
His mother, Marie Bowman, was a Fresh Air Fund camper more than 30 years ago.
Seeing the excitement in Raheem's face during a tour of Camp Hidden Valley in Fishkill, N.Y., brought back memories of great summers for Ms.
Bowman.
"It's good to know that they are still running such good programs," she said.


Do Contests Need a Winner?
A string of performers take the stage in turn.
Each grasps at a moment in the spotlight, trying to outstrip the others in the eyes and ears of a select, slightly benumbed jury seated in the auditorium.
Each hopes, in effect, to be judged best.
Anything less than No. 1 is a defeat.
A musical competition?
Yes and no.
It could be the Ninth Van Cliburn International Piano Competition, which recently ended here.
But it could just as well be "real life": an audition for a spot in a major orchestra, perhaps.
Many argue nowadays that competitions, for all their venerable precedents, have no place in an artistic setting and should be confined to the sporting arena.
But competition has always been a fact of life in the arts as well as in the businesses surrounding them.
To suggest otherwise is naive.


To Russia, With Good Ol' American Know-How
NOT every Soviet factory was honored with a name like Krasny Proletary, or Red Proletarian, and this one, which makes sophisticated machine tools and lathes, was particularly favored: It was part of the secret ministry that made Moscow's atomic warheads.
Now, with the Soviet Union's collapse and a wrenching transition under way, Krasny Proletary is taking an unusual path from its command-economy habits to a capitalist economy in which not everyone will survive: It is hiring an American consultant, and listening to him.
The company is being watched as a model for some of the other 8,000 large Russian companies trying to negotiate their way from the centralized economy to the market; 1,500 of them had been privatized as of June 1.


Off and Running


Funeral for Furniture Store Owner Slain in Brooklyn


Gun Laws: Mood Change in the Northeast
On consecutive nights this week in Hartford and Albany, you could see the once-immovable politics of gun control shifting like tectonic plates.
Votes taken in both capitals to ban assault weapons suggested that politicians, at least in the crime-weary Northeast, sense movement in popular opinion about the always delicate relationship between the demand for public safety and the right to bear arms.


Enormous Changes at the Last Minute
Spring has come early to Warsaw this year.
Crocuses poke through the soil near Chopin's statue in Lazienki Park, and the snow has retreated to small mounds heaped with dirt in the shadows.
For me, a visitor returning to Poland after an absence of 11 years, the change is more than seasonal.
The country's transformation is noticeable even before entering, in the cursory glance given to my American passport at the spanking new Okecie airport.
Gone are the interrogations, the hassle of filling out currency forms, the peculiar overhead mirrors that enabled immigrations officials to peer down your back.


IN SHORT: FICTION
C.I.A. ADVENTURE BLUE HEARTS By Jim Lehrer. Random House, $20.


Helen Hayes Tribute
A memorial tribute to the actress Helen Hayes, who died on March 17, is to be held at 12:30 P.M. on Friday at the Shubert Theater, 225 West 44th Street, in Manhattan.
James MacArthur, Miss Hayes's son, will be the host.
Among those scheduled to participate are Barbara Cook, Douglas Fairbanks Jr., Julie Harris, Richard Kiley, Burgess Meredith, Jason Robards, Sylvia Sidney and Fritz Weaver.
Leslie Browne and Robert La Fosse of American Ballet Theater will perform a dance elegy.
Public seating will be first come first served.


JUNE 6-12: What Took So Long?; After a Cardinal's Slaying, Mexican Drug Lord Is Seized
Joaquin (El Chapo) Guzman Loera had been on a lot of lists of most-wanted drug traffickers.
But as long as he merely shipped tons of cocaine to the United States each month and bought the protection of corrupt police, the Mexican Government didn't bother him much.
When he was captured last Wednesday in Guatemala, his biggest mistake seemed to have been to arrive at the wrong airport at the wrong time.
Mr.
Guzman was said by the police to have been the target of the brothers Arellano Felix, Tijuana-based traffickers whose gunmen started a firefight that left a Roman Catholic cardinal and six other people dead in the Guadalajara airport on May 24.
The shooting horrified this predominantly Roman Catholic country.
Mexican authorities went after Mr.
Guzman with a vengeance.


No Headline
"I felt very lucky that I had a skill and I didn't have to be a burden on the government. I could just carve out my own little corner in the United States, and sew and sew until the kids here were legal and the kids I left at home didn't need me anymore." -- LEIDA FERMIN, who runs a small illegal sewing factory in Manhattan.  [ 42:1. ]


JUNE 6-12: Avenging the Peacekeepers; U.N. Troops Strike Back At a Somali Warlord Who Tested Them
Violence flared in Somalia last week, as a powerful Somali warlord tested the resolve of the United Nations and President Clinton.
In a series of ambushes in Mogadishu last Saturday, Somali gunmen killed 23 Pakistani peacekeeping troops and wounded 57 others.
The ambushes began after United Nations troops had finished a prearranged inspection of weapons storehouses belonging to Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, a Somali warlord.
But United Nations troops backed by American air power retaliated yesterday in a predawn attack on the arms depots of General Aidid, whose militia the United Nations said was behind the ambushes.
General Aidid accused the United Nations of provoking the attack.


Three Marriages, Three Worlds, Three Acts
ONCE, maybe 20 years ago, Alan Ayckbourn was commonly called the English Neil Simon.
Now that the one has surpassed the other in prolificacy (Ayckbourn: 45, Simon: 26) and sheer comic invention, the comparison is less than glib, more than fatuous and to steal a deconstruction from Shakespeare's Dogberry, completely odorous.
Besides, while Mr.
Simon, now and again, reaches for depth, or lets in the darkness, it is one of the ego, not the soul.
Such old associations are brought to mind by the Long Wharf Theater's revival of Mr.
Ayckbourn's "Absurd Person Singular," almost 19 years after the play's Broadway premiere.
True to the manner of the playwright's playful setups -- in Ayckbourn, relationships and life unravel -- the story unravels in three kitchens in three acts over three Christmases: the last one, this one and the next one.


Why Whistle-Blowers Can Seem a Little Crazy
ERNEST FITZGERALD of the Pentagon uncovered multimillion-dollar fraud and waste in the building of the C-5A cargo plane.
Walter Stewart and Ned Feder of the National Institutes of Health made careers of hunting down fraudulent lab results in N.I.H.-supported research.
Perhaps the most famous whistle-blower of all, Frank Serpico, revealed a pattern of payoffs in the New York Police Department.
Every government bureaucracy someday finds itself attacked from within by a whistle-blower and, almost inevitably, the whistle-blowers suffer for it.
Often they are punished more harshly than the wrongdoers they catch.


Frozen Out in Japan? Join the Club.
Computer chips, auto parts and rice may be the best-known markets that the Japanese protect, but they are hardly the oldest.
For a century the Japanese press, an early convert to the notion that information is power, has maintained a curious monopoly on information -- particularly access to Government officials and early looks at vital corporate data.
Both have been available chiefly to members of Japan's "press clubs," which exclude foreigners.
But last week the editors of Japan's biggest newspapers and TV networks finally relented to decades of pressure.
Foreign news organizations, they declared, "in principle" will be permitted to become full members.
The move was hailed by the exiting American Ambassador, Michael Armacost, as one of America's most important trade victories in a country where decision-making is more than a little opaque.
Indeed, far more than ideas are at stake -- money, for instance.
The Bloomberg News Service has long argued that Japanese news services and their subscribers have an unfair edge because they get first crack at corporate earnings and other market-moving information.


Rachel Vail, Mitchell Elkind
Rachel Vail, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey T. Vail of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married yesterday evening to Dr.
Mitchell S. Elkind, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Arthur Elkind, also of New Rochelle.
Rabbi Miriam Ancis officiated at the Harvard Club in New York.
Mrs.
Elkind, 26, is an author whose novels "Wonder" and "Do-Over" were published by Orchard Books.
She graduated from Georgetown University.


As Bosnia War Rages, General Warns of U.N. Pullout
As fighting raged across the country and relief convoys came under heavy fire, the top United Nations general in Bosnia and Herzegovina warned today that the United Nations would "have no option but to withdraw" its forces unless leaders of Serbs, Croats and Muslims expressed support for peace.
The commander, Gen.
Philippe Morillon of France, said fighting had intensified in central Bosnia and around the towns of Maglaj, Doboj and Brcko in complete disregard of cease-fire accords reached in April and May.


Busy Evenings in a City of Causes
Warm spring weather finds New Yorkers turning out to help the homeless, fight AIDS, recognize achievement and celebrate fine craftsmanship.


The Summer Ritual: Music Out-of-Doors
THE collaboration of musicians and the out-of-doors in Beethoven's Ninth or Bach's Brandenburgs, or even Schubert's "Trout" Quintet, can be quite glorious even when it encompasses the occasional cricket solo or thunderclap percussion.
Sometimes it even includes a seascape as backdrop or intoxicating gardens in full bloom.
And if one is truly fortunate, nature's own Klieg light, the moon, illuminates a masterpiece.
And always there is the barely audible rustle of sheet music.
Over the next few weeks a pleasant cacophany of creatures and natural phenomena will join with classical musicians in the perennial union.
And Connecticut, with its Berkshire foothills to the north and seascapes to the south, offers a variety of settings for the quintessential summer ritual.
One can board a 19th-century steamship in Mystic and revel in authentically performed Renaissance music while cruising the Sound.
Or, on a mountaintop in Falls Village just above the Appalachian Trail, a music lover can absorb string quartet music in a shed built to resonate like the interior of a violin.
Festival venues range from the intimate to the grandiose.
And while most of the settings encourage spreading a picnic on a grassy knoll or cracking a croquet ball while a brass quintet plays some buoyant preconcert selections, at the moment of truth -- the concert itself -- the music making is anything but casual.


Azerbaijan Says Armenians Are Gaining Ground in Heavy Fighting
Armenian forces from the disputed enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh in Azerbaijan attacked the western city of Agdam early today, military and civilian officials there said.
The officials said the attack occurred hours after a midnight deadline expired for the local Armenians to agree to a proposed timetable for a cease-fire.
The Armenian forces were reported to have captured several villages, and fighting was reported throughout the day.
No casualty figures were available.


'Humane' Isn't The Right Word
To the Sports Editor:
George Vecsey hints that the thoroughbred racing business "carries the fin de siecle gloom of being yesterday's sport" (The Times, June 6).
After Prairie Bayou's horrible breakdown in the Belmont Stakes, I hope his thought becomes a reality.
Too many horses are breaking down in too many races.


Miss Moncrieff, Mr. Buttrick
Lucinda Barrett Moncrieff, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest Van Dyke Moncrieff of Wickford, R.I., was married yesterday to Samuel Cox Buttrick, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stedman Buttrick of Concord, Mass.
The Rev.
Mary Carson performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church in Newport, R.I.
Mrs.
Buttrick was until recently an institutional equity sales assistant at the First Boston Corporation in New York.
Her father, now retired, was a vice president at Bowne &amp; Company, financial printers in New York.


Idol Worship


Gutter Replacement: Project for Two People
REPLACING worn-out aluminum or galvanized gutters with vinyl ones is usually a relatively easy job for two people.
Generally, the main criterion is easy access to the roof.
Vinyl gutters cost about the same as aluminum but are easier to join, require no maintenance other than cleaning and are sturdy enough to resist denting from a ladder leaning against them.


Meditations on the Epidemic
MONOPOLIES OF LOSS By Adam Mars-Jones. 250 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $21.


REBELS IN ANGOLA CALL FOR U.S. ROLE
Despite the Clinton Administration's recent diplomatic recognition of Angola's formerly Marxist Government, guerrillas in the southern African nation are urging the United States to broker a peace accord to end the civil war there.
"There is no other country, no other observer that can do it," said Fatima Roque, the shadow economic minister for the rebel organization that goes by the Portuguese acronym Unita, during a visit to Washington this week.


The Gift of a Difficult Life
ORDINARY TIME Cycles in Marriage, Faith, and Renewal.
By Nancy Mairs. 238 pp.
Boston: Beacon Press. $20.


DANCE
June
BALANCHINE CELEBRATION, New York City Ballet, New York State Theater, Lincoln Center.
Through June 27.
The final weeks of an ambitious retrospective of 73 ballets by George Balanchine, ending with "Dinner With Balanchine," a five-hour (or thereabouts) smorgasbord of dance, starring guest artists from around the world, and food, starring Balanchine's favorite recipes.
Performances through June 26 are Tuesdays through Fridays at 8 P.M.; Saturdays at 2 and 8, and Sundays at 1 and 7 P.M.; "Dinner With Balanchine" at 4 P.M.
Tickets: $9 to $55; "Dinner With Balanchine," $23 to $120.
Information: (212) 870-5570.
Charge: (212) 307-4100.
ALTOGETHER DIFFERENT, Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea.
Tomorrow through Saturday.
A festival of new works by eight small modern dance companies.
Performances are at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $15.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
P.S. 122's BIG ROOM, Irving Plaza, 17 Irving Place at 15th Street, Manhattan.
Tomorrow and Mondays through July.
Performances and partying in the vast old rock palace.
The series opens with the opening performance of the 1993 Firewall Total Arts Festival, a two-week celebration of dance, poetry and visual art in theater spaces around New York and Philadelphia.
Opening-night artists include Elliot Sharp, Laurie Carlos and Oliver Lake.
Artists performing later in the Big Room series include Blue Man Group, Penny Arcade, Dance Noise, Nuyorican Poets Live, Urban Bush Women, Reno, Charles Dennis and Sarah Skaggs.
Performances are at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10; $5 with free P.S. 122 Big Room pass, available at Performance Space 122, 150 First Avenue, at Ninth Street, East Village in advance or at Irving Plaza on the day of show.
Reservations: (212) 477-5288.
Charge: (212) 307-7171.
PILOBOLUS DANCE THEATER, Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, Chelsea.
June 21 to July 17.
Three programs by the blithe spirits who made acrobatics a dance word, including the intriguingly titled new "ReJoyce: A Pilobolus Finnegans Wake" and "Slippery Hearts." Performances are Mondays through Fridays, 8 P.M.; Saturdays, 2 and 8 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
RUSSIAN FESTIVAL, World Financial Center, 200 Liberty Street, on the Hudson River, lower Manhattan.
June 29 to Oct. 31.
Poetry readings, art exhibitions and dance, including ballet and folk dance.
Free.
Information: (212) 945-0505.
AMERICAN TAP DANCE ORCHESTRA, Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, Manhattan.
June 30.
"American Landscape," a tap celebration of the music of Hoagy Carmichael, choreographed and performed by Brenda Bufalino and company members.
Performance is at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $18.
Gala tickets: $35; $75 includes post-performance reception.
Information: (212) 840-2824.
Charge: (212) 307-7171.
July
DANCES FOR WAVE HILL, 249th Street and Independence Avenue, Riverdale, the Bronx.
Dance leaps, dashes and rolls out over this sprawling green environmental center.
Choreography by Reggie Wilson, Muna Tseng and Irene Hultman (July 14 and 17); Sham Mosher, Joanna Mendl Shaw and Steve Krieckhaus (July 21 and 24); Sara Pearson, Sham Mosher (July 28 and 31).
Performances are 6:30 P.M. on Wednesdays; 3 P.M. on Saturdays.
Free on Wednesdays.
Admission on Saturdays: $4; $2 for the elderly and students; children free.
Information: (212) 989-6996.
ELIZABETH STREB/RINGSIDE, Brooklyn Bridge Anchorage, at the foot of the bridge, Cadman Plaza West and Old Front Street.
Ms.
Streb's "Lookup" will not formally open until Sept. 17, but from July 14 to Sept. 4, rehearsals of this wall-climbing piece will be open to the public on Wednesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays from 1 to 4 P.M., with a preview on July 28 from 6 to 8 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 989-6830.
DANCING IN THE STREETS.
Joanna Haigood performs in "Cho-Mu/Butterfly Dreams," West Side Highway at 59th Street, Manhattan.
July 29 and 30.
A collaborative installation and performance piece created with Reiko Goto and the Zaccho Dance Theater, all of San Francisco, with the audience moving through seven sculptures. 6:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 989-6830.
SERIOUS FUN, Alice Tully Hall, Lincoln Center.
July 8 through 30.
The festival goes truly downtown this year, with new work by 11 performance artists and groups including Culture Clash, Pomo Afro Homos, Lisa Kron and Emergency Broadcast Network, as well as a new electro-acoustic monodrama from Diamanda Galas and a Megadance ode to comic wit that includes the haunting Lucinda Childs classic "Carnation." There will also be dance from Susan Marshall and yet another go at "The Rite of Spring," this time by Marie Chouinard.
Performances are at 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20 to $30; $85 for a five-performance subscription.
Information: (212) 875-5050.
Charge: (212) 721-6500.
August
LINCOLN CENTER OUT OF DOORS, in Lincoln Center's parks, plazas and open spaces.
Aug. 8 to 24.
New this year are two series: Playdays, featuring performances and participatory events for families, and a tribute to Philadelphia, featuring Philadanco and Steve Krieckhaus.
The festival opens with the Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company and includes dance on social issues by Marlies Yearby and Amy Pivar, Montreal Dans in Canadian Butoh dancing, aboriginal dance from Taiwan, and dance from Brazil, Israel, the Ukraine, India and Cambodia.
Free.
Information: (212) 875-5400.


World Cup Ticket Sale
The scramble for World Cup 1994 tickets begins anew today.
Organizers of the 52-game soccer tournament, which is being held in the United States for the first time next summer, are offering 300,000 tickets to the 44 games in the first round, when all 24 teams are competing, and the round-of-16 that follows.


Miss McGibbon, Dr. Maccaro
Elizabeth McGibbon, a registered nurse at North Shore University Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhassett, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Paul C. Maccaro, a chief resident in the department of medicine there.
The Rev.
Jose R. Aldegunde performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of the Incarnation in Queens Village, Queens.


Rum's Punch
Here was a time many years ago in Havana when any young man of station -- a hidalgo -- was given a barrel of rum when he was born.
The rum was stored for him in the cellars of Bacardi or some other prominent distiller.
Each year, on his birthday, he received another barrel, until he reached 21, when the first barrel was bottled for him.
Every year thereafter, one cask was added and one was bottled.
That way, a gentleman always had his own 21-year-old rum at hand.


Restoration at Glen Island
IN 1875, the 100-acre island off New Rochelle now run by the county and known as Glen Island Park was a privately owned amusement park.
Now one large expanse of land, it then consisted of five islands that could only be reached by boat; each one had a different international theme.
One of the most popular was set up as a German beer garden, complete with Bavarian-style stone structures built to resemble castles.
Today, two 30-foot-high stone turrets are all that remain of the old amusement park.
One is used to store sculls and oars used by Iona College rowing teams; another is roped off because of the danger of falling rocks.


No Excuses, No Solace As Big Names Stumble
Curtis Strange, Paul Azinger and Seve Ballesteros head into next week's United States Open under less than ideal circumstances after their showing at this week's Buick Classic.
These three, along with several other prominent players on the PGA Tour like John Daly, performed miserably in this week's tournament at the Westchester Country Club and missed the cut.


The Globe's Own Family Is a Story Unto Itself
WHEN she was a young reporter at The Boston Globe two decades ago, Susan Trausch remembers, a very excited John I. Taylor, president of the family company that had owned the paper since 1872, came up to her as she was preparing to do a routine story on the local gas company.
"Are you," he asked with apparent envy, "going to ride on the gas truck?"


Correction
A picture caption on May 16 with an article about changes in zoning for parking facilities in Philadelphia misidentified the garage at Seventh and Market Streets.
It is the Square Industries Garage.


Restoring a Battlefield to the Time of George Washington
STANDING at the Visitor Center of Monmouth Battlefield State Park, looking over the gently rolling hillsides, you might find it hard to imagine that hundreds of men died here, amid clouds of cannon smoke and gunpowder, in suffocating midsummer heat.
But it was on this site in June 1778 that American troops under Gen.
George Washington caught up with a British force commanded by Gen.
Henry Clinton, who was leading his men from Philadelphia to Sandy Hook, where boats would carry them to New York City.


Emigres in New York: Work Off the Books
Leida Fermin wanted at least a modest version of the American dream.
She had not left behind her family in the Dominican Republic to go on welfare or to work forever, for a pittance, in a basement tailor shop.
So last year, she lugged four used sewing machines and endless yards of pink taffeta into her Manhattan apartment, creating a tiny, illegal factory to make ruffled party dresses for little girls.
"I am using my talents to support my family decently, in the only way I know how," said Ms.
Fermin, 52, a legal Dominican immigrant.
"It is only basic survival, really. I mean, what options do I have?"


A Look Behind the Grille of a Frosty Blast
ONE rarely sees beauty being assembled, for beauty must often grow into itself over time.
But what comes off a production line in Greenvale, L.I., is a hulking piece of undeniably pleasing pulchritude, an aggregate of wiring, condenser, insulation, fans, motors, sheet metal, Freon and evaporator.
All hail Climate Command II, an air-conditioner made by the Slant/Fin Corporation.


Budget-Makers Try to Soften Election-Year Blow
Faced with a difficult fiscal squeeze, Mayor David N. Dinkins and the leadership of the City Council have fashioned a recession election-year budget planned so that most New Yorkers will not notice it over the next few months.
Those next few months, of course, are an important political season in the city.
Both the Mayor and the Council members hope that the spending cuts are gentle enough and the stabilization of taxes reassuring enough to most New Yorkers that the city's fiscal straits will not be on their minds come Election Day.
This is not a buoyant budget, but it is one they can run on.


Welfare Mothers Have a Big Job to Do Raising Their Children
To the Editor:
"Clinton Idea Used to Limit Welfare" (news article, June 2) reports on the dilemma of the Clinton Administration on welfare reform.
You report that states are beginning to create regulations under which women will lose benefits after two years as recipients of Aid to Dependent Children, but without the day care, training and supportive services specified by President Clinton (and David T. Ellwood, his nominee for Assistant Secretary of Health and Human Services for planning and evaluation) as a condition for "ending welfare as we know it."


Majmudars Turn Cup Into Family Affair
The resemblance emerges on the court and off it.
Gina and Kunj Majmudar not only bear similar features as brother and sister, they both have powerful forehands and error-free games that have dominated their opponents in the New York City Mayor's Cup All Scholastic tournament at the U.S.T.A.
National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows, Queens.
This is Gina's fourth Mayor's Cup at the varsity level, and her third chance to defend her championship title.
She first won the tournament in 1990 as a freshman at New Dorp High School in Staten Island.
She says it was her most difficult final ever; she beat her sister, Mona, then a senior.


Kitty Weyl, Robert Dove
Nancy Katherine Weyl, a senior public affairs manager for the United States Chamber of Commerce in New York, was married yesterday to Robert Wallace Dove, a managing director in New York for UBS Securities, an investment bank.
The Rev.
Campbell Gillon performed the Presbyterian ceremony at Fox Folly Farm in Lincoln, Va., the weekend home of the bride's mother.
Mrs.
Dove, 35, is known as Kitty.
She graduated from Colby College.
She is the daughter of Nancy S. Weyl of McLean, Va., and the late Dr.
W.
Leonard Weyl.
Her father was the chief of surgery at Northern Virginia Doctors Hospital in Arlington.
Her mother is a novelist and a painter.


Facing the Problem Of County Gangs
THE jagged scar begins three inches above Luis Cruz's left ear, clearly visible through his closely cropped haircut, and continues down to the middle of his neck.
"It's a long story," the 21-year-old said.
"We were young and thickheaded then."
It started with a squabble at school over a girl, continued with retaliatory skirmishes between two rival youth groups and exploded one night two years ago on a street corner on this city's west side, a crowded jumble of housing projects, apartment buildings and modest one- and two-family houses.


ATTRACTIONS
Here is a sampling of attractions, some featuring special summer activities, in New York City.
Times and dates are subject to change.
Museums and Historic Sites
ABIGAIL ADAMS SMITH MUSEUM, 421 East 61st Street, Manhattan.
A landmark house dating from 1799 and featuring rooms furnished in the Federal and Empire styles of the early 19th century.
Open Monday through Friday, noon to 4 P.M.; Tuesdays, 5:30 to 8 P.M.; closed Saturdays, Sundays and in August.
Admission: $3, $2 for students and the elderly; free for children under 13.
Lectures, $5.
Information: (212) 838-6878.
ALICE AUSTEN HOUSE, 2 Hylan Boulevard, Rosebank, S.I.
An 18th-century farmhouse, converted in the 19th century to a Victorian cottage, which was the home of the photographer Alice Austen.
On view are period furniture and "A Century Apart," a collection of photographs of Staten Island buildings by Austen and Lisa Clifford.
Special events include: July 18, poetry readings with the Staten Island Poetry Society, 3 P.M.; Aug. 1, Nautical Festival, including music, storytelling and dramatic recitation, 1 to 4 P.M.
Hours: Thursday through Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $2.
Information: (718) 816-4506.
AMERICAN CRAFT MUSEUM, 40 West 53d Street, Manhattan.
On exhibition through July 4, with related lectures by the participating artists, is a series of site-specific "Glass Installations," including works by Michael Aschenbrenner, Bruce Chao, William Morris, Mary Shaffer, Carmen Spera and Steve Tobin; through July 4, "60's Ceramics," an exhibit of ceramic sculpture and vessel forms.
July 15 through Oct. 10: "Edible Drawings by John Cage: Experiments in Handmade Paper"; "Gertrud and Otto Natzler: Collaboration/Solitude," the first museum retrospective of work by these ceramists in 20 years; July 15 through Sept. 5: "Paul Soldner: A Retrospective," work by a central figure in the development of ceramic art.
Hours: Wednesday through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Tuesdays, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Admission: $4.50; students and the elderly, $2; children under 12, free.
Information: (212) 956-3535.
AMERICAN MUSEUM OF THE MOVING IMAGE, 35th Avenue at 36th Street, Astoria, Queens.
On permanent display are items relating to film, television and video, like costumes, sets and filming equipment.
On exhibition through August is "Changing Faces," more than 450 photographs and artifacts that examine the work of hair stylists and makeup artists.
Through July 4: "What Made Pistachio Nuts? Early Sound Comedy and the Vaudeville Tradition," featuring the films of Eddie Cantor, the Marx Brothers, Wheeler and Woolsey, W. C. Fields, Burns and Allen and others.
July 10 through Aug. 1: "All in the Family: The Classic Melodramas of John Stahl and Douglas Sirk," movies by Hollywood's masters of the family melodrama.
Aug. 6 through Sept. 5: "Gossamer Garbage: A George Kuchar Film and Video Retrospective," poverty-row classics by a master of underground film and video.
Hours: Tuesday through Friday, noon to 4 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays, noon to 6 P.M.
Admission: $5; elderly, $4; students and children under 12, $2.50; children under 4, free.
Plus $2 for screenings.
Information: (718) 784-0077.
AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY, Central Park West at 79th Street.
"Barosaurus," a permanent display, features a free-standing dinosaur more than 40 feet high.
Museum hours: Sunday through Thursday, 10 A.M. to 5:45 P.M.; Fridays and Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 8:45 P.M.
Admission: $5; $2.50 for those under 12.
Information: (212) 769-5100.
AMERICAN NUMISMATIC SOCIETY, Broadway at 155th Street, Washington Heights.
The most extensive coin collection in North America.
Continuing exhibits include "American Numismatic Design, 1892-1922," with all coins and medals issued during this period, and "The World of Coins," exploring the roles of ancient, medieval and modern coins.
Hours: Tuesday through Saturday, 9 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Sundays, 1 to 4 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 234-3130.
ASIA SOCIETY, 725 Park Avenue, at 70th Street.
On display through Aug. 15: "Gods, Guardians and Lovers: Temple Sculptures from North India, A.D. 700-1200."; through Aug. 13: "The Silk Road Video Series," Fridays at 6:30 P.M.
Museum hours: Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; to 8 P.M. on Fridays; Sundays, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $2; students and the elderly, $1; free on Fridays from 6 to 8 P.M.
Information: (212) 517-6397.
BARTOW-PELL MANSION, 895 Shore Road North, Pelham Bay Park, the Bronx.
A museum on a nine-acre site overlooking Long Island Sound with examples of fine and decorative arts from the 19th century.
Special events include a 2 P.M. concert on June 20, "Music at the Mansion" with the City Island Chamber Ensemble; tickets: $5.
Hours: Wednesdays, Saturdays and Sundays, noon to 4 P.M.
Museum admission: $2.50; students and the elderly, $1.25; children under 12, free.
Information: (212) 885-1461.
BROOKLYN'S HISTORY MUSEUM, 128 Pierrepont Street, Brooklyn Heights.
On permanent display are photographs, paintings, drawings and memorabilia relating to Brooklyn.
On display through 1993 is "AIDS/Brooklyn," a collection of photographs, taped interviews and personal belongings of Brooklyn residents with AIDS.
On June 17, "Video Conversations: AIDS, Women and Injection Drug Use," a workshop in conjunction with the exhibition, 6:30 P.M.; $3 (includes museum admission); Aug. 7, "Gallery Adventures: Bats, Hats and Stats," a day for Dodgers fans, 1 to 4 P.M.; $3 (includes museum admission).
Hours: Tuesday through Saturday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $2.50; the elderly and children under 12, $1; free on Wednesdays.
Information: (718) 624-0890.
CARNEGIE HALL.
Seventh Avenue at 57th Street.
On permanent display is "100 Years at Carnegie Hall," an exhibition of photographs, letters, newspaper articles and other memorabilia, including an autographed program from the Beatles' Carnegie Hall debut in 1964, Arturo Toscanini's baton and Benny Goodman's clarinet.
Open daily, 11 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; closed holidays.
Free.
Information: (212) 903-9629.
Through July, tours of Carnegie Hall are offered every Monday, Tuesday and Thursday, at 11:30 A.M., 2 and 3 P.M.
Admission: $6; $5 for students; $3 for children under 12.
Tickets available at tour ticket window in lobby on tour days.
Information: (212) 903-9790.
CHINATOWN HISTORY MUSEUM, 70 Mulberry Street, Chinatown.
On permanent display is "Remembering New York Chinatown," a collection of oral histories, photographs and other artifacts.
Through October: two photography displays, "The People of Chinatown" by Nina Kuo and "From Canton to New York: The Broken Tradition" by Leh-Chyun Lin.
Open Sunday through Friday, noon to 5 P.M.; closed holidays.
Admission: $1; children under 12, free.
Information: (212) 619-4785.
THE CLOISTERS, Margaret Corbin Drive, Fort Tryon Park, Washington Heights.
A branch of the Metropolitan Museum of Art with medieval art and architecture, including sculpture, tapestries, manuscripts and crafts.
All lectures are at noon and 2 P.M. and are free with museum admission: $6; students and the elderly, $3; children under 12 free accompanied by an adult.
Information: (212) 923-3700.
CONEY ISLAND, Astroland Amusement Park, 1000 Surf Avenue, Brooklyn.
Open today, noon to midnight.
Starting Saturday, open daily, noon to midnight.
Rides are $1.50 to $3; a pay-one-price admission of $12.99 allows unlimited access to the major rides in scheduled sessions.
Information: (718) 265-2100.
DYCKMAN HOUSE, 4881 Broadway, at 204th Street, Inwood.
The last 18th-century Dutch Colonial farmhouse in Manhattan, with period rooms and antiques.
Open Tuesday through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Suggested admission: $1.
Information: (212) 304-9422.
ELLIS ISLAND IMMIGRATION MUSEUM.
Photographs, artifacts and displays document immigration to the United States from 1892 to 1924.
Circle Line ferries to Ellis Island leave Battery Park in lower Manhattan starting at 9:15 A.M. and then every 30 minutes from 9:30 A.M. to 3:30 P.M. daily; boats also leave Liberty State Park in Jersey City every 45 minutes from 9:15 A.M. to 3:30 P.M. daily.
All ferries stop at Liberty Island.
Round-trip fare: $6; $5 for the elderly, $3 for ages 3 to 17; children under 3 free.
Admission to the island and museum is free.
Information: (212) 269-5755 or (201) 435-9499.
EMPIRE STATE BUILDING OBSERVATORY, Fifth Avenue at 34th Street.
Views of the metropolitan region from more than 1,000 feet above street level.
The observatory is open daily from 9:30 A.M. to midnight.
Admission: $3.50; $1.75 for the elderly and children 5 to 12; children under 5 free.
Information: (212) 736-3100.
FIRE MUSEUM, 278 Spring Street, South Village.
The museum's offerings, which date from the mid-18th century to the present, are among the most comprehensive collections of fire-related art and artifacts in the United States.
Hours: Tuesday through Saturday, 10 to 4 P.M.
Admission: $3; 50 cents for children.
Information: (212) 691-1303.
FEDERAL HALL NATIONAL MEMORIAL, 26 Wall Street, lower Manhattan.
The site of George Washington's inauguration and the drafting of the Bill of Rights.
The railing from the nation's first Capitol building, which stood on this site until it was demolished in 1812, is on view, along with the suit that Washington wore to his inauguration.
Open Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 264-8701.
GARIBALDI-MEUCCI MUSEUM, 420 Tompkins Avenue, at Chestnut Avenue, Rosebank, S.I.
The museum houses memorabilia of the Italian patriot Giuseppe Garibaldi and of the Italian-American inventor Antonio Meucci, who some believe experimented with the telephone before Alexander Graham Bell received his patent.
Hours: Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Weekends, 1 to 5 P.M.; closed holidays.
Free.
Information: (718) 442-1608.
GENERAL GRANT NATIONAL MEMORIAL, Riverside Drive at 122d Street, Morningside Heights.
The classical-domed tomb overlooking the Hudson River holds the sarcophagi of Ulysses S. Grant and his wife, Julia.
The site includes exhibitions about Grant's military and political careers and material on the Civil War.
Hours: Wednesday through Sunday; 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.; open on Federal holidays.
Free.
Information: (212) 666-1640.
HARBOR DEFENSE MUSEUM, Fort Hamilton, Brooklyn.
The museum, in an 1825 fort, displays uniforms, weapons and artillery pieces from all American wars.
The Persian Gulf war display includes rifles, uniforms and a Russian-made antiaircraft gun captured in Kuwait.
Hours: Monday through Friday, 1 to 4 P.M.; closed holidays except Memorial Day and July 4.
Free.
Information: (718) 630-4349.
HAYDEN PLANETARIUM, American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West at 81st Street.
June 20-28: "Bold Voyages . . . Distant Shores," a sky show exploring the celestial knowledge of the Mayans, Aztecs, Incas and Anasazi.
Monday through Friday at 1:30 and 3:30 P.M., Saturdays at 11 A.M. and hourly from 1 to 5 P.M., and Sundays hourly from 1 to 5 P.M.; June 19 and 26: "Teddy's Quest," the story of a teddy bear who was born in space.
Saturday at 11 A.M.; Daily, beginning July 1: "Orion Rendezvous: A Star Trek Voyage of Discovery," in which the actor LeVar Burton joins the "Star Trek" crew.
Monday through Friday at 1:30 and 3:30 P.M., Saturday and Sunday hourly from 1 to 4 P.M.; "Laser Drive 3-D," a laser show with animation and pop music, is presented Fridays and Saturdays at 7, 8:30 and 10 P.M.
Admission: $8.50.
Planetarium admission: $5; students and the elderly, $4; children 2 through 12, $2.50.
Information: (212) 769-5921.
HISPANIC SOCIETY OF AMERICA, Broadway at 155th Street, Washington Heights.
A museum dedicated to Hispanic culture with fine and decorative arts of the Iberian Peninsula from prehistory to the present.
Hours: Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; Sundays, 1 to 4 P.M.; closed holidays.
Free.
Information: (212) 926-2234.
I.B.M.
GALLERY OF SCIENCE AND ART, 590 Madison Avenue, at 56th Street.
Through June 26: "Two Lives: Georgia O'Keeffe and Alfred Stieglitz," 50 paintings and 50 photographs by the couple, who were artistic collaborators as well as husband and wife.
Through Sept. 11: "20th-Century Works from the University of Iowa Museum of Art," including works by Phillip Guston, Max Beckmann, Grant Wood and Miriam Shapiro.
Hours: Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 745-3500.
INTREPID SEA-AIR-SPACE MUSEUM, Pier 86, 46th Street and 12th Avenue, at the Hudson River.
This converted World War II aircraft carrier features an A-12 Blackbird, the world's fastest plane, and a 1936 lightship, No. 112 Nantucket.
Also on view are items from the Persian Gulf war, including Patriot missiles, an A-6 bomber and Scud missile wreckage.
Through Sept. 6: "Seafest '93" lets visitors board police boats, fire boats, tugboats, antique sailing ships and lightships docked at a 330-foot barge.
Hours: Wednesday through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; closed holidays.
Museum admission: $7; $6 for the elderly; $4 for children 6 to 12; children under 6, free). Information: (212) 245-0072.
MUSEUM OF TELEVISION AND RADIO, 25 West 52d Street.
A collection of historic radio and television broadcasts, as well as exhibitions of other media, including drawings, posters and photographs.
Through July 3: "Words and Images: The Writer on Radio and Television," 48 radio and television programs that explore the role of authors and literature.
Through Oct. 3: "Star Trek: The Next Generation," a screening series along with gallery displays, including the Emmy Award-winning costumes and masks.
Hours: Tuesday through Sunday, noon to 6 P.M.; until 8 P.M. on Thursday.
Admission: $5; students, $4; the elderly and children under 13, $3.
Information: (212) 621-6800.
MUSEUM OF THE CITY OF NEW YORK, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street.
Through 1993: "Broadway: 125 Years of Musical Theater," an exhibition of costumes, set designs, models, posters, programs and photographs dating from "The Black Crook" of 1886 to the present.
Through Sept. 19: "Welcome to Your Second Home: Ethnic Social Clubs in New York" and "Shared Perspectives: The Printmaker and Photographer in New York, 1900-1950." Hours: Wednesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sundays, 1 to 5 P.M.
Admission: $5; $3 for students, the elderly and children; $8 for families.
Information: (212) 534-1672.
NATIONAL MUSEUM OF THE AMERICAN INDIAN, Broadway at 155th Street, Washington Heights.
One of the world's largest collection of artifacts relating to the American Indian.
Hours: Tuesday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sundays, 1 to 5 P.M.
Admission: $3; students and the elderly, $2; children under 7 free.
Information: (212) 283-2420.
NELLIE BLY AMUSEMENT PARK, 1824 Shore Parkway, off the Belt Parkway, Bensonhurst, Brooklyn.
Special events include: June 13, a "Baby Parade"; June 19, "Boy Scout Day"; June 20, "The Amazing Mr. E," comedy and magic.
Hours: Tuesdays and Thursdays, 11 A.M. to midnight; Mondays, Wednesdays and Friday through Sunday, noon to midnight.
Rides cost $1.25 to $1.50.
Information: (718) 996-4002.
NEW YORK HALL OF SCIENCE, 47-01 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
July 3 through Sept. 5: "Science of Sports," a special exhibition exploring the science involved in Americas favorite pastimes.
Admission: $3.50; $2.50 for the elderly and those under 18.
Information: (718) 699-0005.
NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY, Fifth Avenue and 42d Street.
June 26 through Aug. 21: "Flora Photographica: The Flower in Photography 1835 to the Present," a major exhibition of flower photography.
Through Aug. 28: "A Change of Clothes: Femininity, Fashion and Feminism," photographs, fashion plates, illustrations and advertisements reflecting changes in women's status.
Through Sept. 25: "Dandies and Doughties: Writers in Britain, 1890-1900," manuscripts, first editions, original drawings and photographs documenting the work of Wilde, Yeats, Shaw and Conrad.
Hours: Tuesdays and Wednesdays, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Thursday through Saturday, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 869-8089.
NEW YORK PUBLIC LIBRARY FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS, 40 Lincoln Center Plaza, at 65th Street.
On display through June 18: "In Perilous Times: Dancers of Germany and Austria, 1930 to 1945," photographs and pamphlets documenting the works of dancers and choreographers during the Nazi period.
Hours: Monday and Thursday, noon to 8 P.M.; Wednesday, Friday and Saturday, noon to 6 P.M.; Free.
Information: (212) 870-1630.
NEW YORK STOCK EXCHANGE, 20 Broad Street, lower Manhattan.
The stocks-and-bonds trade is explained through exhibitions, a film and a self-guided tour of the Stock Exchange Visitor's Center.
Hours: Monday through Friday, 9:15 A.M. to 4 P.M.; closed holidays.
Free.
Tickets are distributed beginning at 9 A.M.
Information: (212) 656-5167.
NEW YORK TRANSIT MUSEUM, Boerum Place at Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn Heights.
The museum, in a 1930's subway station, has 18 vintage subway and elevated cars, antique turnstiles and a working signal tower.
Hours: Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Admission: $3; $1.50 for children under 17 and the elderly.
Information: (718) 330-3060.
QUEENS MUSEUM OF ART, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
On permanent exhibition is the Panorama of New York City, a large architectural scale model of the five boroughs, covering 9,335 square feet and including more than 865,000 miniature buildings.
Completed in 1964, it is billed as the world's largest scale model.
Through Aug. 31 "Keith Haring," eight drawings, one sculpture and a 60-foot mural by the artist.
Through July 4: "Barbara Ess, 1981-1991," more than 24 large-format photo prints and three installations.
Lecture information: (718) 592-9700.
Hours: Tuesday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission: $3; $1.50 for students and the elderly.
Information: (718) 592-5555.
RICHMONDTOWN RESTORATION, Staten Island Historical Society, 441 Clarke Avenue, Richmondtown.
A village and outdoor museum characterizing three centuries of Staten Island history and culture.
Hours: Wednesday through Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.; closed holidays.
Admission: $4; $2.50 for the elderly and children 6 to 18; children under 6 free.
Information: (718) 351-1611.
ROCKEFELLER CENTER, 30 Rockefeller Plaza.
Hourlong tours of the NBC Television studios.
Daily, every 15 minutes from 9:30 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.; closed holidays.
Tickets: $8.
Information: (212) 664-4000.
SCHOMBURG CENTER FOR RESEARCH IN BLACK CULTURE, 515 Lenox Avenue, at 135th Street, Harlem.
The center's holdings include audio tapes of W. E. B. Du Bois and Booker T. Washington, the original manuscript of Richard Wright's novel "Native Son," and thousands of other documents, paintings and photographs.
Through Aug. 13, "Fort Mose: Colonial America's Black Fortress of Freedom," a traveling exhibition about America's first legally sanctioned black community.
Hours: Mondays, Tuesdays, Wednesdays 12 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Fridays and Saturdays 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Thursdays, Sundays and holidays.
Free.
Information: (212) 491-2200.
SOUTH STREET SEAPORT MUSEUM AND MARKETPLACE, 14 Fulton Street, lower Manhattan.
This 19th-century port district has a large fleet of historic vessels as well as an array of restaurants, shops and bars.
Through July 18: "A Mariner's Fancy: The Whaleman's Art of Scrimshaw," 19th-century carvings and etchings on bone and tusk.
Through Labor Day: "The Original Cash Machines," a collection of mechanical banks from 1865 to 1915.
Museum hours: Weekdays 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Weekends 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed holidays.
Museum admission: $6; $5 for the elderly, $4 for students, $3 for children under 12.
Information: (212) 669-9400 for the museum; (212) 732-7678 for the marketplace.
STATEN ISLAND INSTITUTE OF ARTS AND SCIENCES, 75 Stuyvesant Place, St.
George.
Cultural museum and library with artistic, scientific and environmental collections.
Through Aug. 1: photo-enlargements and scale models documenting the history of Staten Island's coexistence with the water.
Through Aug. 29: "Lizards' Tales: Reptiles and Amphibians of Staten Island," featuring live lizards.
Hours: Monday through Saturday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sundays, 1 to 5 P.M.
Admission: $2.50; $1.50 for students and the elderly.
Information: (718) 727-1135.
STATUE OF LIBERTY, on Liberty Island.
Visitors can climb stairs to the statue's crown daily, from 9 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Circle Line ferries to Liberty Island leave Battery Park in lower Manhattan every 45 minutes from 9:30 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.; ferries also leave from Liberty State Park in Jersey City every 45 minutes from 9:15 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.
All ferries returning from Liberty Island stop at Ellis Island.
Round-trip fare is $6; $5 for the elderly; $3 for children 3 to 17 years old; children under 3 free.
Admission to Liberty Island is free.
Closed Christmas Day.
Information: (212) 269-5755 or (201) 435-9499.
THEODORE ROOSEVELT BIRTHPLACE, 28 East 20th Street, Manhattan.
Exhibitions, artifacts and memorabilia about the only United States President born in New York City.
Hours: Wednesday through Sunday, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M.; open holidays.
Admission: $2; children and the elderly free.
Information: (212) 260-1616.
UNITED NATIONS HEADQUARTERS, entrance at First Avenue and 46th Street, Turtle Bay.
Hourlong tours with visits to the Security Council and the General Assembly leave every 15 minutes from the main lobby.
Tours cost $6.50; $4.50 for the elderly and students, $3.50 for children aged 5 to 15.
Children under 5 not permitted on tour.
Groups of 15 or more require reservations.
Information: (212) 963-7758.
Zoos
BRONX ZOO, 185th Street and Southern Boulevard, the Bronx.
A vast array of animals in both indoor and outdoor habitats; special areas include Jungle World, Wild Asia, Lion Island, the World of Birds, the Great Apes, the Giraffe Building and the Children's Zoo.
Wild Asia features a monorail ride through 40 acres ($1.50).
Camel rides are $2.
Saturday and next Sunday, "Wildlife Babies Celebration" lets visitors meet the youngest members of the mammal, bird and reptile collections and help build a giant giraffe; 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
The zoo also offers adult and children's education programs.
Information: (718) 220-6854.
Hours: Monday through Friday, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays, 10 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Admission: $5.75; $2 for the elderly and children 2 to 12; children under 2 free.
Information: (212) 367-1010.
CENTRAL PARK ZOO, entrance from Fifth Avenue and 64th Street.
Two pairs of golden-headed lion tamarins and an endangered species of monkey from Brazil are in residence, along with polar bears, colobus monkeys, gentoo penguins and red pandas.
Special events include "Jazz in June," outdoor concerts this Tuesday, June 22 and June 29.
Jazz tickets are $12 in advance and are available through Ticketmaster, (212) 307-7171, or the Zoo Gift Shop, or may be purchased at the door for $15.
Also: July 24 and 25, "Chill Out With the Polar Bears and the Penguins," ice carving demonstrations, crafts and contests, free with museum admission.
Numerous nature classes for children or families are given on weekends.
Schedule and reservations: (212) 439-6538.
Hours: daily, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M., weekends and holidays, 10:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Admission: $2.50; $1.25 for the elderly; 50 cents for children 3 to 12; 2 and under free.
Information: (212) 861-6030.
NEW YORK AQUARIUM, West Eighth Street and the Boardwalk, Coney Island, Brooklyn.
New Sea Cliffs exhibition featuring penguins, seals, walruses and sea otters.
Special events include: July 10 and 11, "Wonderful Walrus Weekend," special behavioral demonstrations, craft activities and live entertainment from 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.; Aug. 7 through 15, "Baby Beluga Birthday Bash," celebrates the second birthday of Hudson and Casey with live entertainment and puppet making.
Special events are free with museum admission.
Hours: Weekdays, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Weekends 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Admission: $5.75; $2 for the elderly and children 2 to 12; under 2 free.
Information: (718) 265-3474.
QUEENS ZOO, 53-51 111th Street, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
Special events include: July 10 and 11, "Coyotes," an exploration of the world of coyotes, from 10 to 11:30 A.M.; for ages 7 through 10 on Saturday and 4 through 6 (accompanied by an adult) on Sunday.
Nature classes for children are given weekends from 10 to 11:30 A.M., reservations required: (718) 271-7045.
Hours: daily, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; until 5:30 on weekends and holidays.
Admission: $2.50; $1.25 for the elderly; 50 cents for children 3 to 12; under 3 free.
Information: (718) 271-7761.
STATEN ISLAND ZOOLOGICAL SOCIETY, 614 Broadway, West Brighton.
Among the highlights are a serpentarium with turtles and a large collection of North American rattlesnakes.
Hours: daily, 10 A.M. to 4:45 P.M.
Admission: $3; $2 for children 3 to 11; 2 and under free.
On Wednesdays after 2 P.M., admission is free.
Information: (718) 442-3100.


Embargo on Children
To the Editor:
Representative Charles Rangel is right on the mark with his new bill to end our embargo on medicines and food for Cuba.


Andrew Gurley Jr. and Allison Kahler
Allison Leslie Kahler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert G. Kahler of Timonium, Md., was married yesterday to Andrew Fenn Gurley Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gurley of Irvington, N.Y.
The Rev.
Dr.
George Gray Toole performed the ceremony at the Towson (Md.) Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Gurley, 29, is a production merchandiser at the Berkley Shirt Company in New York.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology and the University of Maryland.
Her father is a human-resources counselor at the Baltimore Medical System Inc., a health-care company in Baltimore.
Her mother, Zedith Kahler, owns Flowers by Penny Lane in Reisterstown, Md.


Results Plus
TENNIS Stich to Face Doubles Partner in Final Wayne Ferreira, the defending champion, toppled Todd Martin, 6-7 (2-7), 6-3, 7-5, in the semifinals of the Queen's Club grass court tournament yesterday in London to set up a showdown with his doubles partner, Michael Stich.
Stich saved four match points before beating the Australian Jamie Morgan, 5-7, 6-4, 8-6.
Stich struggled for 2 hours 8 minutes to beat the 83d-ranked Morgan, an upset winner over Stefan Edberg on Friday in another three-set battle.
Ferreira had problems handling Martin's consistent serve until midway through the match.
He also was overpowered in the first-set tie breaker as the American moved smoothly into a 5-1 lead.
The South African pounced on Martin's errors to tie the match by winning the second set and broke for a 6-5 lead in the third with rain starting to fall.
He clinched a place in the final of the Stella Artois championship when Martin netted a service return. (AP)


Mary Beth Jordan And Don Morris
Mary Beth Jordan, the deputy editor of Child magazine in New York, was married yesterday to Don Morris, a graphic designer, also in New York.
The Rev.
John Quinn performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Chapel of the Divine Compassion at the Good Counsel Convent in White Plains.
Ms.
Jordan is keeping her name.
She graduated from Brown University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Jordan Jr. of White Plains.
Her father is the chairman of Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor Inc., an advertising agency in New York.


THE DEATH OF EROS
For an intellectual, the late Allan Bloom sure knew how to work a crowd.
"The Death of Eros" (May 23) provides a jolly abundance of mordant swipes at feminists, p.c. types and other modern bogeymen. (Or should we say bogeypersons?)
But once they get past the Rush-Limbaugh-for-eggheads bits, who among even the most doctrinaire right-wingers will agree with him that sex has been rendered "boring" by the idea that "you've got a right to do anything in the privacy of your own bedroom"?
Or that "eros requires speech, and beautiful speech, to communicate to its partner what it feels and wants" (which would seem to eliminate all, save poets and classical scholars, from even the possibility of erotic fulfillment)?


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Alpha  $126,800
745 Pursel Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 56-year-old ranch; covered back porch, move-in condition, full basement; taxes $2,664.
Colonia  $160,000
37 North Lincoln Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 37-year-old split level; new roof and water heater, parquet floors, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,411.
Greenwich Township  $158,000
129 Warren Street  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 6-year-old bi-level; 2 acres plus, c/a; taxes $2,769.
Iselin  $83,000
207 Woodbridge Commons  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 10-year-old condominium apartment; c/a, covered patio, monthly maintenance $125; taxes $2,084.
Lopatcong  $130,000
47 Peddlers Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 15-year-old bi-level; newly painted interior, c/a, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $5,800.
Milltown  $152,500
63 Townsend Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; new roof and siding, eat-in-kitchen, full basement; taxes $2,850.
OTHER AREAS  Mamaroneck, N.Y.  $260,000
3 Washington Square  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old co-op; entry hall, dining room, modern kitchen, terrace, doorman, beach rights; maintenance $993.
Avon, Conn.  $211,000
30 Hemlock Lane  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 13-year-old contemporary; screened porch, new deck, on cul de sac, 1 acre; taxes $4,480.
Bayport, L.I.  $135,000  319 Fairview Avenue  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 35-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, den, finished basement, fireplace; taxes $5,700.


Putting an Old Saw to Work in the South
Here in this riverside city of 10,000, where gracious mansions were seized early in the Civil War by Union forces, a new invader has stormed the town.
As before, the draw is real estate.
With its picturesque harbor, quaint downtown and elegant homes, Beaufort (pronounced BYEW-furt) has become a favored location for moviemakers.
While one production company was filming in a rural area outside town at the end of May, Paramount was scouring the city with a real estate broker, looking for just the right house.


What's Audubon Doing in New York City?
To the Editor:
Peter A. A. Berle's self-congratulatory article on the retrofitting of Audubon House ("Take a Tour of This Building, and Save!," Viewpoints, June 6) carefully avoided the most important question: Why is an environmental organization spending $24 million on a headquarters building in New York City?


SPORTS
Here is a sampling of spectator sports in the New York metropolitan region and participatory sports in New York City this summer.
Dates and times are subject to change.
FOR SPECTATORS
Baseball
SHEA STADIUM, Flushing, Queens.
The New York Mets.
Unless otherwise noted, games are at 7:40 P.M.
Tickets range from $6.50 to $15.
Information: (718) 507-8499.
A schedule of Mets home games follows: Philadelphia Phillies (June 13, 1:40 P.M.); Montreal Expos (June 21 and 22; June 23, 1:40 P.M.); St.
YANKEE STADIUM, the Bronx.
The New York Yankees.
Unless otherwise noted, games are at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets range from $6.50 to $16.00.
Information: (718) 293-6000.
Tennis
U.S.
TENNIS OPEN, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Queens.
Sponsored by the United States Tennis Association.
Aug. 30 through Sept. 12.
Two sessions daily, at 11 A.M. and 7:30 P.M., through Sept. 9; one session daily, at 11 A.M., Sept. 10 through 12.
Tickets range from $15 to $50.
Qualifying rounds: Aug. 25 through 28, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Free.
Information: (914) 696-7000; tickets: (718) 271-5100.
Football
GIANTS STADIUM, Meadowlands, Route 3, East Rutherford, N.J.
New York Giants and New York Jets.
Tickets range from $25 to $31.
Information: (201) 935-8500.
Home exhibition games: Jets versus Philadelphia Eagles (Aug. 13, 7:30 P.M.); Giants versus Pittsburgh Steelers (Aug. 14, 8 P.M.); Giants versus Jets (Aug. 21, 8 P.M.).
FOR PARTICIPANTS
Today
TOUR DE CURE, Gateway National Recreational Center, Floyd Bennett Field, Brooklyn.
Day of cycling to beat diabetes, sponsored by the American Diabetes Association; 100-, 50- and 25-kilometer loops.
Information: (800) 281-4925.
June 16
MILE RUN, Marine Park, Brooklyn.
Organized by the New York Road Runners Club. 7 P.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
SUMMER SPEED RACE NO. 4, Clove Lakes Park, S.I.
A three-mile race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 7 P.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
June 20
FAMILYFUN RUN, Central Park.
A program of races for children and adults organized by the New York Road Runners Club. 9:30 A.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
EMPIRE STATE QUALIFIER 5K AND 10K RACEWALK RELAY, Central Park.
Five- and 10-kilometer racewalks for adults and juniors, up to 19 years old.
Sponsored by the Eastside Track Club.
Women start at 9 A.M.; men at 10 A.M.
Registration and information: (212) 628-1317.
June 23
SUMMER SPEED RACE NO. 5, Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
A five-kilometer race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 7 P.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
June 24
CHEMICAL BANK CORPORATE CHALLENGE NO. 3, Central Park.
A 3.5-mile race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 7 A.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
June 27
GREENWAY 10K, Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
A race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 8 A.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
June 30
SUMMER SPEED RACE NO. 6, Clove Lake Park, S.I.
A three-mile race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 7 P.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
MARINE PARK ONE-MILE RUN, Marine Park, Brooklyn.
Sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 7 P.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
July 7
SUMMER SPEED RACE NO. 7, Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
A five-kilometer race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 7 P.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
July 11
1+2+3=6 MILE RELAY, Central Park.
Sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 10 A.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
STATEN ISLAND BIATHLON, Richmond Parkway.
A 24-mile running and cycling race.
Sponsored by the Big Apple Triathlon Club. 9 A.M.
Registration and information: (212) 289-4113.
July 14
SUMMER SPEED RACE NO. 8, Clove Lake Park, S.I.
A three-mile race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 7 P.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
MARINE PARK ONE-MILE RUN, Marine Park, Brooklyn.
Sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 7 P.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
July 17
TED CORBITT 24-HOUR RUN, Roosevelt Island.
An endurance race.
Sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 10 A.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
July 18
MAC CHAMPIONSHIP, Central Park.
A three-kilometer racewalk sponsored by the Park Racewalkers. 9 A.M.
Registration and information: (212) 628-1317.
ROOSEVELT ISLAND SUMMER 5K, Roosevelt Island.
Sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 10 A.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
BIG APPLE TRIATHLON, Riverbank State Park, atop the North River sewage treatment plant, at 145th Street and the Hudson River, Harlem.
A 15 1/4-mile swimming, running and cycling race.
Sponsored by the Big Apple Triathlon Club. 7:30 A.M.
Registration and information: (212) 289-4113.
July 21
SUMMER SPEED RACE NO. 9, Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
A five-kilometer race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 7 P.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
July 28
SUMMER SPEED RACE NO. 10, Clove Lake Park, S.I.
A three-mile race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 7 P.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
MARINE PARK ONE-MILE RUN, Marine Park, Brooklyn.
Sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 7 P.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
Aug. 1
RESERVOIR RUN, Central Park.
A five-kilometer run sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 10 A.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
Aug. 4
SUMMER SPEED RACE NO. 11, Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
A five-kilometer race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 7 P.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
Aug. 8
BRONX MUSEUM BIATHLON, Grand Concourse.
A 16-mile running and cycling race.
Sponsored by the Big Apple Triathlon Club. 8:30 A.M.
Registration and information: (212) 289-4113.
Aug. 11
SUMMER SPEED RACE NO. 12, Clove Lake Park, S.I.
A three-mile race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 7 P.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
MARINE PARK ONE-MILE RUN, Marine Park, Brooklyn.
Sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 7 P.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
Aug. 15
HISPANIC HALF-MARATHON, Central Park.
A 13.1-mile race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 9 A.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
Aug. 18
SUMMER SPEED RACE NO. 13, Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
A five-kilometer race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 7 P.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
Aug. 22
CENTRAL PARK TRIATHLON, Lasker Pool.
A 17 1/4-mile swimming, running and cycling race.
Sponsored by the Big Apple Triathlon Club. 7:30 A.M.
Registration and information: (212) 289-4113.
Aug. 25
SUMMER SPEED RACE NO. 14, Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
A five-kilometer race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 7 P.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
Aug. 29
BACK TO WORK RUN, Central Park.
A four-mile run sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 10 A.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
Sept. 1
SUMMER SPEED RACE NO. 15, Prospect Park, Brooklyn.
A five-kilometer race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 7 P.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
Sept. 5
29th ANNUAL HENRY E. ISOLA CROSS COUNTRY CLASSIC, Van Cortlandt Park, the Bronx.
A four-mile race sponsored by the New York Road Runners Club. 11:30 A.M.
Registration and information: (212) 860-4455.
All Season
CENTRAL PARK CHESS AND CHECKERS HOUSE, midpark at 64th Street, adjacent to the Dairy.
Twenty-four tables for outdoor play and 10 indoor.
Saturdays and Sundays, 11:30 A.M. to 3:30 P.M.
Information: (212) 794-6564.
CENTRAL PARK LAWN SPORTS, north of Sheep Meadow at 66th Street.
Bowling and croquet greens.
Through Nov. 2, open daily 8 A.M. to dusk.
Permits: $30.
Permits, good through Nov. 28, are available at the Arsenal, 830 Fifth Avenue at 64th Street, Room 1 in the basement; open Monday through Friday, 9 A.M. to 4 P.M. and in June, Saturdays from 9 A.M. to noon, closed Sundays.
Permit information: (212) 360-8133.
CENTRAL PARK ROWBOAT RENTALS, Loeb Boathouse, midpark at 72d Street.
Open daily, weather permitting, Mondays through Fridays, 11 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays, 11 A.M. to 6:30 P.M.
Fees: $8 an hour for rowboats; $35 a half-hour for gondolas, with up to six passengers per ride.
Information: (212) 517-2233.
CENTRAL PARK TENNIS COURTS, midpark at 96th Street.
Open daily 7 A.M. to dusk.
Full-season permits available at the Arsenal, 830 Fifth Avenue, at 64th Street.
Fees: $50 ($20 for the elderly; $10 under age 18).
Information: (212) 360-8133.
NORTH MEADOW RECREATION CENTER, Central Park, midpark at 97th Street.
Activities for children include board games, table-top hockey, Ping-Pong, arts and crafts, ice-skating, kite-flying, basketball and football.
Weekdays, 4:30 to 8 P.M.; weekends, 10 A.M. to 8 P.M.
Information: (212) 348-4867.
GOTHAM MINIATURE GOLF, Wollman Rink, Central Park, midpark at 62d Street.
Open Mondays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Tuesdays, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Wednesdays and Thursdays, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. and 7:30 to 9:30 P.M.; Fridays and Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 11 P.M.; Sundays, 10 A.M. to 9:30 P.M.
Also roller-blading, roller-skating and bank-shot basketball on the premises.
Admission: $6.50 for one activity, $10 for two, $15 for three; $3 for children for one activity, $5 for two and $7.50 for three.
Information: (212) 517-4800.
CLAREMONT RIDING ACADEMY, 175 West 89th Street, Manhattan.
English mounts for hire, $33 an hour.
Lessons and courses (for experienced riders only) range from $35 for an hourlong group lesson to $630 for 10 private lessons.
Weekdays, 6:30 A.M. to 10 P.M.; Saturdays and Sundays, 8 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Reservations necessary: (212) 724-5100.
DIXIE DEW STABLES, 88-11 70th Road, Forest Hills, Queens.
English and Western mounts for hire, $17 and $20 an hour.
Lessons and courses range from $30 for an hourlong, semiprivate lesson to $160 for five private lessons.
Day trips, $150 (including transportation from the stables and lunch).
Open daily 7:30 A.M. to twilight.
Information: (718) 263-3500.
JAMAICA BAY RIDING ACADEMY, 7000 Belt Parkway, between Flatbush Avenue and Rockaway Parkway, Mill Basin, Brooklyn.
English and Western mounts for hire, $20 for 45 minutes.
Private English riding lessons available, $40 an hour ($23 for half-hour children's lessons).
Open daily, 9 A.M. to 5 P.M., and Tuesdays and Thursdays to 9 P.M.
Information: (718) 531-8949.
PELHAM BIT STABLES, 9 Shore Road, between City Island and Orchard Beach, the Bronx.
English and Western mounts for hire; $15 an hour on weekdays and $18 an hour on weekends and holidays.
Half-hour and hourlong English riding lessons range from $20 to $30.
Open daily, 8 A.M. to dark.
Information: (718) 885-0551.
VAN CORTLANDT STABLES, 254th Street and Broadway, Riverdale, the Bronx.
English and Western mounts for hire, $15 an hour on weekdays, $18 an hour weekends and holidays.
Half-hour and hourlong lessons range from $20 to $30.
Open daily, 8 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Information: (718) 543-4433.
ICE STUDIO, 1034 Lexington Avenue, at 73d Street.
Open year-round except August.
Indoor skating sessions Mondays, Wednesdays and Thursdays, 12:30 to 1:30 P.M.; Tuesdays and Thursdays 8:30 to 10 P.M.; Fridays, 5 to 6 P.M. and 8:30 to 10 P.M; Saturdays, noon to 1 P.M. and 5:15 to 6:15 P.M.; Sundays, noon to 1 P.M., 2:45 to 3:45 P.M. and 5:15 to 6:15 P.M.
Admission: $5 for a one-hour session, or $6 for a 90-minute session.
Private lessons for ages 6 and older are $30 per half-hour; reservations are required.
Skate rentals: $2.75.
Forty-minute group lessons for children under age 6 are $15.
Studio is open 10 A.M. to 10 P.M.
Information: (212) 535-0304.
SKATE KEY ROLLER RINK, 2424 White Plains Road, near Pelham Parkway, Morris Park, the Bronx.
Wednesdays and Thursdays, 8 P.M. to midnight; Fridays, 4:30 P.M. to 1 A.M.; Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 3 A.M., and Sundays, 12:30 P.M. to midnight; Admission: $3 to $6.
Skate rental, $1.
Information: (718) 547-0700.


Unconventional College Finds Adults Are Good Students
AT Charter Oak State College in Connecticut there are no classrooms and no curriculum.
It does have a faculty but its members don't teach.
Ten percent of its students -- average age close to 40 -- live outside the state.
Some even live outside the country.
The college has no campus, but exists in a suite of rooms in a commercial office and shopping complex.
It is a most unusual place.
It is also relatively unknown.
Ask most people about Charter Oak and they might talk about the tree revered in early Connecticut history, where the colony's charter was hidden.
But a college?


COMMERCIAL PROPERTY: New York Hotels; New York City Hotels Battling the Blues
SEVERAL years ago, when Regent Hotels International decided to put up a 52-story luxury hotel at 57 East 57th Street, it seemed like a great idea.
The New York economy was booming, hotels were commanding impressive room rates, and occupancy rates were high.
By last August, when the Four Seasons bought all the Regent properties, New York wasn't such a boom town anymore.
The Four Seasons professed to be unworried.
After all, the company, whose Pierre Hotel has been astriking success, would have its name emblazoned on a luxury property.


Why Not More Safety In Car Inspections?
I read with interest your May 23d article about Connecticut's success in selling special interest license plates.
Fine!
But there is another side of our Department of Motor Vehicle activity which is woefully inadequate: car inspections.
Connecticut does test annually for emissions.
But there is no mandatory testing for lights or brakes.
I talked to my representative and senator about this and was told to contact Commissioner Goldberg.
His reply to me was that nothing could be changed without an act of the legislature.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: John A. Williams; A Novelist's Journey in Race Relations
THERE came a time, John A. Williams says, when he had to choose between taking an active role fighting racism or take up his pen and demand to be heard.
In the end, he decided to be "totally a writer," he says, and his 20 books bear witness to his determination.
And come this January, he will be able to devote even more time to his writing when he retires from Rutgers University in Newark, where for the last 14 years he has been a professor of English and journalism.
In an interview at his home in Teaneck, Professor Williams, 67, further talked about the relationship between blacks and whites in general, and blacks and Jews in particular; his his interracial marriage and the experience of teaching at Rutgers.
"No complaints," he insisted.
"I'm talking about the facts of racism that have figured prominently in my life." They have also figured in the lives of the heroes of his novels.


Made-for-TV Mystery: What, if Anything, Do Yanks Owe City?
It is the biggest and most secretive television deal in local team sports history, one the New York Yankees and the Madison Square Garden Network discuss as openly as Coca-Cola executives discuss their soda formula.
So shrouded is this deal that when New York City auditors wanted to view it, they were refused copies, and had to trek to Yankee Stadium like obsequious subjects doing their master's bidding.
"I've been trying to find out what the cable deal is for years," said Betsy Gotbaum, New York City's Parks Commissioner, whose department administers Yankee and Shea Stadiums and is responsible for collecting rent from the teams.


Sic 'Em!
BOB DOLE'S TITLE is Senate Republican Leader.
The sign over his door used to read, "Minority Leader," a tradition Senator Everett Dirksen preserved, but Senator Hugh Scott changed it in the late 1960's when he was leader because it struck him as down-putting.
The Senate Republican Leader (going against Times style, I capitalize the letter l because it is part of a title) called the other day and, before passing along a hot news tip, observed, "Those guys in the White House just don't know sic 'em."


FACTORY TOURS
Although the Slant/Fin Corporation does not give regular tours of its air-conditioning plant, other factories, farms, breweries and wineries do.
Here is a sampling of these tours in the Northeast.
Factories and Farms
BEN &amp; JERRY'S, Route 100, Waterbury, Vt.
A 30-minute walking tour through the ice-cream factory, including a slide show on the history of the company.
Visitors can watch the process from cow to carton.
Tours are scheduled on a walk-in basis.
Hours: Mondays through Saturdays, 9 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Tour and tasting: $1; 13 and under, free.
Information: (802) 244-5641.
CABOT COOPERATIVE CREAMERY, Route 100, Cabot, Vt.
A 30-minute walking tour and video showing the milk vats, curd pumping and the packaging department.
Tour and tasting: $1.
Hours: Mondays through Saturdays, 9 A.M. to 4:30 P.M.
Information: (802) 563-2231.
HERSHEY CHOCOLATE WORLD, Park Boulevard, Hershey, Pa.
Hershey's Chocolate World visitors center offers a 12-minute ride whose theme is "From Bean to Bar," showing how chocolate is made.
The ride takes visitors past 22 scenes depicting chocolate making, with video displays and simulations of the actual manufacturing process.
Hours: Mondays through Sundays, 9 A.M. to 4:45 P.M.
Free.
Information: (717) 534-4900.
SHELBURNE FARMS, intersection of Bay and Harbor Roads, off Route 7, Shelburne, Vt.
A 90-minute tour in an open wagon that covers the landscape, dairy barn and Shelburne House gardens.
Shelburne Farms produces cheese and is also a nonprofit organization that teaches children about agriculture.
Tours are 9 A.M. to 5 P.M. daily.
Fee: $6.50; $5.50 for the elderly; $3.50 for children aged 3 to 15; 3 and under, free.
Information: (802) 985-8686.
STEINWAY PIANOS, Steinway Place, Long Island City, Queens.
A two-hour tour of all parts of the piano factory, including the popular "pounder room" where the keyboard is pounded 10,000 times to reveal any possible flaws.
Tours year-round except for July and August.
Free.
Times and information: (718) 721-2600.
Breweries
MANHATTAN BREWERY, 42 Spring Street, SoHo.
A walking tour exhibiting the entire brewing process from the mash tun room to the wort kettles, the fermenting room to the cold rooms where the beer is conditioned and stored.
Days and hours of summer tours have not yet been determined.
Information: (212) 925-1515.
ZIP CITY BREWERY, 3 West 18th Street, Chelsea.
A walking tour of the malt room and lager cellar.
Tours are Tuesdays at 7 P.M. and Saturdays and Sundays at 2 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 366-6333.
Wineries
MILLBROOK VINEYARDS, R.R. 1, Millbrook, N.Y.
Tour includes the Dutch hip-roofed dairy barn and the oak barrel room.
Tours are noon to 5 P.M. daily.
Tour and tasting are free.
Information: (914) 677-8383.
BALDWIN VINEYARDS, 110 Hardenburgh Road, Pine Bush, N.Y.
Open daily, 11 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Tours: $4.
Information: (914) 744-2226.
BENMARL VINEYARDS, Highland Avenue, Marlboro, N.Y.
Open daily, year-round, noon to 5 P.M.
Tours on the hour, noon to 4 P.M.
Tour and tasting: $5.
Information: (914) 236-4265.
FOUR SISTERS WINERY AT MATARAZZO FARMS, Route 519, R.D. 1, Belvedere, N.J.
Free tours and wine tasting.
Year-round, Saturdays and Sundays, every half-hour from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Information: (908) 475-3671.
NORTH SALEM VINEYARD, Hardscrabble Road, North Salem, N.Y.
Free tours year-round, daily, 1 to 5 P.M.
Information: (914) 669-5518.
PINDAR VINEYARDS, Main Road, Peconic, L.I.
Free tours daily, 11 A.M to 5 P.M.
Information: (516) 734-6200.
HAIGHT VINEYARD AND WINERY, Chestnut Hill Road, off Route 118, Litchfield, Conn.
Year-round, Monday through Saturdays, 10:30 A.M. to 5 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Free tours and wine tasting every hour.
Information: (203) 567-4045.
SCHAPIRO WINE COMPANY, 126 Rivington Street, Manhattan.
Tours of the 94-year-old winery, vats and machinery include tasting.
Sundays, 11 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 674-4404.


Traveling Tightwads: How Low to Go?
WHAT is it about travel that turns people into raving cheapskates?
I have nothing against getting a discount; in fact, my epitaph will probably be, "She got a cheap fare." But some tourists seem to spend their entire vacation playing the wayfarer's version of "The Price Is Right." It matters not if a given experience is momentous, breathtaking, romantic, educational -- or unpleasant.
What matters is the price.
Obviously, if you've got a wandering soul and limited funds, it's better to go on the proverbial shoestring than not to go at all.
But bargain hunters can get obsessive.
Last year, for example, my husband, Duke, and I went to Ecuador, a destination we admittedly chose because an airline was offering a $430 round-trip special from Los Angeles to Guayaquil.
The country has to be one of the least expensive places in the Western Hemisphere -- we regularly dined well for under $10, flew between major cities for $16 and took private Spanish lessons at a Quito school for $5 an hour.
Still we were called extravagant.


Two Areas Fight Radar-Tower Sites
RESIDENTS of North Bellmore and East Hills are uniting to fight the construction of two radar towers that the Federal Aviation Administration is proposing for their neighborhoods.
The towers, part of a $350 million Terminal Doppler Weather Radar system for 47 airports, would enable air-traffic controllers to detect sudden wind shifts, gusts and heavy rains that can threaten takeoffs and landings.


Inspector Ends A Hunger Strike Against Agency
A Government scientist has ended his hunger strike against the National Institutes of Health in its 33d day, defusing at least for now an embarrassing confrontation over the institutes' handling of scientific fraud cases.
The scientist, Walter W. Stewart, began the strike after he and Dr.
Ned Feder, both scientific fraud investigators, were criticized by Health and Human Services officials and their office was closed.
On Friday he was told by a doctor that he was in danger of sudden, irregular heart rhythms and possibly death from heart failure if he continued his fast.
He began eating later that night.


ON THE STREET
Here is a sampling of fairs, festivals and parades that are planned in New York City this summer.
Information was supplied by the Community Assistance Unit of the Office of the Mayor.
Many dates and times are tentative, since these are events that, in some cases, require permits from the Mayor's Office.
Major holiday parades and festivals are listed on page TK.
Today
SECOND AVENUE STREET FAIR, Second Avenue between 68th and 92d Streets, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by the East Manhattan Chamber of Commerce.
PUERTO RICAN DAY PARADE, Fifth Avenue between 44th and 86th Streets. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by Puerto Rican Day Parade Inc.
WELCOME BACK TO BROOKLYN FESTIVAL, Grand Army Plaza and Eastern Parkway, between Washington and Flatbush Avenues, Park Slope.
Noon to 5 P.M.
Sponsored by the Fund for the Borough of Brooklyn.
June 15
MUSEUM MILE FESTIVAL, Fifth Avenue between 82d and 105th Streets, Yorkville. 6 to 9 P.M.
Sponsored by the Museum Mile Festival.
June 19
CHRISTOPHER EAST STREET FESTIVAL, Christopher Street from Seventh to Greenwich Avenues. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by the Christopher East Block Association.
SPANISH CHILDREN'S PARADE, Third Avenue between 88th and 122d Streets, Manhattan.
The parade begins at noon.
Sponsored by the Evangelical Children's Association.
WEST END AVENUE STREET FAIR, West End Avenue between 72d and 79th Streets, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by the Safe Haven West Side Basketball League.
QUEENS FESTIVAL, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, Flushing, Queens. 9 A.M. to 9 P.M.
Also tomorrow.
Sponsored by the Queens Borough President's Office and the Department of Parks and Recreation.
STONEWALL FESTIVAL, Waverly Place between University Place and Broadway, Greenwich Village. 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by the Stonewall Democratic Club.
June 20
VILLAGE INDEPENDENT DEMOCRATS FESTIVAL, West Fourth Street from Seventh to Eighth Avenues, Greenwich Village. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by the Village Independent Democrats.
June 24
MOST HOLY CRUCIFIX STREET FESTIVAL, Mott Street between Hester and Canal Streets, Little Italy. 11:30 A.M. to 11:30 P.M.
Through July 4.
Sponsored by the Most Holy Crucifix Guild.
June 26
ASTOR PLACE FESTIVAL, Astor Place, between Lafayette Street and Broadway, East Village. 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by Transportation Alternatives.
VALLEY LOCAL DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION STREET FESTIVAL, Amsterdam Avenue between 96th and 106th Streets, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by the Valley Restoration Local Development Corporation.
June 27
SAN JUAN FIESTA, De Witt Clinton Park, 52d Street and 11th Avenue, Clinton. 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by the City of New York Parks and Recreation Department and the New York City Department of Hispanic Affairs.
MIDWOOD MARDI GRAS, Avenue M between Coney Island Avenue and Ocean Avenue, Midwood, Brooklyn. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by the Midwood Development Corporation.
WEST SIDE STREET FAIR, Broadway between 66th and 71st Streets. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by the West Side Sanitation Council.
GAY PRIDE AND HERITAGE PARADE, Columbus Circle to Fifth Avenue, to Washington Square Park, ending at Barrow and 10th Streets in the West Village.
Begins at 10 A.M.
Sponsored by Heritage of Pride.
GAY PRIDE FIREWORKS DISLAY, Pier 45 between Christopher and West 10th Streets at the Hudson River, West Village. 10:30 P.M.
Sponsored by the Gay Pride Committee.
July 11
CAPTIVE NATIONS WEEK RALLY, Fifth Avenue between 59th and 72d Streets. 9 A.M.
Sponsored by the Captive Nations Committee.
COLOMBIAN FESTIVAL, Flushing Meadow Park, Flushing, Queens. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by the Colombian Festival Committee.
July 14
BROADWAY ON BROADWAY, Broadway and Seventh Avenue, between 42d and 47th Streets. 11:30 A.M. to 12:45 P.M.
Sponsored by the Times Square Business Improvement District.
July 24
HUDSON STREET FAIR, Eighth Avenue between 14th and Bleecker Streets, West Village. 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by the Federation to Preserve the Greenwich Village Waterfront and Great Port.
July 25
COUNCIL OF NEIGHBORHOOD ORGANIZATIONS STREET FESTIVAL, Eighth Street between 43d and 50th Avenues, Borough Park, Brooklyn. 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by the Council of Neighborhood Organizations.
July 31
V.R.D.R.
STREET FAIR, Waverly Place, from University Place to Broadway, West Village. 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by the Village Reform Democratic Club.
Aug. 8
MERCER STREET BLOCK PARTY, Mercer Street, between Bleecker and West Third Streets, NoHo. 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by the Washington Square Village Tenants Association.
ECUADORIAN FESTIVAL, Flushing Meadow Park, Corona, Queens. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by the Ecuadorian Civic Committee Inc.
MADISON AVENUE FESTIVAL, Madison Avenue between 47th and 57th Streets. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by the Avenue of the Americas Association.
Aug. 22
LAGUARDIA PLACE FIORELLO FESTIVAL, LaGuardia Place, between Washington Square Park and Houston Street, Greenwich Village. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by the Friends of LaGuardia Place.
MACY'S TAP-O-MANIA, 34th Street between Eighth Avenue and Broadway. 11:30 A.M. to 12:30 P.M.
Sponsored by Macy's.
Aug. 28
CRAFTS FESTIVAL, Columbus Avenue between 60th and 62d Streets, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Also Aug. 29.
Sponsored by Fordham University at Lincoln Center.
HORATIO STREET FESTIVAL, Greenwich Avenue between Seventh and Eighth Avenues, West Village. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by the Horatio Street Association.
Sept. 3
WASHINGTON SQUARE ART SHOW, Washington Square Park, Greenwich Village. 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Through Sept. 5.
Sponsored by the Washington Square Outdoor Exhibit Association.
Sept. 4
CRAFTS FESTIVAL, Columbus Avenue, between 60th and 62d Streets, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Through Sept. 6.
Sponsored by Fordham University at Lincoln Center.
SEAPORT LABOR DAY CONCERTS, South Street Seaport, Pier 16 at the East River, lower Manhattan. 6:30 to 8:30 P.M.
Through Sept. 6.
Sponsored by South Street Seaport.
WEST END AVENUE STREET FESTIVAL, West End Avenue, between 86th and 96th Streets, Manhattan. 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Sponsored by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People.
CHELSEA EIGHTH AVENUE FESTIVAL, Eighth Avenue between 14th and 23d Streets, Chelsea. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by the Chelsea Reform Democratic Club.
Sept. 5
BRAZILIAN STREET FESTIVAL, West 46th Street between the Avenue of the Americas and Madison Avenue, Manhattan. 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
Sponsored by the Brazilian-American Cultural Center.
WEST INDIAN KIDDIE PARADE, Kingston Avenue from St.
John's Place to Fulton Street, to President Street, to the Brooklyn Museum. 10 A.M.
Sponsored by the West Indian-American Carnival Association.
Sept. 6
WEST INDIAN DAY PARADE, Eastern Parkway from Utica Avenue to Washington Avenue, Crown Heights, Brooklyn. 10 A.M.
Sponsored by the West-Indian American Carnival Association.


SAINT HILLARY
I believe that we all respond better to leadership by example than to sermons.
The Clinton Administration already is showing signs of being tarnished by an image of sloppiness, if not moral laxity, so lectures from the First Lady about individual and group behavior invite accusations of hypocrisy.


Much Ado About (Nearly) Nothing
Minimalism is as noncommittal as fashion gets without leaving a body naked.
At its best, minimalist fashion is like Mission-style oak furniture: inviting, architectural, sturdy, elegant.
At worst, it's plain.
It can put demands on the wearer.
It won't inspire your friends to apply adjectives to you that you couldn't inspire alone.
A minimalist dress is the only $2,000 one that you might wear to meet the Dalai Lama without feeling obscene.


Haitians Mourn the Loss of a Piece of Their Dream
Wilner Boucicault died living the American dream, shot down as he closed his furniture store, the largest Haitian-owned business in New York City, perhaps the entire country.
To many of his countrymen struggling through life in a new land, he was the embodiment of what they were working to become and a source of help and advice on how to attain success in an unfamiliar country.
Mr.
Boucicault arrived in New York 25 years ago from a suburb outside Port-au-Prince and worked as a parking attendant while he studied at the City University, an incubator of generations of immigrant success stories.
Saving his money, he opened his store only a year ago, and he ultimately wanted to own a bank that would serve the needs of other Haitian-Americans.


A Place Where Cape Cod Meets the Bronx
HISTORY records that the year 1816 was so cold on City Island -- Long Island Sound froze in the winter -- that it was called the "Year of No Summer."
Wow.
City Island without summer seems as unimaginable as fried clams without tartar sauce, the horizon without sailboats.
From the laughing Spanish-speaking families occupying the sea of blue picnic tables at Johnny's Reef Restaurant to the yachtsmen who radio ahead to order lobster at tonier eateries to an ecstatic child with ice cream smeared all over his face to luckless fishermen waiting for the Bx 29 bus to take them home, City Island emblematizes the warm season.


History Notes


From Mazes to Mermaids, Fun for All Ages
IF you can't get away from New York City this summer, you can round up the family and head for the parks.
Children can learn how music is similar to games and sports in a series of free outdoor concerts by the Little Orchestra Society in various cityparks.
Or they can get their blood pumping by running races in Central Park, where everyone receives a ribbon.
On the days when only air-conditioning can soothe the delicate equation of summer tempers, try taking advantage of city museums.
At the Asia Society in Manhattanm children can learn how to wrap a sari and a turban, Indian style.
If they want to make their own art, the Brooklyn Museum and the Metropolitan Museum of Art have theme-based workshops and tours every week that can be habit forming.


Meredith Meiler, Andrew Rocca
Meredith Ann Meiler, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Mark J. Meiler of Oneonta, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Andrew Francis Rocca, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank H. Rocca of West Chester, Pa.
The Rev.
Paul Roman performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Mary's Church.
Mrs.
Rocca, 24, was until recently a trading assistant at Mitsui &amp; Company in New York, an importer and exporter of paper products.
She graduated from Franklin and Marshall College.


Data Update
*4*MEDIAN RESALE HOUSE PRICES
Apr. 93
Mar. 93
Apr. 92
Nation
$ 105,400
105,100
$ 103,500
Northeast
139,700
138,300
142,000
Midwest
85,700
85,200
80,900
South
91,700
91,200
91,500
West
142,700
144,200
144,400
*4*Source: National Association of Realtors
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.65
7.68
8.79
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.74
4.73
5.99
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.53
7.55
8.65
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.57
4.61
5.77
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.53
7.52
8.67
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.38
4.38
5.76
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.79
7.87
8.90
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.32
5.35
6.49
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.58
3.40
4.27
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.06
7.17
8.26
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


A Jazz Festival and Its Musical Muses; Jimmy Scott -- A Voice That Tweaks Souls
The 1993 JVC Jazz Festival, which runs from Friday to June 26, will be sleeker than in previous years.
With 20 concerts at six locations throughout Manhattan, the schedule is heavy in singers and tributes (to the likes of Thelonious Monk and Charlie Parker).
And because of rising costs, many smaller events, like the afternoon piano concerts, have been dropped.
But despite the leanness, the festival should still offer performances to satisfy the tastes of most jazz lovers.
Here, six noted authors tell why a performer or honoree on this year's program speaks to them.


There's Nothing Like Foreign Policy for Producing Ennui
SHORTLY after President Clinton took office he held a town meeting in Chillicothe, Ohio, during which an audience chosen by lottery asked him about everything, it seemed, from health care to Hillary.
But in 90 minutes he did not get a single question on foreign policy.
It was a harbinger of things to come.
In all the town hall meetings the President has held since then, you could count on one hand the number of unprompted foreign policy questions he has received from the public.
Clinton aides barely bother anymore to even prepare the President for foreign policy questions, for they know he is much more likely to get asked about the trimmings of Cristophe the barber than the travels of Christopher the diplomat.


Brooke Silbersack and John Aymar 3d
Brooke Claire Silbersack, the daughter of Virginia Rodgers of Stamford, Conn., and J. Wayne Silbersack of Darien, Conn., was married on Thursday to John vanBeuren Aymar 3d, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Aymar Jr. of Darien.
The Rev.
Winston Lewis performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Swept Away Resort in Negril, Jamaica.
Mrs.
Aymar, 24, is a student at Fordham University.
Her father, now retired, was a vice president of Petersen Advertising in Freehold, N.J.


Anne Palmer, Stephen Laney Jr.
Anne Winslow Palmer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
F.
Morgan Palmer Jr. of New York, was married yesterday to Stephen Michael Laney Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Laney of Marietta, Ga.
The Rev.
Herbert G. Draesel Jr. performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Holy Trinity in New York.


Anne Gambrill, Warner James Jr.
Anne Elizabeth Gambrill, a daughter of Johanne N. Gambrill of Tenafly, N.J., and James H. Gambrill of Maplewood, N.J., was married yesterday to Warner Thompson James Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James of Madison, Conn.
The Rev.
Brian Fidler performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Englewood, N.J.
Mrs.
James, 23, and her husband, 24, are teachers at the Trinity-Pawling School in Pawling, N.Y., she of history and he of English.
They graduated from Bates College.
The bride's father is an associate at the law firm of Crummy, Del, Deo, Dolan, Griffinger &amp; Vecchione in Newark.
Her mother teaches mathematics at the Dwight-Englewood School in Englewood.


Paris Airports Get Direct Link
Travel between Orly Airport south of Paris and Charles de Gaulle Airport at Roissy in the northeast can be completed entirely by rail and without getting into delays caused by city traffic.
The Orlyval light rail automated train connects Orly South and Orly West terminals with the suburban R.E.R.
B line at the Antony stop.
The two trains are on either side of the same platform and one usually leaves promptly after the other arrives.


The Painful Past Still Eludes France
LAST July, it was the 50th anniversary of France's first mass roundup of Jews for deportation to Nazi Germany.
Last November, it was President Francois Mitterrand's decision to send an Armistice Day wreath to the tomb of the Vichy regime's head of state, Marshal Henri Philippe Petain.
Last week, it was the murder in Paris of the Vichy police chief, Rene Bousquet, who was facing charges of crimes against humanity for sending Jews to their death.
In one way or another, the question of France's role in the Holocaust keeps coming back.
The facts as such are no longer disputed.
Between 1942 and 1944, some 76,000 French and foreign Jews were deported from France to Germany; some 2,500 survived.
Further, most were arrested by French police on orders of French officials and were carried on French trains for delivery at the German border.


JUNE 6-12: An African Nation's Agony; Some 600 Are Slain In a Massacre in Liberia
For Liberia, the massacre at a refugee camp 40 miles east of the capital of Monrovia was neither the first nor the worst tragedy to have been visited on that unhappy country.
But the killing of some 600 unarmed people -- 90 percent of whom were women and children -- and the wounding of more than 700 others was nonetheless horrifying.
Last Sunday, a group of armed thugs entered the camp and systematically killed the inhabitants.


Robert G. Hicks, Anesthesiologist, Is Dead at Age 70
Dr.
Robert G. Hicks, a leader in the field of anesthesiology, died on Thursday at a hospital in Stamford, Conn.
He was 70 and lived in Greenwich.
The cause was pneumonia and complications of cancer, his family said.


Not Even Doc Can Revive Mets This Time
One would think that the Mets had exhausted all possible methods of defeat.
They've lost on ninth-inning errors and offensive collapses, blown rundown plays and horribly squandered saves.
Never before, though, during this dismal season had the Mets found themselves in this ugly situation: Last night at Shea Stadium, they could not manage a single run.
So with the best team in baseball against him -- and one of the worst at his back -- even Doc Gooden couldn't save the woeful Mets this time.


Storybook Saga Ends
A team of lawyers, doctors, machinists and factory workers just missed pulling off one of the biggest upsets in soccer history yesterday, playing a team of highly paid professionals even for 77 minutes before losing, 1-0, in the final of the German Cup.
ULF KIRSTEN's second-half goal off the chest of Hertha goalie CHRISTIAN ZIEGLER powered Bayer Leverkusen past the Hertha BSC Amateurs, 1-0, in the Cup finals, ending the saga of one of the biggest underdogs in the game's history.
Hertha BSC was the first amateur team ever to reach the finals in the 50 years of the German Football Association playoffs.
Hundreds of professional and amateur teams in the country compete to win the cup.


U.S. to Push Germany and Japan for U.N. Council
The Clinton Administration has told Germany and Japan it will soon start a campaign to fulfill its promise to support permanent seats for them on the Security Council.
Despite the Administration's position, diplomats said any effort to change the Security Council would run into difficulties.
Britain and France, for instance, worry about losing their permanent seats and veto privileges.


Megan E. Barber And David Snead
Megan Elizabeth Barber, a daughter of Albert and Regina Barber of New Canaan, Conn., was married yesterday to William David Snead, the son of William E. and Patricia Snead of Albuquerque, N.M.
The Rev.
Kevin Royal performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
John and St.
Mary Church in Chappaqua, N.Y.
Mrs.
Snead, 27, is an account executive at Rick Johnson &amp; Company, an advertising agency in Albuquerque.
She graduated from the University of Richmond.
Her father, a former chief financial officer for NBC, is the president of CNBC, in Fort Lee, N.J., an NBC-owned cable service.


Gutter Replacement: Project for Two People
REPLACING worn-out aluminum or galvanized gutters with vinyl ones is usually a relatively easy job for two people.
Generally, the main criterion is easy access to the roof.
Vinyl gutters cost about the same as aluminum but are easier to join, require no maintenance other than cleaning and are sturdy enough to resist denting from a ladder leaning against them.


G.O.P. Opposition Endangers Campaign Finance Bill
Campaign finance legislation may die in the Senate next week if Democrats cannot find a way to win a few Republican votes by modifying the bill's provisions for public financing of elections.
The issue that seemed the rage last fall when Ross Perot denounced the money in the political system has been stalled in the Senate.
And even if legislation to limit spending and curb political action committees survives the Senate, it faces a difficult future in the rest of the legislative process.


Clinton Vows Full Review of U.S. Role in Salvador
Responding to criticism by lawmakers that American officials condoned massacres by the Salvadoran Army and death-squad killings in the 1980's, President Clinton has promised Congress his Administration will make a full review of United States involvement in El Salvador.
Mr.
Clinton's decision, announced in a June 7 letter to several Democratic Congressional leaders, comes more than two months after a report sponsored by the United Nations detailed extensive human rights violations committed by Salvadoran military officers whose careers benefited from American support.


Yum Yum
PIEKARSKI means "son of a baker" in Polish, and Chuck Piekarski, a strapping 39-year-old tenor with an Actors' Equity card, has been on staff baking desserts at night for God's Love We Deliver for more than two years.
Last Tuesday around midnight, he was putting 50 trays into the convection ovens in a commercial kitchen on the Upper West Side.
Six hundred people with AIDS in the metropolitan area would find his brownies included with their free, freshly cooked meals the next day.
Some of them would find his miniature birthday cakes, as well.
"I'm sort of like Bigfoot around here because nobody sees me," Mr.
Piekarski said with a shy, untheatrical smile as he lumbered in his baseball cap and chocolate-smeared apron around the kitchen, hauling buckets of sugar (his recipe calls for 33 3/4 cups), boxes of eggs (90) and semi-sweet chocolate (17 pounds).
"It's a good dessert," he said, "but it's one of the messy ones."


Blame Doesn't Belong to Ewing
To the Sports Editor:
As a longtime fan and season ticket-holder of the New York Knicks, I naturally was deeply disappointed by the team's playoff elimination at the hands of the Chicago Bulls.
But what was perhaps most distressing was the unfair blame leveled at Patrick Ewing for the Knicks' demise, as exemplified by George Vecsey's column written after Game 5. ("The Knicks may have gone as far as they could go. . . . No coach, not even Pat Riley, has been able to turn Patrick Ewing into a charismatic, gimme-the-ball leader," June 4.)


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 13, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
47
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
2
4
DARKEST HOUR, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The concluding volume in a series about the Cutlers, a plantation-owning family.
3
17
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
3
THE MAGIC OF YOU, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A 19th-century British minx sets her cap for an American sea captain.
5
72
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
6
61
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
7
6
SHADOWFIRES, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A woman is stalked by her supposedly deceased husband.
8
7
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Pocket, $5.99.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
9 *
3
THE CAT WHO WASN'T THERE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) Jim Qwilleran contends with crimes in Scotland.
10
1
TOMORROW'S PROMISE, by Sandra Brown. (Harlequin, $4.50.) A woman learns that her husband, long missing in action, may be alive.
11 *
2
SHADOWS, by John Saul. (Bantam, $5.99.) An evil influence brings horrors to a school for gifted children.
12
1
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
13
1
TURTLE MOON, by Alice Hoffman. (Berkley, $5.99.) Two damaged adults and a troubled child strive valiantly to achieve happiness.
14
24
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The investigation of a woman's death involves the American-Japanese rivalry.
15 *
8
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Kinsey Millhone investigates a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
7
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
2
4
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President.
3
6
NOT FOR SALE AT ANY PRICE, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $5.95.) America's problems.
4
501
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
5
87
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
6
17
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
7
108
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
8
5
WHERE THE BLUEBIRD SINGS TO THE LEMONADE SPRINGS, by Wallace Stegner. (Penguin, $11.) Essays on the American West.
9 *
17
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) Social life and sexual fantasies.
10 *
14
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Examples of waste.
11
18
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
12 *
22
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on self-esteem.
13
132
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
14
21
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) Factors affecting the environment.
15 *
32
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.50.) A war against women.
16 *
14
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) Navy memoirs.
17 *
4
WRITTEN BY HERSELF,
edited by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $15.) Writings by women.
18 *
4
BARBARIANS AT THE GATE, by Bryan Burrough and John Helyar. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The 1988 battle for control of RJR Nabisco.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
96
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) A collection of some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
10
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK: Volume 2, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) More tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
121
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
4
138
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending May 29, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


SAINT HILLARY
After 12 years of moral certitude from Pat Robertson, Jerry Falwell, Dan Quayle, et al, I am exhilarated by Mrs.
Clinton's willingness to say, "I don't know."
The Founding Fathers cared deeply about the politics of virtue.
Thomas Jefferson defined virtue as "a love of others, a sense of duty to them, a moral instinct, in short, which prompts us irresistibly to feel and to succor their distresses." All of which sounds pretty "fuzzy," to use the pejorative Michael Kelly applies to Mrs.
Clinton.


SAINT HILLARY
Personally, I am delighted to have leadership in Washington that seeks more complex answers to our society's ills than a simplistic, "Just Say No." And I do not mind in the least that Mrs.
Clinton has not yet totally formulated her solutions.
As a teacher, I am always pleased when students come up with the right answers -- but I am thrilled when they begin to ask the right questions.
ROBERT ROSSNER Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
HOW WE SURVIVED COMMUNISM AND EVEN LAUGHED By Slavenka Drakulic.
Harper Perennial, $12.
A Croatian journalist discusses life under Communism; it was filled with indignities large and small, from the lack of privacy to the lack of panty hose.
Last year our reviewer, Cathy Young, called the book a "thoughtful, beautifully written collection."


Laura Garner, Roger Hardon
Laura Anne Garner, a vice president of the Chase Manhattan Bank, was married yesterday to Roger Knox Hardon, a vice president of Scudder Stevens &amp; Clark, the investment management firm.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Arlan Baillie performed the ceremony at the Wilton (Conn.) Congregational Church.
Mrs.
Hardon, 33, graduated from the University of Virginia and received an M.B.A. from the University of California at Los Angeles.
She is the daughter of Sarah Garner of Atlanta and the late Henry M. Garner.


'Little Italy' in South America: Colombia's Rising Leather Industry
SAY "Colombian exports" and most people will think of cocaine or coffee -- or books, bananas and oil.
Lately, though, without fanfare, finely tooled Italian-style leather belts and bags have been added to the list.
In fact, with labor costs one-fifth those in Italy, Colombia is becoming South America's "Little Italy." It is pouring money into machinery and training to offer leather goods on the world market at half the price charged by Italian manufacturers.


On the Court, In the World
DAYS OF GRACE A Memoir.
By Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad.
Illustrated. 336 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $24.


Golf's Gamesmanship Is as Subtle as a Controlled Slice
We've heard a lot these days about "trash talk." That's the National Basketball Association's phrase for bench-jockeying, an old baseball tradition.
By whatever name, it has to do with getting to an opponent's mind, upsetting his concentration, disrupting his psychological equilibrium.
Some sports purists condemn it as unsportsmanlike.
They claim a game should be won solely on physical merits, sheer talent, and perhaps a lucky bounce.
But games are played in the mind every bit as much as with the body.
The proliferation of sports psychologists on today's scene proves that.
It follows then that if the mind is in the action, it's as open to intimidation or coercion as the second baseman is to the runner trying to break up the double play with a spikes-high slide.
A Needle Nonetheless
In baseball, basketball, football and hockey, the jockeying of an opponent is usually verbal, very direct, often crude; and, as when Jackie Robinson broke into the major leagues, viciously mean and racist.
In golf, jockeying is more subtle, in keeping with the sport's courteous ambiance.


Wendy Cramer, Andrew Sanford
Wendy Sue Cramer, a daughter of Susan Tofel of New York and Robert Cramer of Washington, was married yesterday to Andrew Beatty Sanford, a son of Elizabeth B. Boocock of Basking Ridge, N.J., and Richard C. Sanford of New York.
The Rev.
Jamie Hamilton, an Episcopal priest, and Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel officiated at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
Mrs.
Sanford, 26, graduated from Duke University and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
Her father is the owner of Robert S. Cramer &amp; Company, a public relations firm in Washington.
Her mother, a former chairwoman of the board of the Nightingale-Bamford School, is a vice president of the Jewish Board of Family and Children's Services, the nonprofit social service organization in New York.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
INTELLECTUAL HISTORY THE MUSIC OF THE SPHERES Music, Science, and  the Natural Order of the Universe.
By Jamie James.
Grove, $20.95.


Gwendolyn Grant, Steven Bowers
Dr.
Gwendolyn Grant and Dr.
Steven Malcolm Bowers, both physicians at Yale-New Haven Hospital, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Dr.
Lowell Ballinger, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Old Parish Church in Weston, Vt.
The bride, 33, is a resident in internal medicine.
She graduated from Amherst College and the Yale School of Medicine.
She is a daughter of Jenifer Grant of New Haven and Dr.
John P. Grant Jr. of New York.


To Arms! To Arms! White Fly is Here
THE goal now is to keep the garden blooming through the sunny months.
If all goes well, everything should be nearly weedless and trouble free.
This does require a few extra hours outdoors, but all too often uninvited troubles appear.
One of the most discouraging is white fly.
These tiny insect pests seem to appear out of nowhere, and almost every kind of soft succulent leaf is to their liking.
They keep away from a few annuals like impatiens and begonias, but vegetable gardeners know this nuisance well, especially on squash and tomato plants.


TELEVISION
June
"FAMILY DOG." Once CBS's great animated hope, because it carried the names of Steven Spielberg and Tim Burton as producers, this dog's-eye view of family life has turned into the longest-running disappointment in recent network history.
Three years in the waiting, it is now being played out as a summer series.
CBS, starting June 23, at 8 P.M.
"JOHNNY BAGO." Another series CBS has talked about putting on the air for more than two years has now been relegated to summer duty.
This one, which stars Peter Dobson as a street hustler who is fleeing the mob in a rented recreational vehicle, also carries the pedigree of association with a famed film name, in this case Robert Zemeckis.
CBS, starting June 25, at 10 P.M.
"CURACAO." Notable mostly as an answer to the question: What is George C. Scott doing these days?
In this made-for-cable movie, he's playing an American expatriate on the Caribbean island, whose friendship with another expatriate, played by William Peterson, leads to involvement in murder.
Showtime, June 27 at 9 P.M.
"LIFEPOD." The first original movie to play in the Fox network's new lineup of Monday movies isn't all that original.
It's a remake of the Hitchcock classic "Lifeboat," with a group of travelers, stranded from their spacecraft, who discover a saboteur in their midst.
Ron Silver stars and also directs.
Fox, June 28, at 8 P.M.
July
"12:01." Still pursuing the science-fiction genre, Fox comes back with a new film about one of those cinema reliables, the experiment gone awry.
A day starts over for a personnel clerk, and he gets a chance to reverse fate, which is good, because the first time around, he lost his job and his girlfriend was murdered in front of him.
Jonathan Silverman stars with Helen Slater.
Fox, July 5 at 8 P.M.
"ACTING ON IMPULSE." In this movie about the movies, a star of Hollywood fright films, played by Linda Fiorentino, resolves to escape from her screaming duties by taking a vacation at a quiet country resort, which, of course, a crazed killer decides to stalk.
Showtime, July 10 at 9 P.M.
"MISSING: JOHN ROBERTSON." A documentary tracing the extraordinary efforts of a young American woman to learn the fate of her father, declared missing in Vietnam 26 years ago.
The film follows her to Vietnam, where she meets a man who says he captured her father, and eventually to Russia, where she meets Boris Yeltsin.
Discovery Channel, July 13 at 9:30 P.M.
"HEIDI." A new two-part movie version of the children's classic, not updated to an outpost in outer space.
This one is still set in the Alps, where an orphan girl changes the life of her irascible grandfather.
Noley Thornton plays Heidi, Jason Robards is the grandfather and Jane Seymour plays against type as the prim, grim governess.
Disney Channel, July 18 and 19 at 7 P.M.
SHARK WEEK.
The perennial crowd pleaser from the Discovery Channel: a full week of shark features with titles like "Teeth of Death." Always the highest-rated week for the Discovery Channel, it begins with "African Shark Safari," July 18 at 10 P.M.
"BLUE ICE." Michael Caine, who must have had a couple of weeks off from making theatrical movies, has squeezed in this cable effort, in which he plays a retired intelligence agent (not named Harry Palmer, though) who jumps back into action to save Sean Young.
HBO, July 31 at 8 P.M.
August
"BASED ON AN UNTRUE STORY." Or "Hot Shots Comes to Television": A takeoff on the ripped-from-the-headlines television movie traditions, in which Morgan Fairchild, playing a perfume mogul who loses her sense of smell, is stalked by a serial killer and encounters a high school teacher lusting after her students and even a rescue team trying to save a lost child.
Fox, Aug. 9 at 8 P.M.


It's Not Over Till It's Over: Grandparents as 'Parents'
"MY friends are playing golf, and I'm playing tiddlywinks," Marion Werle said.
With silver strands among her golden hair, Mrs.
Werle, 56, doesn't appear to be the typical tiddlywinks champ.
One would expect her leisure time to be spent at a bridge table or on a putting green.
Instead she races behind a wobbly two-wheeler or plays children's games in her small apartment in Coram.
Mrs.
Werle is one of the growing number of Long Island grandparents who have custody of their grandchildren.
"I've had Jennifer since she was 2," she said.
"I thought this would be temporary. My daughter is a substance abuser."


State Comptroller Assails Dinkins's Pact on Budget
State Comptroller H. Carl McCall yesterday sharply criticized the $31.2 billion budget agreement reached over the weekend between Mayor David N. Dinkins and leaders of the City Council, saying there were "serious questions about its soundness."
The criticism by Mr.
McCall, who has been in the job just six weeks, comes as a rebuke to the Mayor on several levels.
Not only is Mr.
McCall the state's second highest official and top fiscal monitor, he is also a longtime friend and political ally of Mr.
Dinkins.
Prior to becoming Comptroller, Mr.
McCall was president of the New York City Board of Education, a Dinkins appointee.


Abroad at Home; The Powell Factor
At a lunch for the honorary degree recipients on Harvard's commencement day Gen.
Colin Powell was asked to say a few words to the guests.
When he finished, a woman who has been critical of the military said to a friend: "I'm going to start Pacifists for Powell."
In 24 hours here General Powell all but charmed birds from the trees.
When he spoke extemporaneously, he was thoughtful, gracious, direct, easy.
Then he delivered a formal speech to thousands, including protesters on the issue of gays in the military, and got a standing ovation.


Richard A. Licht, Roanne Sragow
Judge Roanne Sragow of the District Court of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts in Cambridge was married yesterday to Richard A. Licht, a former Lieutenant Governor of Rhode Island and a partner in the law firm of Licht &amp; Semonoff in Providence, R.I.
Rabbi Samuel Chiel performed the ceremony at the Ritz-Carlton in Boston.
The bride graduated from Tufts University and received a law degree from Boston College.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack I. Sragow of Rockville Centre, L.I.
Her father is the executive vice president of Tahari Ltd., a manufacturer of women's clothes in New York.
Her mother, Kaye Sragow, now retired, was a nurse and a teacher of health and nutrition at the Bret Harte School in Cherry Hill, N.J.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  PEDDLER'S BLANKET, IMMIGRANT'S DREAM
Immigrants selling everything from purses and bracelets to Wayne Newton cassettes have created a makeshift marketplace directly in front of the Immigration and Naturalization Service headquarters at 26 Federal Plaza in lower Manhattan, even though most of them are here illegally.
Speaking mother tongues as diverse as Quechua, Wolof and Chinese, they have developed a camaraderie that ignores the fact that many sell the same wares.
Together they play cat-and-mouse games with the police.
And together they slough off public antagonism with the firm belief that they are earning an honest living.
A1.
LAW HOPES FOR LONGER, STRONGER ARMS
Shaken by the stranding of nearly 300 illegal Chinese immigrants aboard a tramp steamer off New York last week, after a surge of similar smuggling attempts along the coasts of Florida and California, Federal officials say they are developing an arsenal of new counter-smuggling tactics: wiretaps, far-reaching conspiracy statutes and the ability to seize money and property obtained through smuggling.
Penalties for smuggling immigrants would be stiffened, too, rising to perhaps a maximum of 20 years in prison, up from five years now.
Federal officials say they are also urging that intelligence satellites and other sophisticated monitoring devices that have been used in the fight against international drug traffickers be brought to bear against immigrant smugglers.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Save a Planet, Make a Buck: The 'Green' Industry Ripens
Adrian Gerstel likes Earth General, a Brooklyn store devoted to selling only such environmentally correct goods as nontoxic cleaners, energy-efficient light bulbs and biodegradable golf tees.
But she is torn between the store's high mission and its high prices.
"It's nice and clean and wholesome," said Ms.
Gerstel, an architecture student.
"You pay a little bit more, but it's almost worth it."


Accounts
*
Remy Amerique, New York, to the Martin Agency, Richmond, for its Remy Martin Cognac brand, previously handled by Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss, New York.
The agency was awarded the account after a review that also included Carmichael Lynch, Minneapolis.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Town &amp; Country magazine, New York, to Team One Advertising, El Segundo, Calif., to handle its trade advertising account, which had long been inactive.
A campaign, carrying the theme "Not the idle rich," is running in trade publications.
Billings were not disclosed.


Donald Slayton Dies at 69; Was One of First Astronauts
Donald K. Slayton, one of the original seven American astronauts and an influential manager in the space agency, died yesterday at his home in League City, Tex., near the Johnson Space Center in suburban Houston.
He was 69.
The cause of death was brain cancer, said Howard Benedict, executive director of the Mercury Seven Foundation.


A Rights Meeting, but Don't Mention the Wronged
In an atmosphere strangely removed from reality, the first World Conference on Human Rights in 25 years opens here on Monday with a broad mandate to discuss human rights in the world -- as long as it avoids naming any government known for abuses.
Under the rules adopted for the two-week conference, the fate of civilians caught in wars in, say, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Angola and Liberia will probably never be mentioned.
Nor is any discussion expected of political prisoners in, say, China or Cuba.


U.S. Plans Tougher Strategy To Combat Alien Smuggling
Shaken by the stranding of nearly 300 illegal Chinese immigrants aboard a tramp steamer off New York last week, after a surge of similar smuggling attempts along the coasts of Florida and California, Federal officials say they are developing an arsenal of new counter-smuggling tactics.
Under a sweeping plan being devised by the National Security Council and several Federal agencies, law-enforcement officials would be armed with some of the powerful tools now widely used against organized crime but banned in immigration cases: wiretaps, far-reaching conspiracy statutes and forfeiture laws to seize money and property obtained through smuggling.


Keep Cutting at the Pentagon
President Clinton's hopes to put the nation on a sound fiscal footing depend heavily on disciplining the defense budget now and for years to come.
The Pentagon is now showing more willingness to help.
But it will need to do more.
As reported Saturday, the Pentagon is scaling down its unrealistic strategy and no longer planning to fight two big wars at once.
And it is considering cancellation of some costly new weapons systems.
But it needs to cancel more if it is to avoid putting a jumbo mortgage on future revenues.


Gianna Zuccotti and Mark Lieb
Dr.
Gianna Zuccotti, a daughter of John and Susan Zuccotti of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Mark Lieb, the son of Marvin and Beverly Lieb of Lido Beach, L.I.
The Rev.
Louis Gigante, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel officiated at the home of the bride's parents in East Hampton, L.I.
Dr.
Zuccotti, 26, is keeping her name.
She is a resident in internal medicine at New York Hospital.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received a medical degree from the Mount Sinai School of Medicine.


Ian Thomas Dies at 64; Couturier to Elizabeth
Ian Thomas, a couturier for Queen Elizabeth, died on June 2, The Times of London reported last week.
He was 64.
He died in the Princess Grace Hospital in London after heart surgery.


Review/Television; Baedeker of Fun and Games In the Outback Down Under
"Rough Guide," the BBC travel series that enters the PBS lists this week, is plainly aimed at a youngish set of jet setters.
The with-it, if not excessively witty, young hosts, the insistent music, the fast takes and jagged editing and the unexpected sites and sights have teeny tourist written all over them.
Subtitles offer bits of information, like the fact that Melbourne is the third largest Greek city in the world.
The first of the eight programs bops around Australia, from the Great Barrier Reef to the outback to Melbourne.
You can see young folks, many of them from Japan, disporting in the town of Cairns, snorkeling, cliff jumping and admiring aboriginal art.
Out in the bush, you can watch a jillaroo (a female sheepherder) doing a job of castration and a pair of kangaroo hunters doing their job.
And in Melbourne you can join some people who spend their off hours exploring sewers, and then you can attend the Bachelors and Spinsters Ball, among partyers in formal dress who go in for mud wrestling.


Library of Congress Buys Charles Mingus Archive
The Library of Congress has acquired the comprehensive papers of Charles Mingus, the jazz bass player, band leader and composer.
The papers include his scores, recordings, photographs, correspondence and original manuscripts.
Jon Newsom, assistant chief of the library's music division, said recently that the acquisition was the most important of its kind in the library's history.
He said the papers, which include several hundred compositions, would be difficult to quantify, but he described them as "one very prolific musician's lifework." The library has the papers of many other American composers, including Aaron Copland, Leonard Bernstein, Richard Rodgers, George Gershwin and John Philip Sousa, as well as the recordings of Duke Ellington.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  SOMALI PROTESTERS KILLED  Pakistani soldiers fired on Somali protesters, killing at least 20 people.
United States aircraft continued attacks on the faction leader accused of killing U.N. troops.
A1  U.S.
OFFICIALS DEFEND ATTACK  United States officials expressed regret over the shooting deaths of Somali women and children in Mogadishu, but defended the actions of the United Nations peacekeeping forces as understandable.
A6


G.O.P. Plan Junks Truce Over Budget
An election-year budget truce between Gov.
Jim Florio and the Legislature was broken this weekend, as Republican lawmakers outlined plans to earmark $150 million in the budget to soften an anticipated increase in the Federal gasoline tax by the Clinton Administration, and Mr.
Florio led Democrats in attacking the proposal.
The plan is part of a $15.4 billion budget that the Republicans, who control both chambers of the Legislature, will introduce on Monday, according to Assembly Speaker Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian of Hackettstown.


Egypt Executes a Terrorist In Drive on Fundamentalists
In a sharpening of the conflict between the Government and the Islamic movement, Egypt announced today the first of what it said would be many executions of militants convicted of terrorism.
The execution was the first of a member of the Islamic movement since five were put to death in 1982 for the killing of President Anwar el-Sadat.


Emigres Are Holding Off on Their Hopes for Haiti
As they do most every day, Creole-speaking men and women gathered yesterday in New York City's barbershops and restaurants, on stoops and street corners, and engaged in a favorite pastime -- exchanging news from Haiti and debating oh-so-passionately the latest twist in the island politics.
But yesterday the conversations lasted a bit longer.
The debate grew louder and arms gesticulated wildly as if added energy might help them make sense of a week filled with double-edged victories, tragedies and enduring frustration over their country's longstanding political turmoil.


Dividend Meetings


The First Big Night Before the Rest of Their Lives


The Immigrant Dream Realized in One Evening
They're under age, overdressed and spending incredible amounts of money.
Ah, romance.
It's prom night, and some of the most glamorous couples out on the town are 17 years old.
Nobody has to tell them about real life; they live here, remember?
But for one night, they could dress up and pretend it was 1953.
She wore something supremely sophisticated, and he showed up with flowers for his best girl.


Suzanne Albin, Robert Tucker
Suzanne Rebecca Albin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Albin of Northport, L.I., was married yesterday to Robert Neal Tucker, the son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Nelson Tucker.
Rabbi Shlomo Blickstein officiated at the Roslyn Country Club in Roslyn Heights, L.I.


Unlicensed Peddlers, Unfettered Dreams
At 11 A.M. on a recent morning, Louis Ndlovu King of South Africa dragged a duffel bag packed with purses to the sidewalk at the corner of Broadway and Duane Street.
Minutes later, Luis and Marcelo Yamberlo, father and son, arrived laden with hand-woven sweaters and bracelets from Ecuador, their native land.
Following them, M. Hu, recently smuggled in from China, wheeled a cart neatly stacked with imitation Montblanc pens to the same spot.
Within 30 minutes, the sidewalks in front of the Jacob K. Javits Federal Building were throbbing with the sales pitches of immigrant vendors illegally hawking "Black Is Beautiful" T-shirts, Wayne Newton cassettes, "Pinocchio" videos, batteries, mood rings, sunglasses, flowered panties and butane lighters.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Aames Financial Corp., Los Angeles, 2.2 million common shares. Oppenheimer.


Review/Opera; Death Visits a Dissonant Family In a New Work by David Carlson
"The Midnight Angel," David Carlson's new piece at the Opera Theater of St.
Louis, addresses with considerable sophistication a contemporary genre best described as parlor melodrama.
Its themes are not Verdi's: noble factions in conflict, treachery on a regal scale or the extravagance of great love denied.
We attend instead the frictions common to families: the overbearing patriarch, the dependent nephew, the lovesick niece, a world-weary family friend or two, the looming inheritance.
Cheek by jowl in drawing rooms of varying splendor, such characters pour out a counterpoint of mutual resentment or isolate their sorrows in lonely asides.
Lady Neville's palace in this particular opera is no parlor, but the familial dissonance that bounces along its walls is familiar indeed.


Health Care Emerges as Issue at Bishops' Meeting
The overhaul of the nation's health-care system and its potential links with abortion will vie for attention with theological intricacies and sexual scandals when the nation's Roman Catholic bishops meet this week in New Orleans.
Catholic-affiliated hospitals are an important component of the American medical system, and the bishops are torn between their longstanding pleas for changes in the health-care system and their opposition to including payment for abortions in a national health insurance plan.


Jane Sovern, Ronald Meister
Jane Sovern, an assistant counsel at the City University of New York, was married yesterday to Ronald W. Meister, a partner of Eaton &amp; Van Winkle, a New York law firm.
Rabbi Richard Israel officiated at the Arch Restaurant in Brewster, N.Y.
Ms.
Sovern, who is keeping her name, graduated from Brown University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice Sovern of Reston, Va.
Her father is a consultant on national security issues.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Stich's Victory Like Watching Grass Grow  Michael Stich showed how dull winning on grass courts can be as he beat Wayne Ferreira, 6-3, 6-4, yesterday to win the Queen's Club championship in London.
The sixth-seeded Stich served up seven aces in beating the defending champion and claiming the $86,000 winner's check in the warmup for Wimbledon.
The two big servers seemed headed for a tie breaker in the first set until Stich dug out a superb cross-court return in the eighth game.
Ferreira, seeded seventh, then volleyed long on break point to fall behind, 5-3.
Stich then served out the first set.
Ferreira, who was also Stich's doubles partner in the tournament, started the second set with a double-fault and was broken by two blistering backhand returns.
Stich raced to a 5-1 lead before being broken for the only time, then rebounded with two aces to close out the 57-minute victory. (AP) Boetsch Gets First Victory: Arnaud Boetsch of France rallied to beat Wally Masur of Australia, 3-6, 6-3, 6-3, in the championship of the Continental grass court championships in Rosmalen, the Netherlands.
The eighth-seeded Boetsch, the 29th-ranked player in the world, earned his first ATP Tour tournament victory and became the first Frenchman to win a grass-court event since Henri Leconte in Sydney, Australia, in 1985. (AP)


Selling 'Jurassic': The Film And Toys
Yes, "Jurassic Park" drew record crowds over the weekend.
Yes, this Steven Spielberg dinosaur fantasy may be too violent and frightening for most children.
Rarely has the gulf between a studio's merchandising and promotion, which are heavily aimed at children, and a film, which is inappropriate for many youngsters, seemed so evident.


Halissee Skips the Crown And Again Rules on Grass
In the afterglow of the Triple Crown campaign, careers are being shaped these days by 3-year-old horses who did not run in the Kentucky Derby, the Preakness and the Belmont Stakes.
And one of them, the colt Halissee, gave a stylish shape to his own career yesterday when he won the Hill Prince Stakes at Belmont Park for his fourth straight victory on the turf.
Halissee, a gray son of the grass star Cozzene and a grandson of the speed horse Fappiano, teamed up with Julie Krone for the second time in four weeks and outran a short field of four rivals.
He led nearly all the way but didn't clinch anything until the homestretch.
Then he stretched it out and got to the wire 2 1/2 lengths in front of Proud Shot, who had half a length on Logroller for second palce.


Book on Anita Hill Greeted by Hysteria
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis, in "Sleaze With Footnotes" (column, May 21), accuses critics and columnists who have given my book "The Real Anita Hill" serious and respectful reviews of failing to check my facts.


Christian Group Criticized As Unsound Insurance Plan
Two white Cadillacs are parked in front of the converted schoolhouse occupied by the Christian Brotherhood Newsletter, a not-for-profit charity, in this small city just west of Akron.
Inside, two cooks are preparing a free lunch for the brotherhood's 60 employees.
The employees, nearly all related to Bruce E. Hawthorn, who founded the brotherhood, eat breakfast and lunch in a private dining room, visit their children in the cheerful nursery and, after work, exercise in the gymnasium.


CHRONICLE
WARREN E. BURGER , the former Chief Justice of the United States, will receive the Betsy Ross Freedom Award at Flag Day ceremonies in Philadelphia today.
Mr.
Burger will be the principal speaker at the ceremony, which marks the 216th anniversary of the adoption of the Stars and Stripes by the Continental Congress in 1777.
The event will be held in front of the Betsy Ross House, where legend has it that the famous flag was sewn.


Michele Reis And Todd Melet
Michele Ingrid Reis, a daughter of Barbara and Ralph Reis of Westport, Conn., was married there yesterday to Todd Benjamin Melet, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Melet of Flint, Mich.
Rabbi Robert Orkand performed the ceremony at Temple Israel.


New Executive At Foote, Cone
Robin Raj has joined Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in San Francisco as senior vice president and group creative director on the Taco Bell account.
He succeeds Neil Sellman, who is moving to Foote, Cone's Los Angeles office to become senior vice president and group creative director on the Mattel account.


Exit, NATO
The Western alliance is dead.
It seems likely that history will record the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's failure to respond effectively to the Bosnian war as evidence of the demise of this military and political partnership.


Chongqing Journal; Some Chinese Won't Toe Party's Line on History
On a lush hillside here is a museum that has it all: Torture Cave with iron rods heating ominously in a fire, an American-inspired concentration camp, grisly photographs of corpses, and a riveting sound-and-light show of Communist heroes being massacred in 1949.
The museum is a reminder that the Government stays in power not only by constructing prisons, but also by building history.


In Ad Drought, Magazines Take Root
If advertising pages and revenues are barometers of health, the magazine industry is only just limping out of its worst recession in decades.
But how about new magazines as a sign of vitality?
In category after category, the pots are bubbling.
Magazines for children.
Magazines for parents.
Magazines for the health conscious and magazines for the fashion conscious.
Sports magazines.
Environmental magazines.
And there are rumors about might-be magazines.


In Defense of the Pope's Brand Name
With entrepreneurs brazen enough to sell Pope-on-a-Rope soap during previous papal visits to the World Youth Festival, there is no telling what a little American ingenuity will create for Pope John Paul II's trip to Denver in August.
But now that the Roman Catholic Church has given its official blessing to merchandising the Pontiff, there will be plenty of official souvenirs to take home.


Review/Ballet; A Reprise of History At Balanchine Festival
Long before the final curtain fell at the New York State Theater on June 18, 1972, dance history had been made.
That was the opening night of the New York City Ballet's first Stravinsky Festival, whose program of five choreographic works included the premieres of two masterly abstractions by George Balanchine, "Stravinsky Violin Concerto" and "Symphony in Three Movements."
Some of the excitement of that occasion was conjured up Tuesday night at the State Theater, when the company presented these two marvels as part of its Balanchine Celebration.
There was also another ballet from that opening night, Balanchine's version of "Firebird." Whereas "Firebird" was virtually ignored in 1972 by balletgoers who were thunderstruck by the plotless premieres, its drama dazzled the audience on Tuesday.


INSIDE
Civil War Threat in Cambodia
The leader of Cambodia's royalist party, a son of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, threatened war unless his half brother halts the secession movement he is leading.
Page A3.
Joining International Radio
Officials say Voice of America and Radio Free Europe-Radio Liberty will be merged, saving $250 million over the next few years.
Page A16.
Early Astronaut Dies
Deke Slayton, a NASA manager and one of the original seven astronauts profiled in "The Right Stuff," died of brain cancer.
He was 69.
Page B9.
Suns Win in Triple Overtime
Phoenix defeated Chicago, 129-121, in triple overtime to trim the Bulls' lead to 2-1 in the N.B.A. championship series.
SportsMonday, page C1.


Rafsanjani Re-elected in Iran, But Without a Huge Mandate
Results issued today showed that President Hashemi Rafsanjani won re-election as expected on Friday, but without the overwhelming mandate he had sought to push through free-market reforms and convince the world that support for Iran's Islamic Government has not faltered.
The President won 63 percent of the 16.3 million votes cast in the four-way race.
In the last presidential election, in July 1989, he faced one challenger and won 94.5 percent of the vote.


Books of The Times; From Tulips to Mergers: Speculative Psychology
A Short History of Financial Euphoria  By John Kenneth Galbraith Illustrated. 113 pages.
Whittle Books in Association with Viking. $16.
It looks at first as if in "A Short History of Financial Euphoria," John Kenneth Galbraith is offering just what his title suggests, a brief account of famous speculative episodes like the mania over tulips that hit Amsterdam in the early 17th century, the South Sea Bubble of the 19th century and the Wall Street crash of 1929.


Tax's Demise Illustrates First Rule Of Lobbying: Work, Work, Work
Jim Mc Avoy remembers well when he and a cadre of the capital's top lobbyists held their first meeting to plot the demise of President Clinton's energy tax.
It was December 1992, Mr.
McAvoy recalls: "I left it, and went straight to our Christmas party."
Not only was the tax plan little more than Washington dinner-party grist; the President wasn't even the President yet.
Mr.
Clinton would not suggest squeezing money from British thermal units until February.
Congress would not vote on a B.T.U. tax until May.


A Noble Loser
If it's true that the great peaks in human civilization tend to produce the greatest artists, then it follows that the great valleys will produce some real losers.
Well, the New York Mets, now plumbing baseball depths unseen since the amazin' summer of 1962, have produced a player who's approaching an 82-year-old record for futility.
Anthony Young, a young pitcher of some promise, lost his 21st game in a row yesterday, when he was beaten by the Phillies, 5 to 3.
He is closing steadily on the major league mark of 23, set in 1910-11 by Cliff Curtis of the old (and legendarily inept) Boston Braves.
Mr.
Young endures all this with remarkable dignity, acknowledging the pain of his predicament but never giving in to it by whining.
That attitude -- and the occasional strong performance -- is what keeps him in the rotation, and in the hunt for the record.
Paradoxically, you have to be pretty good to lose that many in a row -- if you're completely overmatched, you'll be back in the bush leagues in a second.


Alison Lazarus, Clifford Gevirtz
Alison Meg Lazarus, the director of sales for the Knopf Publishing Group at Random House Inc. in New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Clifford Mark Gevirtz, an attending anesthesiologist at the Montefiore Medical Center and an assistant professor of anesthesiology at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.
Rabbi Deborah A. Hirsch officiated at Bridgewaters in New York.
Ms.
Lazarus, 35, is keeping her name.
She graduated from the State University of New York at Binghamton.
She is a daughter of Joan G. Lazarus of Ossining, N.Y., and the late Theodore R. Lazarus.


Sussex Force Only Looks Like Police
Lieut.
Frank Raeder, all 6 feet 9 inches of him, and three fellow private security guards began patrolling the streets of this tiny community in the hills of northwestern New Jersey this month.
They drive bright white cars with a blue stripe and a rooftop rack of red lights.
They wear crisp uniforms of navy and Columbia blue, with a polished leather belt bearing handcuffs, a portable radio, and a 9-millimeter handgun.
They look, for all the world, like police officers, maybe even looking a bit more natty than the four officers town officials dismissed early last year after a drug scandal.
But New Jersey law-enforcement officials say they are nothing more than private citizens in uniform, with no law-enforcement powers.
In fact, the state officials say, their presence may be illegal.


Honors
*
Eileen Roper Ast, senior vice president and director of public relations at Bozell New York, was elected president of New York Women in Communications Inc., succeeding Patricia O'Connell.


U.S. to Merge Its International Radio Operations
After months of acrimonious debate over the future of Government-sponsored broadcasting, the Clinton Administration has decided to merge all international radio operations, senior officials said this weekend.
The officials said the gradual-consolidation plan, which they expect to announce this week, would save about $250 million over the next few years and put Voice of America and Radio Free Europe-Radio Liberty under the same governing board.


Clinton's Dilemma On Court Candidate
After disclosures that Judge Stephen Breyer did not pay Social Security taxes for a housekeeper, Senate backers have started a drive to save his Supreme Court candidacy.
But the situation raises difficulties for President Clinton, who dropped two female candidates in similar cases: if he nominates the judge, he risks being accused of a double standard.
Article, page A11.


A Shopping Spree to Be The (Only) Lady in Red
They're under age, overdressed and spending incredible amounts of money.
Ah, romance.
It's prom night, and some of the most glamorous couples out on the town are 17 years old.
Nobody has to tell them about real life; they live here, remember?
But for one night, they could dress up and pretend it was 1953.
She wore something supremely sophisticated, and he showed up with flowers for his best girl.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
If the news tomorrow on May consumer prices is encouraging, as was the Producer Price Index reported on Friday, current inflation worries will presumably be defused.  [ Page D1. ]
The First Lady proposed "a new bargain" in a speech to the American Medical Association.
Hillary Rodham Clinton said the White House would limit malpractice lawsuits, relax regulation of labs and free doctors from burdensome supervision if doctors supported the President's effort to overhaul health care.  [ A12. ]


Essay; Too Many Russians
There's a telephone directory in my hotel room.
To people accustomed to freedom, that's expected.
But to anyone who worked even for short bursts in the oppressive atmosphere of the Soviet Union, a telephone book is a symbol of freedom.
In the old days, unless you were an official or had a K.G.B. contact, you could never get a list of numbers; the Soviets did not want people communicating.


Tahar Djaout; Writer, 39
Tahar Djaout, an Algerian fiction writer, journalist and poet, died of gunshot wounds on June 2 in Algiers, the British newspaper The Independent reported last week.
He was 39 and lived in Bainem, nine miles west of Algiers.
Mr.
Djaout, a co-founder of a weekly newspaper critical of Muslim fundamentalists, was shot in the head on May 26 near his home.
The police in Algiers said Muslim terrorists had waylaid him.


Shari R. Waldbaum, Lee D. Feinberg
Shari Renee Waldbaum, a lawyer at the Labor Department in Washington, was married yesterday to Lee Daniel Feinberg, an aerospace engineer at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration in Greenbelt, Md.
Rabbi Melvin Sirner performed the ceremony at Beth El Synagogue in New Rochelle, N.Y.
The bride, 27, graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., and received a law degree from American University.
She is the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald Waldbaum of New Rochelle.


World Economies


Is Clinton Moving to Left, Right or Center?
To the Editor:
"A History of Gergenism" (editorial, June 2 ), on the ascendancy of style over substance in the Clinton White House with the appointment of David R. Gergen as communications director, was a welcome relief from mass media hype over Mr.
Gergen.


Is Clinton Moving to Left, Right or Center?; Creative Dialogue
To the Editor:
The reason there is so much apparent confusion associated with the Clinton Administration is that for the first time since Franklin D. Roosevelt a President is engaging the nation in a creative dialogue, which by its nature generates confusion and frustration until it's mastered.


Lisa E. Javitch and Louis H. Benjamin
Lisa E. Javitch, a doctoral candidate in English education at Columbia University, was married yesterday to Louis H. Benjamin, a lawyer in New York.
Rabbi Irving Greenberg officiated at the home of the bride's father in Harrision, N.Y.
Ms.
Javitch, who is keeping her name, is an instructor of English education at Columbia University Teachers College in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Macalester College and received a master's degree in literature from New York University and a master's degree in English education from Teachers College.
She is the daughter of Beth Ann Segal of Wayzata, Minn., and Lee Javitch.
Her father, now retired, was the chairman and chief executive in Carlisle, Pa., of Giant Food Stores Inc., which operates a chain of supermarkets.


Amid the Rubble, Bonilla Finds His Bat
There aren't many lightning-rod athletes who can point to the exact time and place where the barometer changed dramatically for them.
Bobby Bonilla can.
The time was last Monday night.
The place was Shea Stadium.
And for the first time in recent memory, the fans did not boo.


Court Pens Act as Breeding Ground for TB and Other Illnesses
To the Editor:
In "How New York City Confronts the Problem of TB in Its Jails" (letter, June 1), the Commissioners of Health and Correction make a persuasive case that the Dinkins administration is acting on the tuberculosis situation in the city's jails.
But the city has ignored the serious health problems in another component of its criminal justice system, the pre-arraignment court pens.


A Texas Welcome for Columbus's Ships


CUTS IN MEDICARE DRAW OPPOSITION
Black Democrats in the House warned today that the Senate Finance Committee's plans for further cuts in Medicare spending threatened the future of President Clinton's entire budget in Congress.
And a liberal Democrat in the Senate, Tom Harkin of Iowa, said he and his allies would also work to vote down any budget with Medicare cuts that they considered unfair.
But the Senate's Democratic majority leader, George J. Mitchell of Maine, said that the Finance Committee would not only cut Medicare, the Federal health program for the elderly, in the version of the budget to be announced on Tuesday but would also make cuts elsewhere.


Johnson Is Iron Man Of Chicago Marathon
Kevin Johnson was tired before the game.
He was tired of being identified as the principal flop of the first two playoff games in Phoenix.
Johnson was tired after the game, too.
He was exhausted from playing 62 minutes, the most ever played in a National Basketball Association final-round game.
But he felt much better than he might have because the Suns defeated the home team, 129-121, in the triple-overtime marathon dance that more or less brought the Suns back into this series.


Agassi Is Firing His Forehand Again
He may be wearing even more white than is necessary, in the form of a bandage to soothe his ailing right wrist, but Andre Agassi, the undisputed peacock of the male tennis circuit and the unlikely defending champion of Wimbledon, has vowed to return to the scene of his greatest career triumph and attempt to defend his first and only Grand Slam crown.
A week from today, Agassi, who transcended his baseline heritage last year to defeat Goran Ivanisevic in a stirring five-set Wimbledon final, expects to commence his title defense despite being unable, as recently as last Monday, to hit his favorite stroke, the forehand blast, because of pain in his right wrist.


What Makes a Magazine Come to Life? Two Campaigns Take Different Approaches.
BIRTH and rebirth, facts of life with a small "l," are the focus of advertising for two magazines that bear Life with a capital "L" in their titles.
The reintroduction of Life, the struggling Time Inc. monthly, will be heralded in a trade campaign carrying the theme, "It's what you make of it." And Family Life, the fourth title for Straight Arrow Publishers, will be introduced in a trade campaign portraying it as "a new addition to the family."


Tammy Landa, David A. Fisher
Tammy Landa, the daughter of Harriet Landa of Boca Raton, Fla., and William Landa of North Miami Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Dr.
David Alexander Fisher, a son of Drs.
Hyman and Rosalie Fisher of Livingston, N.J.
Rabbi Haskel Lookstein officiated at the Essex House in New York.
Mrs.
Fisher, 30, is a development executive at the UJA-Federation in New York.
She graduated from Boston University.
Her father is the president of Landa Associates, a real estate company in North Miami Beach.


Judith Friend, Andrew Popik
Dr.
Judith Nancy Friend, a daughter of Carol Kenyon of Scotch Plains, N.J., and Karl E. Friend of Emmaus, Pa., was married last evening to Andrew H. Popik, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Selig R. Popik of Spring Valley, N.Y.
Rabbi Louis Frishman performed the ceremony at Temple Beth-El in Spring Valley.
Dr.
Friend is keeping her name.
She is an associate veterinarian at the Westfield (N.J.) Veterinary Group.
She graduated cum laude from Cornell University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received her veterinary degree from the New York State College of Veterinary Medicine.


Moses Polakoff Is Dead at Age 97; Was Lawyer for Lucky Luciano
Moses Polakoff, a lawyer who represented notorious underworld figures like Lucky Luciano and Meyer Lansky, died at his apartment in Manhattan on Saturday.
He was 97 years old.
After a brief career that began with prosecuting offenders, Mr.
Polakoff established a private practice defending them.


Fight on Anti-Theft Device to Heat Up
The Knogo Corporation, one of the handful of companies that make systems to protect retailers from shoplifting, is preparing to fire a new salvo in the battle over which anti-theft device would become the standard used by most store operators.
Knogo, based in Hauppauge, L.I., planned to announce today that Sonopress, the manufacturing division of the Bertelsmann Music Group of Germany, had selected two Knogo theft-detection products that would be embedded directly into recorded materials like cassette tapes and compact disks, according to people familiar with Knogo's plans.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Business Inventories . . .
April  Tuesday  Consumer Price Index . . .
May  Wednesday  Housing Starts . . .
May Industrial Production . . .
May  Thursday Merchandise Trade . . .
April  Weekly Jobless Claims Productivity 1st Qtr.
Friday  None





Is Clinton Moving to Left, Right or Center?; The View From Europe
To the Editor:
On my return from a trip to Europe last week, I was bombarded by news of President Clinton's haircuts and his travel office.
Big deal, especially after years of watching recent Governments misuse our tax money.


Is Clinton Moving to Left, Right or Center?; Cheer Gergen On
To the Editor:
Dismissing the David Gergen appointment as White House communications director as unmasked cynicism ignores Mr.
Gergen's philosophical journey of the last 24 months, seen on public television's nightly news.
Watching Bill Clinton progress through the primaries to the election and victory, and reporting on those events, Mr.
Gergen moved from deep skepticism about the Clinton candidacy to something close to cautious endorsement, as he moved further from identification with the Bush camp.


U.S. Expresses Regret At Shooting of Somalis
American officials expressed regret today over the shooting deaths of Somali women and children in Mogadishu, but defended the actions of the United Nations troops there as understandable.
Witnesses and hospital workers said Pakistani troops had fired into crowds of unarmed women and children, killing about 20 and wounding 50.
But a Pakistani Foreign Ministry spokesman in Islamabad said the troops returned fire after being attacked by an armed Somali group, and strongly denied that Pakistani forces had fired on a defenseless crowd.


Adam Owett and Shana Fox-Martin
Shana Fox-Martin, the daughter of Nancy Fox-Martin of New York and Amsterdam, and the late Milton Fox-Martin, was married yesterday to Adam Thomas Owett, the son of Bernard and Trudy Owett of New York.
Rabbi Dennis Math performed the ceremony at the Hudson River Club in New York.
Mrs.
Owett, 24, is a student at Baruch College in New York.
Her father was a marketing consultant in Amsterdam for European hotels.
Her mother, now retired, was a textile designer in Amsterdam.


Grand Prix of Canada Leaves Andretti Stalled in Pits
The banner in the grandstands opposite Michael Andretti's garage will do as a title for his weekend here at the Grand Prix of Canada.
It read: "Go Micheal."
A positive message, but someone got their wires crossed.


Marilyn Greenberg and Mark Morril
Marilyn S. Greenberg, a painter in New York, was married yesterday to Mark Charles Morril, the general counsel of Paramount Publishing in New York.
Cantor Bruce Ruben officiated at the Stanhope hotel in Manhattan.
Ms.
Greenberg, who is keeping her name, graduated from Temple University and received master's degrees in art and in fine art from Rutgers University.
She is the daughter of George and Frances Greenberg of Palm Beach, Fla.
Her father, now retired, was the chairman and chief executive of Loehmann's, the women's clothing store chain, in the Bronx.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


Red, White, Blue and 1 Goal Short
In the most popular sport in the world, the Germans are known for their raging garrison comebacks.
No lead is safe, because these people do not know how to quit.
But today the world champions of soccer had to hang on for a 4-3 victory over the United States here in the U.S.
Cup tournament, as a crowd of 53,549 spectators at Soldier Field roared for one more late goal.


Nevada Town Booms With Proceeds From Gambling Mormons
A giant neon cowboy stands with his toes against the state line here, looming over a landscape of salt flats and alkaline-stunted sage.
Wendover Will, he is called.
The biggest, friendliest cowpoke in the West.
For three decades he has stood at the Nevada-Utah border, his upraised hand beckoning toward Salt Lake City, 117 miles east of here on Interstate 80, his smile promising a little action in the five casinos at his back.


Carin L. Levine, Roger Ehrenberg
Carin Lynn Levine, a doctoral candidate in clinical psychology at St.
John's University, was married yesterday to Roger Ehrenberg, an investment banker with Citibank in New York.
Rabbi Marjorie Slome officiated at the Coveleigh Club in Rye, N.Y.
The bride and her husband, both 27, graduated with honors from the University of Michigan.
She is the daughter of Marcia Graydon of South Orange, N.J., and Charles Levine of Brooklyn.
Her mother is a lawyer in South Orange.
Her father is a general manager at Sikanib Corporation, a construction company in New York, and a real estate developer


Bridge
For players with more ambition than experience, the Grand National Teams Flight C, for those below life master rank, offers a rare opportunity: By heading the field in New York City and Long Island, Dick and Karen Berbig, Karen Famera and Lew Kroll, all of Farmingdale, L.I., earned a trip to Washington next month to compete in national playoffs.
In the final, played a week ago at the Manhattan Club, 27 West 72d Street, they won by by 25 imps against a group led by Stan Sterenberg of Manhattan, and were aided by the diagramed deal.


Dallas Agency Wins Lone Star Account
The G. Heileman Brewing Company has awarded the Richards Group in Dallas the national creative assignment for its Lone Star beer brand.
Media planning and buying will be handled by SFM Media of New York.
Billings have not been set.


Rebecca Baxt, J. B. Shammash
Rebecca Doria Baxt, a daughter of Dr.
Saida and Dr.
Sherwood Baxt of Saddle River, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Jonathan Baruch Shammash, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Jacob B. Shammash of Longmeadow, Mass.
Rabbi Andre Ungar performed the ceremony at Temple Emanuel in Woodcliff Lake, N.J.


Beatrice Berle, 90, A Doctor, Teacher And Medical Writer
Beatrice Bishop Berle, a physician, teacher and author, died on Friday at her home in Great Barrington, Mass.
She was 90 years old.
Her death was caused by complications from a stroke, said her daughter, Beatrice Berle Meyerson.


Tuxedo and Gown Parade Gets Approval and a Lift
They're under age, overdressed and spending incredible amounts of money.
Ah, romance.
It's prom night, and some of the most glamorous couples out on the town are 17 years old.
Nobody has to tell them about real life; they live here, remember?
But for one night, they could dress up and pretend it was 1953.
She wore something supremely sophisticated, and he showed up with flowers for his best girl.


Review/Dance; Ballet Theater's Wide-Ranging Finale
American Ballet Theater closed its season over the weekend with flags flying, offering first-rate performances in a series of debuts and in the engagement's fleeting glimpse of Antony Tudor's "Undertow."
All three ballets on the company's final bill, presented on Friday night and repeated on Saturday afternoon and evening at the Metropolitan Opera House, were created in the 1940's.
Yet their amazing variety testifies to the strong esthetic differences that coexisted among choreographers in that period.


CHRONICLE
"I have AIDS," begins an article in the current issue of The New Yorker.
The author is HAROLD BRODKEY , a writer at the magazine who is known for his intensely autobiographical fiction.
In the article, Mr.
Brodkey reflects on his childhood, his relationships and his career -- all discussed against the backdrop of an infection that he is publicly acknowledging for the first time.
Mr.
Brodkey, 62, broke into literary circles in the late 1950's with an acclaimed book of short stories and was hailed by some critics as an American Proust or Joyce.
But it took him 27 years to complete his first novel, the 835-page "Runaway Soul," which was published in 1991.


Politics Mixes With Salsa On Fifth Ave.
Celebrating the 500th anniversary of the Spanish arrival on Puerto Rico and their growing prominence in New York City's new political world, hundreds of thousands of Puerto Ricans filled Fifth Avenue with shouts and salsa yesterday afternoon, as local politicians of every origin competed for their handshakes and their votes.
To a mix of raucous cheers and rumbling boos, Mayor David N. Dinkins and his rival Rudolph W. Giuliani -- each dressed in the uniform of the day, crisp embroidered guayaberas that soon wilted under a brilliant sun -- marched with prominent Puerto Rican seconds, mindful that all the recent polls have shown Hispanic voters shaping up as perhaps the key swing bloc in this fall's election.


Chow, Anglin Take Singles; Underdog Loses Bite in Final
Everybody loves the underdog.
Especially when he laughs at himself on the court, dives for every close ball and wears a forest-green hat backward, though the whole point of a cap is to provide shade from the sun.
Seeded 14th, Erik Sicard was an underdog yesterday in the Mayor's Cup All-Scholastic tennis championships at the U.S.T.A.
National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows, Queens, as his enthusiasm and style propelled him into the final.
But Sicard, a 15-year-old sophomore at the Dwight School in Manhattan, ran out of what got him to the final round and lost to 18-year-old Peter Chow of Francis Lewis High School in Queens, 6-1, 6-1.


High Hurdles Await Interactive TV
There may be a few potholes on the road to the information superhighway.
But the 16,000 people who gathered here last week for the annual National Cable Television Association show ignored them as they eagerly kept their sights on interactive television and on the alliances that are being forged to develop its technology.


20 Somalis Die When Peacekeepers Fire at Crowd
At least 20 Somalis were killed on Sunday and dozens wounded when Pakistani peacekeeping troops opened fire on demonstrators in central Mogadishu.
The shootings occurred just after 10:30 A.M. as several thousand Somalis marched down one of the main avenues in what appeared to be a protest against United Nations attacks this weekend on weapons caches belonging to a Somali clan leader.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Networks and Advertisers Evaluate the Lineups for Fall
To figure out how the networks' new fall lineups will fare, you can wait until fall.
But then, of course, you would be three months behind everybody else.
Last week, the networks and the major advertising agencies started to release their forecasts of how the programs on the autumn schedules would do.
This exchange of statistics, the media kingdom's equivalent of a show of plumage, is the first step in the annual mating ritual of the "upfront" season.
During this season, the networks sell commercial time to their big advertisers on a full-year basis.
By the time this crucial period ends next month, the networks hope to have sold nearly $4 billion worth of prime-time advertising spots.


An Artist a Lot More at Home Away From Home
Richard Serra was in his element.
Partly, that meant he was in Europe, which he believes has always supported his work more loyally and intelligently than the United States.
Unfortunately, it also meant Reykjavik, Iceland, and a rain driven nearly horizontal to the grass-tufted volcanic rock and mixed with pinpricks of hail.
"I love this light," he said, squinting up at the implacable, slate-gray sky.
"And I love the look of the piece when it's wet."
He had a point.
"Afangar" -- the name was taken from an Icelandic epic and means something like "wandering about in a contemplative mood" -- consists of nine pairs of hexagonal stone pillars, natural crystalline formations hacked from a quarry in the middle of Iceland and transported to the site.
The pairs outline the small island on which the piece stands, like Viking totems.
When the weather is dry, the stones look light gray and are flecked with bird droppings.
Wet, they're shiny and black, Nordic cousins of the Jupiterian sentinels in the film "2001."


More Misadventures for Anthony Adverse
Anthony Young walked to the pitcher's mound at Shea Stadium early yesterday afternoon, bent down and gently scooped a baseball from the dirt.
So began the sad, slow march to the inevitable.


Canada's Tories Name Woman Prime Minister
Defense Minister Kim Campbell was elected tonight to head the Progressive Conservative Party and to be the first woman to serve as Canada's Prime Minister.
Prime Minister Brian Mulroney, in the last year of his second five-year term, announced his resignation in February, leading to today's convention.


"PULSE: Suspended Licenses"
In New York City, convictions for driving on a suspended or revoked license rose by 13.4 percent to j2,702 in 1991, from 2,364 the year before.
Another 47,824 drivers were convicted for driving without a license, a decline of 10.3 percent from 1990.
Statewide, 43,555 drivers were convicted of driving on revoked, or suspended licenses in 1991, a decrease of 6.8 percent from the previous year.
Most suspensions reflected a failure to respond to a traffic or parking summons.
Licenses were revoked most oten for driving while intoxicated (25.4%); driving without insurance (22.5%); accumulating 3 or more moving violations in 18 months (7.9%), or refusing an alcohol test (7.3%).
An additional 21.9% were out-of-state drivers convicted of violations in New York.


Lori S. Brenner And Jay Sellinger
Lori Sue Brenner, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Morton R. Brenner of Boynton Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Jay Sellinger, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Sellinger of White Plains.
Rabbi Murray Grauer performed the ceremony at the Brae Burn Country Club in Purchase, N.Y.
Mrs.
Sellinger is a gemologist at M. Fabrikant &amp; Sons, a jewelry concern in New York.
She graduated from Washington University.
Her father, who was an endodontist in New York, was also an assistant clinical professor and the chief of endodontics at Mount Sinai Hospital and Medical Center in New York.


No Headline


Cambodian Prince Tells Troops to Prepare to Fight Over Secession
Cambodia's royal family feud threatened to dissolve into civil war today as Prince Norodom Ranariddh ordered his troops to prepare for battle against secessionist forces led by his estranged half-brother, Prince Norodom Chakrapong.
Both princes are sons of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the 70-year-old former monarch who is now considered by many people to be the country's best hope for national reconciliation.
While there was no sign today that Prince Sihanouk had moved to mediate the dispute, many diplomats say they believe that he will eventually forge a coalition government that may include both princes.


Feinstein, at Stanford, Warns Of Too Hasty Military Trims
Senator Dianne Feinstein delivered the main address yesterday at Stanford University's 102d commencement exercise, held at Stanford Stadium.
A member of Stanford's class of '55, Ms.
Feinstein, a Democrat from San Francisco, was elected in November as one of California's first two female United States Senators.
"It is time for a rational plan for defense conversion instead of the random closing of bases and the piecemeal cancellation of defense contracts," Ms.
Feinstein said.
"Otherwise, we risk losing, for both state and nation, the greatest resources of scientific, technical and human capital ever gathered together in human history."


Time to Make Sense on Rent Control
New York City's rent regulations expire tomorrow, as they do every two years.
And legislators are again at loggerheads over rent controls that masquerade as boons to the city's poor and middle class, but actually hurt them by inflating the cost of housing and robbing the city of badly needed tax revenues.
There's not much good about rent controls, despite their undeserved popularity among tenants.
They reduce property tax revenues, discourage construction of new rental apartments and speed the deterioration of older housing.
Controls are making a sick real estate market sicker.
Costs are up, the economy is down and owners cannot recoup their losses through rents.


Brewers Are Happy to See Sea Gulls, Yankees Leave
By the third inning, the Brewer fans were reduced to cheering for a couple of dogs.
With dozens of sea gulls congregating at County Stadium for the third straight night and the Brewers in the midst of absorbing a messy turnaround in the score, the fans wanted entertainment.
They wanted to see Gus and Sarge.
While Sarge staged a splendid solo in chasing away the sea gulls, and as Gus watched on standby, the Brewers did not display any such spunk against the resurgent Yankees.
After racing to a 3-0 lead over Jimmy Key in the first inning, Milwaukee saw its pitching ravaged by the Yankees, who tied the game in the second, went ahead with four runs in the third and ended the game with a 9-5 victory.


Some Fatherly Advice at the Special Olympics


A Test of Assumptions On Race and on Politics
MATCH the two quotations with their speakers:
1: "It's important that we talk about diversity, but at the same time the parties we're trying to help must contribute to their own well-being."


Bosnian Croats and Muslims Urge Troops to Halt Fighting
In a move that only stirred skepticism among United Nations officials, Bosnia's collective presidency, which contains Croats and Serbs as well as Muslims, issued a cease-fire order tonight to end the fighting between Muslims and Croats in central Bosnia.
International mediators had arranged a rare meeting of the seven-member presidency in the hope of persuading Muslim and Croatian politicians to consider proposals for power-sharing in the few regions of Bosnia and Herzegovina that are not occupied by Serbian forces.


Dance in Review
School of American Ballet  Juilliard Theater
The School of American Ballet's 29th annual workshop performances came to a celebratory end last Monday night.
The evening started with the presentation of four Mae L. Wien Awards by Peter Martins, the faculty chairman, to Suki Schorer, a faculty member; Miriam Mahdaviani, a choreographer, and Jennie Somogyi and Edward Liang, students who have just been accepted into City Ballet as apprentices.
The award is for excellence and promise and is intended for students, teachers and choreographers at the school, an affiliate of the New York City Ballet.
Mr.
Liang, seen in a role debut leading the Czardas in George Balanchine's "Cortege Hongrois," epitomized the joyous expertise of these young dancers.
He stood out for his resiliency, crispness and endearing passion.
The lead cast was completed by Michelle Merrell, his partner, and Ms.
Somogyi and Christopher Macdougall.


Finding Help in New York: Step 1, Smash a Police Car
With a gun jammed against his neck and the threat of death if he did not hand over more cash, a resourceful livery-cab driver came up with a sure-fire way to get help late Saturday night: he crashed his cab into two police cars parked outside a station house in Queens.
"There was no police outside at the time," the driver, Elioth Kersaint, explained yesterday.
"Because nobody was there, I had to crash the police cars."


T-Shirts Forsaken In Favot Of Top Hats
They're under age, overdressed and spending incredible amounts of money.
Ah, romance.
It's prom night, and some of the most glamorous couples out on the town are 17 years old.
Nobody has to tell them about real life; they live here, remember?
But for one night, they could dress up and pretend it was 1953.
She wore something supremely sophisticated, and he showed up with flowers for his best girl.
Maybe Mom and Dad missed their prom because they were too cool for formals and lavender cummerbunds, but not these teen-agers.
Prom is hip again, they say.


Patents; It Feels Like Peanut Butter, But It's Designed to Mend the Interior Walls of Damaged Arteries
THE Food and Drug Administration recently approved the implantation of metal "stents" for use in human coronary arteries.
The stents, previously approved for use in other parts of the body, are small coils that act as an internal scaffolding to keep arteries from reclosing once they have been unclogged by angioplasty.
For now, stents are the only option available for doctors who perform angioplasty, an alternative to surgery, who want to prevent the reclosing of heart arteries, a condition known as restenosis.
But Marvin J. Slepian, an assistant professor of medicine at the University of Arizona and director of interventional cardiology at the Tucson Veterans Administration Hospital, says he has come up with a better answer.


Miss Fleetwood And Mr. Paul
Carmen A. Fleetwood, a reporter in Trenton for the New Jersey bureau of The Associated Press, was married yesterday to Gordon A. Paul, a sportswriter for the Dorf Feature Service in Mountainside, N.J., whose articles appear in The Newark Star-Ledger.
The Rev.
Carol Burnside, an Episcopal minister, and Rabbi Shimon Barris officiated at the home of the bride's parents, Mr. and Dr.
Harvey Fleetwood, in Upper Montclair, N.J.


Cabinet Secretary Talks Of U.S.-Industry Links
United States Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown said today that the Clinton Administration was determined to build "a uniquely American partnership" between the public and private sectors to more actively promote American industry abroad.
"President Mitterrand of France or Chancellor Kohl of Germany do not hesitate to jump on a plane to promote French or German industry at all corners of the world," Mr.
Brown said in an interview.
"Now we, too, plan to be more supportive and aggressive."


Review/Rock; Magical Memory Tour, Complete With Updates
For the first third of Paul McCartney's show at Giants Stadium in East Rutherford, N.J., on Friday night, the audience seemed shellshocked.
Mr.
McCartney and the Beatles mean so much to so many people that the hush that greeted him between songs felt like a result of a reconciliation of the private experience of the Beatles' music -- listening to the records at home as a backdrop to adolescence -- and the public experience of sitting at a sold-out stadium.
The contradictions between one's memories of the material and its presentation in a stadium were jarring; much of the Beatles' music was a pure product of the recording studio, irreproducible in concert.
It didn't help much that a third of the way into the concert, Mr.
McCartney magically metamorphosed from a Beatle into an Elton John act-alike, sentimental, and willing to turn the personal into a spectacle of amiability, hardly the original intent of the music.


Market Place; For Japan's Drug Companies, the Cost Controls Never Stop
AMERICAN pharmaceutical companies are bracing for bleaker times because of efforts by the Clinton Administration to control health care costs.
But in Japan, pharmaceutical companies have been living with Government price controls and regular price cuts for years.
"The U.S. market is heaven compared to the Japanese market," said Yoshihiko Yamamoto, a pharmaceutical industry analyst here for Salomon Brothers.


Brown Takes Old Baggage to a New Port
When Larry Brown was a boy of 7, he lived with his mother and his older brother in a second-floor apartment.
This was after the sudden death by heart attack of his father.
The apartment was above his grandfather's and his uncles' bakery on Park Avenue in Long Beach, L.I.
The bakery was called Hittelman's, for his mother's family name.
Brown remembers sleeping in a room beside one that contained some of the foodstuffs that would later be baked into, among other items, onion rolls and chocolate cake and raspberry rugelach.
Sometimes his Russian immigrant grandfather would be too tired after work to walk the mile or so home, and so would sleep in the same bed with Larry.


A Mysterious and Majestic Challenge for U.S. Open
It might be the most elegant name in golf.
Baltusrol.
The word literally rolls off the tongue, at once distinctive, rhythmic, concise and mysterious.
Merely from its sound, it has to be one of the great places in the game.


Jury Selection Stalls in Case Of Fire Victim
Lawyers are finding it harder than they expected to choose a jury in the widely publicized trial of two white Florida men accused of setting a black tourist on fire because of his race.
Jury selection began last Monday in state circuit court in the trial of Mark Kohut, 26, and Charles Rourk, 33, who are accused of kidnapping and burning the tourist, Christopher Wilson of Brooklyn, on New Year's Day.


Judge's Friends Try to Save Candidacy for High Court
As President Clinton found himself enveloped for the fourth time in questions over a job candidate's household help, Judge Stephen G. Breyer's Senate backers today began an all-out drive to save his candidacy for the Supreme Court.
Led by Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Judge Breyer's chief patron in the Senate, several who had supported the 54-year-old judge, including the Senate's Republican leader, Bob Dole, said Judge Breyer should not be disqualified as a Supreme Court candidate over the disclosure that he had not paid Social Security taxes on the wages of his part-time housekeeper.


PRO BASKETBALL: Sports of The Times; The Heart and Grit of Sir Charles
THE bald, wounded warrior, one Charles Barkley, his bare skull gleaming in the Chicago Stadium lights last night, his charcoal-dark eyebrows skewed in tension, his sore right, shooting elbow encased in a bulky wrap, led the Phoenix Suns to a most improbable but stupendous triple-overtime victory over the home team, the defending champs, the Michael Jordan Chicago Bulls.
It wasn't all Barkley, to be sure -- there were Kevin Johnson and Dan Majerle and Tom Chambers, among others -- but Barkley's grit pervaded the entire Suns team, as it did in Game 2, though that was in a losing cause.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
BOSTON RED SOX -- Placed Scott Fletcher, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to June 10.
Activated Jeff Richardson, infielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Assigned Wayne Housie, outfielder, to New Orleans of the American Association.


Is Clinton Moving to Left, Right or Center?; First at the Wall
To the Editor:
Your report of President Clinton's appearance at the ceremony before the Vietnam Veterans Memorial (front page, June 1) contains the remarkable observation that he was the first President to attend Memorial Day services there in the 12 years since the wall's construction.


Is Clinton Moving to Left, Right or Center?; A Rigorous Standard
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen doesn't seem to understand in "A Fragile Truce" (column, June 2) the difference between opposition to the Vietnam War, which is not dishonorable, and evading wartime service to one's country through influence and manipulation of the system, which is dishonorable.
It is the second that I and many other veterans find abhorrent.


Trade Policy Test at Nissan's Tennessee Plant
For Sylvia B. Rice, who snaps window moldings onto the drivers' doors of new Nissan Altimas here, there are clear advantages when foreign companies set up shop in the United States.
"This factory has provided a lot of jobs to a lot of people," said the 40-year-old single mother of two teen-agers, as car bodies on an overhead conveyor belt moved past her.


Nigeria Bars News of Presidential Election Results
Uncertainty surrounded the outcome of the presidential election in Nigeria as the Government barred news organizations from reporting results of the voting.
The National Electoral Commission said final results would be released only when totals from all 30 states had been delivered to election officials in Abuja, the capital, a process that could take two or three more days.
There were approximately 39 million eligible voters.


U.S. Awaits 2d Key Index Of Inflation
If the consumer price news for May proves as encouraging tomorrow as the Producer Price Index reported on Friday, the second inflation scare of 1993 will presumably be defused.
The producer index -- what American producers receive for their finished goods -- was unchanged last month, after sizable increases in both March and April.
This spurred optimism among many in the credit markets, where inflation is synonymous with danger.


Chongqing Journal; Some Chinese Won't Toe Party's Line on History
On a lush hillside here is a museum that has it all: Torture Cave with iron rods heating ominously in a fire, an American-inspired concentration camp, grisly photographs of corpses, and a riveting sound-and-light show of Communist heroes being massacred in 1949.
The museum is a reminder that the Government stays in power not only by constructing prisons, but also by building history.


It Sure Quacks Like a Filibuster
It's now apparent that Senate Republicans have two overriding goals with respect to the campaign-financing reform bill now before their chamber -- neither positive.
They want to kill it or, failing that, weaken it and thus reduce its threat to the political status quo.
They hope to do so without being seen as obstructionist, which could hurt them with gridlock-fatigued constituents back home.
The game won't work.
If serious political reform dies in the Senate, the Republican fingerprints will be apparent to everyone.
So will the timidity and hypocrisy of five swing G.O.P.
Senators: Dave Durenberger of Minnesota, James Jeffords of Vermont, John McCain of Arizona, William Cohen of Maine and John Chafee of Rhode Island.


Jennifer B. Lew, Paul N. Foster
Jennifer Beulah Lew, the daughter of Dr.
Ellen H. Spitz of New York and Dr.
John S. Lew of Ossining, N.Y., was married yesterday to Paul Nathan Foster, a son of Dorothy and Stanley Foster of Atlanta.
Rabbi Albert Goldstein officiated at the Rockport (Mass.) Country Club.
Ms.
Lew, 27, is keeping her name.
She is the counsel to the Tobacco Products Liability Project at Northeastern University in Boston.
She and her husband both graduated from Yale University, and she received a law degree from the State University at Buffalo.
Her father is a consultant in applied mathematics to the computer and medical industries.
Her mother is a lecturer in the psychiatry department at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.


Agency Co-Founder Starts Own Shop
Bob Cox, formerly president and creative director at Cox Landey &amp; Partners of New York, has opened the Cox Group, offering creative and account services.
Mr.
Cox, 52, who co-founded Cox Landey with Martin Landey in 1989, left that agency late last year; he was replaced there by Jane Cavalier as president and by Jeff Griffith as creative director.


After Three Overtimes, the Suns Say Not Yet!
For the Phoenix Suns, tonight was a test of character.
It was a test of endurance.
And it was a test of how badly they wanted their season to continue.
The Suns passed on all counts.
In a triple-overtime thriller that left both teams drained, Phoenix outlasted the Chicago Bulls, 129-121, in Game 3 of the National Basketball Association finals at Chicago Stadium.


SHELLING BY SERBS IS SAID TO KILL 50 IN FIRST-AID CENTER
More than 50 people were reported killed today at an improvised first-aid center when Bosnian Serb forces unleashed heavy artillery barrages on Gorazde, which the United Nations designated a safe area less than two weeks ago.
The Sarajevo radio reported that the shelling had left Goradze's streets littered with bodies and that a rocket had exploded in the first-aid center, killing all 50 or so people inside.
The number of deaths, if confirmed, would be among the highest in a single attack since fighting began in Bosnia in April 1992.


Playoff Loser Wiebe 'Tickled' Just to Be in It
Mark Wiebe was one happy golfer despite losing the playoff in today's Buick Classic and the reason was simple: He barely made the second-round cut in the $1 million tournament.
"I'm tickled," Wiebe said shortly after losing to Vijay Singh in the third extra hole at Westchester Country Club.
"I shot 75 and I'm in the playoff."


DOCTORS ANNOUNCE WAY TO FORESTALL EFFECT OF DIABETES
In what doctors termed the most important discovery for diabetics since insulin, researchers said today that the devastating complications of the disease could be prevented or delayed.
They said this was possible when diabetics closely monitored their blood sugar levels with a special meter throughout the day and injected themselves with insulin four to seven times daily to keep their blood sugar at a near-normal level.
In current practice, most patients do not monitor their blood so closely and give themselves one or two doses of insulin a day, which allows their blood sugar to vary greatly.


First Lady Offers Doctors A 'Bargain' on Health Plan
In a speech to the American Medical Association today, Hillary Rodham Clinton proposed "a new bargain" in which the White House would limit malpractice lawsuits, relax regulation of medical laboratories and free doctors from burdensome Government supervision if the doctors supported President Clinton's effort to overhaul the nation's health-care system.
Mrs.
Clinton said doctors must take the lead in cracking down on incompetence, negligence and other abuses by practicing physicians.
In return, she said, the Administration will try to protect the "clinical autonomy" of doctors, reduce paperwork and remove legal obstacles to self-regulation of the medical profession.


Is Auto Plant Of the Future Almost Here?
Is the dream of a super-efficient auto assembly plant on the brink of reality or just a cockeyed fantasy hatched by Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua?
The sages of manufacturing science are not quite sure.
Mr.
Lopez, the head of purchasing and production for Volkswagen A.G., said he would discuss the theories behind such a plant at news conferences Monday in Hanover, Germany, and Madrid.
But Volkswagen is not ready to disclose whether it will actually build one.


Next Wave Festival to Open With Premiere
The American premiere of Steve Reich's first music theater work, "The Cave," the New York premieres of Philip Glass's latest opera, "Orphee," and "Billboards," a Joffrey Ballet production based on the music of Prince, are among the highlights of the 11th Next Wave Festival at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
The festival is to open on Oct. 13, with Mr.
Reich's work, and run through Dec. 4, when the Brooklyn Philharmonic and the Mercer Ellington Jazz Band will perform works by Duke Ellington.
Also among the productions scheduled is the long-postponed American premiere of "The Black Rider," a collaboration between the director Robert Wilson, the songwriter Tom Waits and the author William S. Burroughs (Nov. 20 to Dec. 1).


Gems Reported Taken at Convention Center
About $900,000 in gold, jewelry and precious stones disappeared from a locked storage room at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center on the West Side of Manhattan, two exhibitors told the police yesterday.
Representatives of the exhibitors, Rex Jewelers and Esquire Jewelry, said they put the jewelry and loose gems into a footlocker and a suitcase, taped both shut and locked them in the storage room at 6:30 P.M.
Saturday.


New Software for Reading Handwriting
The Aha Software Corporation plans to introduce today one of the first software products to quickly and successfully manipulate handwriting for hand-held computers.
If hand-held computers prove easy to use with the help of such software, they could be a boon to sales representatives taking orders, lawyers preparing briefs, executives keeping a calendar -- indeed anyone who writes.


From Fiji To First As Singh Prevails
One of the most improbable journeys in golf hit a major destination today when Vijay Singh of Fiji won the Buick Classic by defeating Mark Wiebe on the third hole of sudden death.
After holing a 10-foot putt on the final hole of regulation, the 30-year-old Singh hit a brilliant 6-iron within 5 feet of the cup on the third playoff hole, the 444-yard 11th at the Westchester Country Club, and made the putt to win his first tournament on the PGA Tour.


Binay Ranjan Sen Is Dead at 94; Led U.N. Drive Against Hunger
Binay Ranjan Sen, whose horror at the famine deaths of nearly a million Bengalis inspired him to forge a United Nations campaign against world hunger, died on Thursday in Calcutta.
He was 94.
He died of bronchial pneumonia, his family said.


Barkley Elbows Injury Aside
Charles Barkley, the Phoenix Suns' All-Star forward, said today that his right elbow was still sore, but that he expected to play Wednesday night in Game 4 of the National Basketball Association finals.
Barkley had to have the elbow drained of fluid before Game 3 on Sunday night, but he played and had 24 points and 19 rebounds as the Suns beat the Bulls in triple overtime.


Providing in Prose the Eerie Voice of Madness
Patrick McCabe is a quiet man who lobbed a small bombshell of a novel and is still reeling from the blast.
Two years ago, he was teaching learning-disabled students in a London grade school, and writing a strange tale at night.
It was called "The Butcher Boy," and it was a haunting narrative, told in the voice of a small-town Irish boy who descends into madness and commits an act of unspeakable violence, forshadowed in the first sentence of the book: "When I was a young lad 20 or 30 or 40 years ago I lived in a small town where they were all after me on account of what I done on Mrs. Nugent."
Lyrical and disturbing, horrific and hilarious, "The Butcher Boy" reaped a bumper harvest of critical superlatives in Britain and Ireland.
As a fictional creation, Francie Brady, the narrator, was placed in the same company as Huck Finn and Holden Caulfield.
The novel's language -- passionate, colloquial and rich -- was deemed worthy of Joyce.


Bridge Toll Divides City Of New York
A seemingly simple dispute over tolls on the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge has pitted Staten Island against the rest of the city, and is likely to be decided by Congress.
Since 1987, the majestic bridge between Staten Island and the Bay Ridge section of Brooklyn has been something of an anomaly.
It is the only New York City bridge where tolls are collected only from vehicles headed in one direction, specifically, from cars and trucks driving west to Staten Island.


Four Men Arrested In Protection Scheme
Four members of an Asian gang were arrested yesterday and charged with extortion and conspiracy for demanding protection money from Chinese restaurants in Sunset Park, Brooklyn, the police said.
The four young men, aged 15 to 20, were arrested on the street near Fifth Avenue and 59th Street in Brooklyn in the early afternoon, said Detective Ron Antoci of the Brooklyn Robbery Squad.
All four are members of the Flying Dragons, a Chinatown gang, Detective Antoci said.


One-Stop Shopping Is Luring the Younger Woman
When Joseph Cicio became chief executive officer of I. Magnin last September, he decided the store was overlooking a potential customer: the career woman with advanced fashion taste but a limited budget.
"The store had a brilliant designer business and designer image," he said in a recent interview in the San Francisco store, "but the young career customer was not a shopper in this store."
Now she is, he said.
What brought her in was a whole new floor devoted to her needs that opened in January.
Called the New Edge, it carries Donna Karan's DKNY line along with designers like Byron Lars, Norma Kamali, Todd Oldham, Anna Sui and Gemma Kahng.


Halifax Corp.  reports earnings for Year to March 31


Robern Industries reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


Luby's Cafeterias reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


THE SUPREME COURT: The Overview; CLINTON NAMES RUTH GINSBURG, ADVOCATE FOR WOMEN, TO COURT
President Clinton today chose Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg, whose litigation on behalf of women's rights helped transform the legal landscape in the 1970's, to become the first Supreme Court Justice picked by a Democratic President in 26 years.
If confirmed, Judge Ginsburg, whose first job out of Columbia University Law School was as a legal secretary, would be the second woman to serve on the High Court, joining Justice Sandra Day O'Connor.
She would also be the first Jew to serve on the Court since Justice Abe Fortas resigned in 1969.
Unpredictable Center
In her 13 years on the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, the 60-year-old Brooklyn-born judge has occupied an unpredictable center on a panel that has grown into rigidly hostile ideological camps.
She has ruled in favor of abortion rights, but has also criticized the 1973 Supreme Court decision that made abortion a Constitutional right, saying it went too far, too fast.


Hilcoast Development Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


THE SUPREME COURT: Supreme Court Roundup; Justices to Decide if a Federal Law Protects Abortion Clinics From Protests
The Supreme Court today agreed to decide whether abortion clinics can invoke a Federal racketeering law to sue anti-abortion groups that organize demonstrations and blockades intended to shut down the clinics.
The Justices accepted an appeal filed by the National Organization for Women, which tried to use the law, the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, to sue several anti-abortion groups on behalf of abortion clinics in Delaware and Wisconsin.
The organization sought to prove that the groups had formed a nationwide conspiracy to eliminate access to abortion by using extortion and intimidation to drive the clinics out of business.


Circuit City Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Radix Ventures Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


CHRONICLE
The pupils in the fourth grade at the Chapin School figured out recently that MILDRED J. BERENDSEN, had eaten 11,380 birthday cupcakes, signed 60,400 report cards and handed out 1,169 diplomas during her tenure as headmistress.
So commencement tomorrow will be a bittersweet occasion: Mrs.
Berendsen, 65, is retiring after 44 years at the private girls' school on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Bell &amp; HowellCo., Skokie, Ill., is offering $80 million of senior notes due in 2000 at 100 to yield 9.25 percent through Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette Inc.
Noncallable for four years, the notes are rated B-1 by Moody's Investors Service and B+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Boeing Co., Seattle, is offering $300 million of 6.35 percent notes due in 2003 at 99.78 to yield 6.38 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The noncallable issue is rated A-1 by Moody's and AA by S.&amp; P.


Plan for 'Safe Areas' in Bosnia May Need 7,500 More Troops
A report by Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali to the Security Council today estimated that at least 7,500 more peacekeeping troops, backed by the threat of air strikes, would be needed to deter Serbian attacks against six "safe areas" designated by the Council in Bosnia.
The report said full security -- "deterrence through strength" -- would require 34,000 more troops.
But a "light option" of 7,500 troops is all that member states were likely to contribute in the foreseeable future, the report added.


Norand Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Senate Mailings Are Criticized By Democrats
Using a freedom of information request for postal records, a group of Democratic Senators demonstrated today that most taxpayer-financed legislative mail is sent out shortly before elections.
"This is a graphic demonstration that what we have in New York State is public campaign financing without the public's permission," said Senator Richard A. Dollinger, a Democrat from the Rochester area.


Nantucket Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 27


No Headline
"The announcement the President just made is significant, I believe, because it contributes to the end of the days when women, at least half the talent pool in our society, appear in high places only as one-at-a-time performers." -- JUDGE RUTH BADER GINSBURG.  [ A24:4. ]


Israel Again Offers Arabs Broader Civil Authority
With a new round of Middle East peace talks starting in Washington on Tuesday, Israel is offering to hand the Palestinians immediate control over many functions of daily life, even before an agreement is reached on self-rule in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip.
While the offer is not new, some Israeli officials have focused on it with extra intensity of late as a possible quick deal that could show progress and ease the way toward resolving more complex issues involved in any future Palestinian self-government.


Miscellany
*
Viacom Enterprises, New York, signed a worldwide licensing and merchandising agreement with the New York City Marathon to license apparel, gifts and other items.


No Seasonal Change Found for Color Vision
FOR 45 years, scientists thought that people's color vision varied according to the seasons, and they could not understand why.
Now science has come up with an answer to the mystery: the instrument used for the test in 1948 was flawed.
A study in the current issue of the journal Nature found that the instrument's readings were affected by room temperature.
So if a testing room got warmer and cooler through the year, the device would seem to indicate that people's color vision varied with the seasons, researchers said.


Comtrex reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Valuable Diploma or Meaningless Piece of Paper?
A year ago, Charisse Dangerfield, a cherub-faced 16-year-old from the Bronx, was just another student bored with the rigors of getting a good education.
On more days than she can count, she shortened her misery by skipping math and any other classes she found especially dull.
"I was doing badly," she said, her words accented by the rhythmic smacks of her chewing gum.
"I just wasn't doing my work."


Corrections
An entry in the Finance Briefs listing in Business Day on Wednesday misstated the debt rating by Duff &amp; Phelps for First Fidelity Bancorp's offering of $150 million in subordinated notes.
The rating is BBB+.


Earth's Crust Sinks Deep, Only to Rise in Plumes of Lava
GEOPHYSICISTS have recently made striking progress in understanding the mechanism of the great heat engine within the earth.
Over the last several months they have reached a rough consensus that the vast plates that comprise the ocean floor sink deep into the earth's mantle, only to be recycled into giant ascending plumes of hot rock.
The plumes, driven, some believe, by heat from the earth's core, emerge to form strings of oceanic islands like the Hawaiian chain or to blanket continents with huge sheets of lava.
The discoveries, said Dr.
Michael E. Wysession, a professor at Washington University in St.
Louis who is an authority on the earth's interior, constitute "a second revolution," comparable in scientific terms to the theory of plate tectonics, which, when it came to be accepted three decades ago, showed that the continents had been in constant motion over the course of geological time, carried along by great plates.


Observer; Eponymy On the Potomac
A Dictionary of Washington Eponymical Etymology:
To Bork, verb.
The act of scrutinizing to death a nominee for high public office.
The word derives from Robert Bork, a Supreme Court nominee whose record was examined so minutely by the Senate Judiciary Committee that the rest of the Senate, assuming there must be something wrong with anyone who needed that much scrutiny, refused to confirm him.
Usage examples: "Unless Clinton nominates people acceptable to Republicans, we will Bork them in the streets, we will Bork them in the hills, and we will Bork them on C-Span." (Winston Churchill, when asked what he would say if he were to return as Senator Bob Dole.) Slang: "Stick a fork in him, he's Borked."


Summer Swimming Preparations in New Jersey


Philip H. Dorn; Computer Expert, 62
Philip H. Dorn, a New York computer expert who advised corporate clients, died on June 8 while returning home from an evening at the ballet.
A resident of Manhattan, he was 62.
The cause was a heart attack, said Michael Roos, a family friend.


Critic's Notebook; Return of the B Movie, Now Playing on TV
Postwar 1940's.
The Bronx.
Within a three-block radius of my childhood apartment, there were six movie theaters, all showing second features, sometimes even third features.
None of the low-budget flicks were likely to win awards, but many have become celebrated film-noir classics, the kind that always seem to star Dan Duryea.
Today.
Across the nation.
The second feature is virtually extinct in movie houses.
Ah, but there is television.
The B movie lives.
And it positively thrives on one electronic equivalent of an old movie palace: the USA cable network.


Ozzie Canseco Retires
OZZIE CANSECO has retired from the Class AAA Louisville Redbirds.
Canseco, the twin brother of JOSE CANSECO, cited displeasure with the Redbirds' parent team, the St.
Louis Cardinals, in announcing his retirement Saturday night.
The 28-year-old outfielder was placed on the voluntary retired list.


Degrees Conferred At Merchant Marine
United States Secretary of Transportation Federico F. Pena delivered the keynote address yesterday to 203 graduates at the United States Merchant Marine Academy's 57th commencement exercises.
"The Clinton Administration is committed to expanding trade opportunities all over the world, including our North American Trade Agreement with Canada and Mexico and similar accords with other nations in the future," Secretary Pena said.
"But we are also committed to insuring a level playing field -- the same access for American goods and services in foreign markets that our partners enjoy in American markets."


Chess
When opponents prepare to march against your position, the natural reaction is to stop them.
Yet sometimes there is another way.
Quite often a great player like Samuel Reshevsky would allow his opponents to carry out their plans and then deviously demonstrate that there were hidden defects he could exploit.
One psychological advantage of this strategy is that opponents will not easily apply the brakes to their pet schemes, even supposing they have a hunch you are up to something.
The game between the grandmasters Bent Larsen of Denmark and Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn from Round 10 of the Fourth Miguel Najdorf International Tournament in Buenos Aires shows the 19-year-old American nicely carrying out the Reshevsky stratagem.
His victory in this encounter helped him tie for first place with the Latvian grandmaster Aleksei Shirov, each with 7-4 scores in the event, which was held April 18 to 30 to celebrate Najdorf's 83d birthday.
Third place went to Viktor Korchnoi at 6 1/2-4 1/2.


Ray Sharkey, 40; Actor Often Played Role of Tough Guy
Ray Sharkey, a television and film actor whose portrayals of rough-hewn and emotionally vulnerable tough guys won wide acclaim, but whose personal life descended into a nightmare of drug and alcohol abuse, died on Friday at Lutheran Medical Center in Brooklyn.
He was 40 years old.
He died of AIDS, according to Herb Nanas, his manager since 1975.


Bloody Sunday in Somalia
A week after 23 United Nations peacekeepers were killed by Somali gunmen, an obviously rattled group of Pakistani peacekeepers opened fire on Somali civilians.
It was precisely the wrong target; women, children and civilian demonstrators are not the enemies in Mogadishu.
The Pakistanis' grievous error handed a propaganda windfall to the Mogadishu warlord Mohammed Farah Aidid.
It would compound the tragedy if General Aidid, the culprit responsible for so much suffering in Somalia, is able to portray himself as a victim.
President Clinton was justified in sending more warplanes to Somalia in support of the 20-nation peacemaking effort.
But yesterday's accidental strike at a civilian target by a Cobra gunship shows the need for greater care in targeting.


Base Ten Systems Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


U.S. Rejects Notion That Human Rights Vary With Culture
Responding to a challenge by some authoritarian governments in the third world, the United States warned today that it would oppose any attempt to use religious and cultural traditions to weaken the concept of universal human rights.
The strong statement set the stage for a intense struggle between Western countries committed to the universality of human rights and countries that oppose what they describe as the imposition of Western values.


Wills &amp; Evans Seeks Creative Director
R.
Scott Wills, president at Wills &amp; Evans Inc. in New York, said yesterday that by the end of July he planned to name a successor to Ben Evans, the agency's executive vice president and creative director, who will leave to become creative director at the Microsoft Corporation in Redmond, Wash.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a meeting of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops this week in New Orleans misstated the opening day.
It is Thursday.
The article also referred incorrectly to the bishops' scheduled action on the International Commission on English in the Liturgy.
They plan to discuss the role of the commission, but not to vote on it.


Molson's Beer Discusses Projects
The Miller Brewing Company has been discussing American advertising projects for Molson's beer brands with several agencies, executives who spoke on condition of anonymity said yesterday.
The discussions, reported this week in Adweek, are another setback for Lintas New York, which has handled the Molson account; the agency is facing problems with two large clients, I.B.M. and Diet Coke.
The executives said that while the account was not in review, Miller had been asking about ad ideas at agencies including Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. in New York, which handles Miller Genuine Draft and Genuine Draft Light.


Can U.N. Survive Continued Failure in Bosnia?; The Recognition Game
To the Editor:
It has recently been claimed that the "early" recognition of Croatia and Slovenia, prompted by German pressure, was the main cause of the conflict in the former Yugoslavia, including the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
This assertion overlooks the chronological sequence of events preceding the oubreak of the war, including its root causes.


Johnson's 62 Minutes Make Him Man of Hour
Opponents, and even teammates, have noticed a harder edge to Kevin Johnson this season.
Johnson admits to the change in attitude.
And it is not a coincidence.
The Phoenix Suns' talented point guard has stopped worrying about the opinions of outsiders and has concentrated solely on winning.
That attitude has rubbed some people the wrong way, but Johnson offers no apologies.
The Suns are in the finals, and thanks largely to Johnson's record-setting 62-minute performance in Game 3, the Suns still have a realistic chance at their first title in franchise history.


HOUSE PANEL ADDS ABORTION BENEFITS
Without a roll call or even debate, the House Appropriations Committee voted today to include abortion in Federal employees' health-care benefits.
Approval by the full House and the Senate is considered probable and would end a Government ban on such coverage that was imposed in 1983.
The House panel's action reflected a major shift in abortion policy since President Clinton took office after 12 years of Republican Administrations.


World Trade Center Fire
A fire broke out at the World Trade Center yesterday, starting and ending with an air-conditioner that was installed after the bombing in February, the Fire Department said.
No one was hurt and there was only minor damage.
The air-conditioner, a temporary two-story unit attached to the outside of Two World Trade Center, malfunctioned and burst into flames shortly before 2 P.M., said a spokesman for the Fire Department, Capt.
Ed Harrington.
The fire was brought under control by 2:17, he said, so there was no need to evacuate any part of the skyscraper.
But the fire was serious enough that 12 fire trucks and 55 firefighters were called to put it out.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
MILWAUKEE BREWERS -- Placed Mike Boddicker, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.
Recalled Mike Ignasiak, pitcher, from New Orleans of the American Association.
OAKLAND ATHLETICS -- Signed Andy Smith, pitcher, and Brian Whatley, catcher.


Patterns
A New Seventh Avenue
There is a creeping realization on Seventh Avenue that the fashion deal as we know it may never be the same.
The "house" structure -- name designer, new creations twice a year to support a plethora of derivative licensed goods -- is starting to seem like a house of cards.
Perry Ellis will introduce a concept on Thursday for a fully licensed label, with no in-house manufacturing.
And Bob Mackie closed his ready-to-wear manufacturing business last week, leaving only out-of-house licenses and his couture.
It is no coincidence that spokesmen for both companies mentioned QVC, the television shopping channel as a key to the future.


CHRONICLE
The invitation carried the first hint that the party tonight for HARVEY LICHTENSTEIN, president and executive director of the Brooklyn Academy of Music, would be no staid affair.
On its cover, encapsulating the history of mankind, were these designations: "Stone Age," "Machine Age," "Atomic Age" and "The Harvey Years."
Some 380 friends and colleagues will get together at the academy to celebrate "the Harvey years" -- the era that began 25 years ago when he took over and transformed the academy from a declining cultural center to a highly successful showcase for experimental performances of all sorts.


Classical Music in Review
'Postcard From Morocco'  Reimann Opera Theater New York University Theater
Theatrical absurdism has lost much of its bite nowadays, largely because it has been outstripped by reality.
Dominick Argento's one-act opera of 1971, "Postcard From Morocco," presents seven characters in search of identity, waiting for a train in Morocco, and they certainly speak and carry on weirdly.
But have you spent any time in Penn Station lately?


A Survey Shows the Dissatisfaction When Marketer and Agency Just Don't Understand Each Other.
REMEMBER the tune "Two Different Worlds"?
The latest results from an annual survey of agency-client relationships suggest that it ought to be revived as a theme song for marketers and their Madison Avenue shops.
A preview of the 1993 Salz Survey of Advertiser-Agency Relations indicates that the two sides, rarely of one mind about anything, continue to perceive important elements of the work they do together in startlingly disparate ways.
The misunderstandings, as revealed in the eighth annual survey, would be comical if not for the fact that they seem to be making themselves felt in the outcome of the campaigns the agencies produce.


42 Are Injured as Circle Line Boat Hits Pier


Conference Ends With Little Hope For AIDS Cure
Only an eternal optimist would have left the ninth international AIDS meeting here last week believing that new drugs will be available anytime soon to save the lives of the 14 million people now infected with the virus that causes AIDS.
Or believing that a vaccine would be developed in time to prevent the number of those infected from soaring to at least 30 million by the year 2000, as the World Health Organization predicts.
A realist, on the other hand, would be heeding the one clear message sounded at the meeting: prevention is the only way to stop the alarming spread of the virus, H.I.V., throughout the world.


Ferreting Out False Claims For Welfare
When Vanessa F. needed money for the security deposit on a new apartment, she thought she had a foolproof solution: welfare fraud.
"I thought it would be pretty easy to do," Vanessa said.
"A lot of people do it by going to the different towns and giving different addresses. A lot of them have jobs too."


Corrections
A sports chart yesterday about the United States Open golf tournament in New Jersey this week misstated ABC-TV's broadcast schedule for it.
The network plans to show taped highlights on Thursday and Friday, from 11:35 P.M. to 12:05 A.M., Eastern time, and to provide live coverage on Saturday and Sunday, from 1 P.M. to 6 P.M.


Stock Traders Cautious Ahead of Price Data
Stocks turned in a lackluster performance in sharply slower trading yesterday, but key indexes managed to move a little higher.
Trading was cautious ahead of today's release of the Consumer Price Index for May, which may or may not confirm last week's Producer Price Index report that showed a leveling of inflation.


Computer Outsourcing reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Renaissance Masterpiece Visiting Metropolitan


On My Mind; Syria, Drugs and The U.S.
The Bekaa Valley was once Lebanon's breadbasket -- rich with wheat, fruit, vineyards.
Since Syria took military control of the country 90 percent of the valley has been given over to drug cultivation -- particularly opium for heroin.
Syrian military units border cannabis and opium fields and laboratories for making the heroin.
Individual Syrian officers make as much as $30,000 a year from the trade.


Transcript of President's Announcement and Judge Ginsburg's Remarks
Following is a transcript of remarks today by President Clinton and Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg, as recorded by the Federal News Service, a transcription company: BY PRESIDENT CLINTON
Please be seated.
I wish you all a good afternoon, and I thank the members of the Congress and other interested Americans who are here.
In just a few days when the Supreme Court concludes its term, Justice Byron White will begin a new chapter in his long and productive life.
He has served the Court as he has lived, with distinction, intelligence, and honor.
And he retires from public service with the deep gratitude of all the American people.


AZERBAIJAN CHIEF FIGHTS REBELLION
Trying to save his Government from a growing insurrection, President Abulfez Elchibey of Azerbaijan said today that military force would be used against the rebels, even if it means plunging the former Soviet republic into civil war.
"The legitimately elected Government of Azerbaijan has the right to defend the country from falling into the control of criminals and bandits," Mr.
Elchibey told foreign ambassadors and journalists in Baku, the capital.
"If the rebels do not stop their actions, we will be obliged to respond with force."


Mutual Benefits
The JMC Group, formerly Spear Financial Services, markets annuities, insurance products and mutual funds.
It is among the companies that stand to benefit from increased efforts by banks to offer financial services other than traditional deposits.
Yesterday, JMC's James Mitchell &amp; Company unit signed an agreement to market mutual funds and annuities for the Sumitomo Bank of California and JMC's stock rose.


In Serbia, Sanctions Fuel Rage
Under the green plastic roof of the central market, Desa Kukobat fumbled to make change for a customer, slowly counting out a thick pile of 100,000- and 50,000-dinar notes, once a small fortune in Yugoslavia.
The head of lettuce she had just sold cost 50,000 dinars; the man, apologizing, said the smallest bill he had was one million dinars, which is worth only about $1.30 at today's rate.
"The embargo is suffocating us," complained Mrs.
Kukobat, 53, a sunburned woman selling cucumbers, lettuce and potatoes.
"People can't afford to buy anything, we can't afford to produce very much and the money is worthless paper. Why don't you ease these sanctions? We are not America's enemies."


Lack of Sex Information Drives Up Teen-Age Pregnancy Rate
To the Editor:
Your June 3 report of a 17-year-old Long Island girl who gave birth to a baby and then placed him in a trash can missed an important point: While your sources talked at length about the young woman's inability to pay for prenatal care, very little attention was paid to her apparent inability to talk to her parents about her plight.


THE SUPREME COURT: The News Media; After a Bid for a Truce, the White House and the Press Corps Are Back at It
It took about 18 hours for President Clinton's tentatively declared second honeymoon with the White House press corps to collapse in a heap.
On Sunday night, Bill and Hillary Clinton invited hundreds of journalists to a picnic on the South Lawn of the White House that featured badminton, volleyball and an amateur stage revue mounted by the White House communications staff.


Chefs International reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


R2 Medical Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Jupiter's Watery Moon
NASA researchers have found the first strong evidence of water on the surface of Jupiter's moon Io.
Ice from water is mixed with more abundant sulfur dioxide ice on the orange-and-yellow moon.


Solectron Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Foreign Students
Foreigners accounted for approximately half of the 30,432 postdoctoral fellows in science and engineering at universities in the United States in 1991, according to a report by the National Science Foundation.
Ten years ago, they made up only one-third of the total, said Dr.
J.
G.
Huckenpohler, a science resource analyst for the foundation.


Economist Is First Woman to Become Prime Minister of Turkey


Soccer and Television Make a Bad Sports Mix
At 1:20 P.M.
Sunday, I slept.
I didn't mean to.
I just did.
And I dozed several more times during ABC's telecast of the United States-Germany World Cup warmup.
I really want to like soccer.
Well, I want not to loathe soccer -- and to understand the worldwide hype for it, the passion that makes enraged fans attack referees, the reason why millions of American children play soccer, and why intelligent people think next year's World Cup here will be a sports-business landmark.


Wiley (John) &amp; Sons Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Sports of The Times; Sports Rule: Always Root For Visitors
WHAT a great game in Chicago on Sunday.
The world champions taking on the upstarts.
Huge, knowledgeable, boisterous crowd.
Mood swings in the high-scoring game.
The outcome in doubt until the final seconds.
There was also a basketball game.


Some Good News for Johnson
The latest diagnosis of Howard Johnson's mysterious illness has, for the moment, ruled out any of the most alarming possibilities.
Hepatitis, a fear for a while, has been discounted.
Rheumatoid arthritis, not an improbablity, seems a long shot.
Lyme disease has been effectively ruled out.
"Is there a chance that it could still wind up a significant problem?" said Dr.
John Olichney, the internist for the Mets.
"Tiny. Really tiny." Johnson, who is suffering from what the medical officials are terming "an acute viral syndrome," remained in New York today, sick but relieved and recovering.


Doctors Planning Battle Against Health-Care Plan
Leaders of the American Medical Association laid the groundwork today for an aggressive legal and political campaign against two important elements of the health plan being developed by President Clinton: limits on national health-care spending and on doctors' charges.
The association's board warned that there would be significant constitutional problems if the Government tried to impose price controls or an overall limit on health spending, both of which have been advocated by the White House.


Carrington Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Bulls' Only Concern: Referees
Do things suddenly look shaky for the Bulls as they approach Game 4 of their championship playoff series with the Phoenix Suns?
Does this Chicago team, which has won two straight National Basketball Association titles, have anything to worry about, realistically?
"We're still in the driver's seat," Chicago forward Scottie Pippen said this morning, with the series still in the Bulls' favor at two games to one.
"We're just a little tired."


Promotion at Ford
The Ford Motor Company announced today that John A. Hall had been elected vice president for employee relations, succeeding J. Craig Hausman, who will retire at the end of the year.
Mr.
Hall will immediately assume the responsibilities of the position, and Mr.
Hausman will go on special assignment to study employee issues.


Review/Television; Two Views of Dying of AIDS, From the Flippant to the Poignant
"Silverlake Life: The View From Here" and "The Broadcast Tapes of Dr. Peter" are video diaries of men dying of AIDS.
Both, of course, are inherently sad, but for all the similarities of content, their impact is strikingly different.
"Silverlake Life" opens the new "P.O.V." ("Point of View") documentary season tonight on PBS, and "The Broadcast Tapes" will be shown on July 1 on HBO.
Peter Jepson-Young, a Vancouver, British Columbia, doctor in his 30's whose weekly accounts of the workings of the disease were shown on Canadian television from 1990 through 1992, used the medium as a way of helping others understand what he was going through and somehow help himself bear with it.
Perhaps he was sustained by his medical training.
By contrast, Tom Joslin, a California film maker, and his lover, Mark Massi, seem to be coming on to the camera, giving a show that almost trivializes their suffering.


Review/Cabaret; The Belter as Balladeer
Laurie Beechman is a performer bursting with such heart that in almost everything she sings there is the sense of someone emotionally attempting to shoot the moon.
The singer, who is appearing at Rainbow and Stars through July 3, has the voice to back up that drive.
When singing quietly, she projects a smoky, yearning intensity.
Pushing up the volume, she becomes a piercing belter who could almost shatter glass in phrases that turn around a maudlin, full-throated sob.
What Ms.
Beechman, who has performed in clubs for many years, is slowly coming to learn is that for someone with a voice and emotive instincts as large as hers, less is more.
The best moments at Thursday's early show were relatively quiet renditions of "Isn't It Romantic?" and "Long Before I Knew You," in which she held back the sob and sang at half-throttle.
Her version of "A Very Precious Love," the stately Paul Webster-Sammy Fain ballad from the movie "Marjorie Morningstar" skillfully blended the soft and the aggressive.


In Her Own Words: Ruth Bader Ginsburg
ON WOMEN AND THE LAW
From a 1987 speech in Colorado Springs:
The Warren Court of the 1960's thus held the base line set by the Supreme Court in the 1870's, at the turn of the century, and in the 1940's.
That base line tied tightly into the prevailing "separate spheres" mentality, or breadwinner-homemaker dichotomy: It was man's lot, because of his nature, to be breadwinner, head of the household, representative of the family outside the home; and it was woman's lot, because of her nature, not only to bear but also to raise children, and keep the home in order.





A Victim of the Deregulated Road
The St.
Johnsbury Trucking Company, a leader in the Northeast trucking market, said yesterday that it would close after years of struggling with problems that included nonunionized competitors and a soft Northeast economy.
The fate of the company, founded 72 years ago as a milk hauler in St.
Johnsbury, Vt., mirrors that of many trucking companies that have fallen since the industry was deregulated in 1980.
Of the top 50 trucking companies operating in 1978, by last year all but 9 had closed or merged.


Q&amp;A
Drinking Sea Water
Q. What do birds who spend long periods at sea use for drinking water?
A.
Some seabirds, like petrels, albatrosses, gulls, terns and sea ducks, have salt-secreting glands that filter out salt from the blood so the birds can drink sea water without harm, according to the "Manual of Ornithology," by Noble S. Proctor and Patrick J. Lynch (Yale University Press).


A Tall Order for 7-6 Bradley
The tears of a 7-foot-6-inch center fall farther and harder.
Shawn Bradley, two weeks ago and about 20 time zones away in Australia, curled into a fetal position, wrinkled the suit coat he wore 24 hours a day, stared at a vaulted ceiling two inches from his forehead and cried.
"You don't want to go, do you?" said his Mormon companion.


Accounts
*
Nabisco Foods Group's Lifesavers division, Winston-Salem, N.C., to Long Haymes Carr Lintas, Winston-Salem, as agency of record for Now and Later, a candy brand acquired in December.
Long Haymes also handles two other division brands, Bubble Yum bubble gum and Fruit Stripe gum.
Billings were not disclosed.


Can U.N. Survive Continued Failure in Bosnia?; Germany's Blame
To the Editor:
Re "Germany Is Not to Blame for Bosnia" by David C. Unger (Editorial Notebook, June 7): I cannot understand omission of the vital fact that diplomatic recognition of Bosnia was extended after the recognition of Slovenia and Croatia in December 1991.


ERC Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Lopez Plan For Factory Is Studied
Volkswagen A.G.'s flamboyant purchasing chief said today that the auto maker was pressing ahead with negotiations to build a highly efficient car plant in Spain despite the threat of legal action from his former employer, the General Motors Corporation.
The concept of the low-cost plant, using radical new ideas like having parts suppliers help to assemble the vehicle, has been at the heart of a dispute between the executive, Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortua, and G.M., which rejected Mr.
Lopez's proposals for a similar project before he left Detroit for Volkswagen in March.


Blanch (E.W.) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


THE SUPREME COURT: News Analysis -- The 11th-Hour Scramble; After Hoping for a 'Home Run' in Choosing A Justice, Clinton May Be Just Home Free
Last March, when President Clinton was presented with the opportunity to make his first Supreme Court selection, he told aides he wanted to take his time, hit a "home run" with his nominee, and choose someone who would make everyone stand up and say, "Wow."
But what was supposed to have been one of the most personally exciting decisions of Mr.
Clinton's early Presidency in the end had the appearance of an 11th-hour scramble, with the bodies of other would-be nominees left strewn on the field and three months' careful deliberations boiled down to 36 hours of rapid-fire decisions.


Chrysler Media Shop Names Chief
BBDO North America in Southfield, Mich., said yesterday that David Martin had been named president and chief executive at Pentacom, a new stand-alone subsidiary that will handle media services for the Chrysler Corporation on its estimated $400 million account.
Mr.
Martin has been president of the Culmen Company, a marketing consulting concern in Southfield, and editor at large for Mediaweek magazine.
He served as BBDO's consultant during the review, which Chrysler conducted to consolidate its media services at one of three of its agencies: BBDO, Bozell Inc. or CME KHBB Advertising.


U.S. Warns Rulers on Vote
The Clinton Administration warned civilian and military leaders of the Cambodian Government today that they face international censure if they fail to abide by the results of the elections.
"There will be strong adverse international reaction to any effort to subvert the results of the election," said Joseph Snyder, a State Department spokesman.
Mr.
Snyder, however, declined to specify what kind of international response would follow if the Government of Hun Sen continues its refusal to accept the results of the election.


Bridge
Some of the prettiest endings in the game are rare because they are fragile: best defense will usually make it impossible to reach the required position.
An example is the first deal of the New York Regional Green Point Pairs last month, with the North-South cards held by Irina Levitina of Teaneck, N.J., and Ilya Levitin of Emerson, N.J.
They are certainly one of the world's strongest sister-and-brother partnerships.
West's weird-looking two no-trump opening was a two-under pre-empt, now popular in some quarters.
It showed a hand on which others might open three diamonds.
East corrected to three diamonds, and South took a reasonable shot at four spades.
Diamonds were led and continued, and when South ruffed he could see nine probable tricks.
He did not choose to put all his eggs in the trump basket, so instead of crossing to the heart king and finessing the spade jack, he cashed his top spades in the hope that the queen would fall.


Storm Causes Sinkhole That Leaves 2 Dead


MHI Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Sons of Major League Guns
ORLANDO CEPEDA'S son, MALCOLM CEPEDA, a catcher who was signed by the Royals shortly after he was picked, was not the only relative of a major leaguer taken in the amateur draft this month.
According to major league baseball, the record 1,720 high school, college and other players taken in the draft June 3-5, included a dozen other baseball relatives.
They include outfielder RUSSELL CHAMBLISS (drafted by San Diego), a son of former Yankees first baseman CHRIS CHAMBLISS, who is now a Cardinals coach; outfielder RYAN LEFEBVRE (Cleveland), a son of Cubs Manager JIM LEFEBVRE ; shortstop DANIEL CEY (San Diego), a son of former third baseman RON CEY, and one third-generation hopeful: third baseman MIKE BELL (Texas), a son of former third baseman BUDDY BELL and a grandson of former oufielder GUS BELL.


Joseph Calabretta, 76, Ex-New York Justice
Joseph S. Calabretta, a retired New York State Supreme Court Justice, died on Thursday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhassett, L.I.
Mr.
Calabretta was 76 and lived in Queens.
The family said the cause was complications from a stroke.


Mixed Views on New York City
Two major credit agencies gave mixed reviews yesterday to the $31.2 billion budget approved by the New York City Council.
Both agencies -- Standard &amp; Poor's and Moody's Investors Service -- are reviewing the details of the budget, which has nearly $1.8 billion more in spending than did the budget adopted last year.
But the agencies' initial responses, before a thorough reading of the spending plan, differed.


Two Groups, Citing Savings, Urge Privatization of City Jobs
Asserting that New York City is mired in a prolonged fiscal crisis, two prominent business groups proposed yesterday that the city turn over some services to private companies and take other broad steps that they said would reduce spending and increase revenue by nearly $16 billion over the next 10 years.
The groups, the New York City Partnership and the New York Chamber of Commerce and Industry, acknowledged that their plan, which also includes putting tolls on the East River bridges, relied on ideas that have been under consideration for decades.


Reviews/Dance; 3 Russian Composers Plus One Balanchine
The New York City Ballet's Balanchine Celebration on Friday night at the New York State Theater celebrated not only the choreography of George Balanchine, but also the music of three Russian composers: Tchaikovsky, Stravinsky and Glazunov.
To describe "Tchaikovsky Suite No. 3" as a choreographic matching of musical forms is accurate enough.
But Balanchine did more than mirror music.
He created an implicitly dramatic ballet that begins in unrest and ends in emotional balance and well-being.


Daedalus Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Tune In to Democracy
Over the next two days, House appropriations and Senate foreign relations subcommittees will begin deciding whether to create Radio Free Asia -- to do for such tyrannies as China, North Korea, Vietnam, Laos and Burma what Radio Liberty and Radio Free Europe did for Communist Europe.
The Administration is expected to weigh in with a recommendation.
If President Clinton, who chose to extend China's most-favored-nation status without any human rights conditions, wants to retain credibility as an advocate of global democracy, he'll want to make sure a robust plan for Radio Free Asia goes forward.
In de-fending his decision, he said we have an interest in China's modernization.
But this is true only if China's political development goes hand-in-hand with its economic development.
A China that grows rich and powerful without becoming democratic will be more of a menace than a blessing.


Body Found Floating Off Queens Coastline
The body of a man was found yesterday floating off the Queens shoreline at Breezy Point, the police said.
There was no identification on the body, but the police said the man was Asian.
Sgt.
Virgil Hickmon of the 101st Precinct Detective Squad said there was "a possibility" that the man may have been from the ill-fated ship Golden Venture, which was smuggling Chinese immigrants when it went aground last week off the Rockaway Peninsula.


Wimbledon Seeds Agassi 8th
ANDRE AGASSI became the lowest-seeded men's defending champion in Wimbledon history yesterday, and he got a break to be seeded as high as he was.
Wimbledon's seeding committee, which often disregards ranking, seeded the 13th-ranked Agassi at No. 8.
The American, who has been suffering from a right-wrist injury, is expected to play this week for the first time since April.


Peters (J.M.) Co. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Feb 28


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Accusations of price-fixing by the country's biggest infant-formula producers have embroiled the American Academy of Pediatrics in lawsuits.
Nestle USA says the academy, Abbott Labs and Bristol-Myers conspired to thwart its Carnation subsidiary from marketing formula.
Meanwhile, the pediatrics group received millions of dollars from formula makers.  [ D1. ]
Ruthless cost-cutting during the recession, rising anti-immigrant sentiment and new laws that have given employers more power have worsened conditions for the thousands of immigrants who toil in New York City's economy.  [ A1. ]


Hellooo, Down There: Is That You, Mets?
Major league club owners are scheduled Thursday to adopt a plan to expand the post-season playoffs from two teams in each league to four beginning next year.
The owners are prepared to shatter baseball tradition by allowing nonchampionship teams into their post-season party because they believe the additional invitations will create late-season fan interest.
If it's interest-building gimmicks they want, why wait?
This season's developments have created a ready-made gimmick for another type of playoff.
This one would involve the four worst teams in each league, or at least the National League, because that's where the most intriguing developments have occurred.


L.T. Is on the Green and Reeves Is Seeing Red
Lawrence Taylor's personal prescription for rehabilitating his severed Achilles' tendon this spring has been at least 18 holes on a choice golf course at every available opportunity.
For Giants Coach Dan Reeves, that's a bitter pill to swallow.
Today, as the Giants' three-day mini-camp started, Taylor was playing golf at a charity event in Kansas City, Mo., and Reeves reacted sharply to the fact that the star linebacker wasn't here and apparently had no plans to be here.
Historically, Taylor hasn't attended mini-camps.
The last one he did attend was in 1986.


Ennis Business Forms reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


American Drug Screens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Trading a Badge For a Stethoscope
A little more than 24 hours after he walked up to the stage of Carnegie Hall in his cap and gown to receive his medical degree, Sgt.
Michael Murray was wearing the uniform of the New York City Police Department and conducting roll call for the 6 P.M.-to-2 A.M. tour in one of the toughest precincts in the city.
"Valentin, 12 post. Twenty-two hundred meal," Sergeant Murray said.
In his best Jack Webb monotone, he was assigning the night's foot posts and lunch schedule to the dozen young officers standing in the muster room of the 34th Precinct station house.
The precinct, which encompasses Washington Heights, led New York City again last year in murders.


Motorola Move on Wireless Modems
Motorola Inc. plans to announce a new generation of wireless modems on Tuesday that are small enough to fit in the credit-card-sized slot that is becoming standard in hand-held computers and other portable wireless communications gadgets.
The company said it would be announcing a "technology" not a "product." Motorola's first credit-card-sized wireless modems will not reach the market until early next year.


COMPANY NEWS
A.T.&amp; T., Basking Ridge, N.J., announced that the UNUM Life Insurance Company of America, Portland, Me., had reconfirmed its commitment to a four-year, $16 million contract for global telecommunications services from the American Telephone and Telegraph Company.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Saturday about the closing of parts of two parks in New York City because of lead contamination misattributed a quotation about why officials took the action.
It was Mayor David N. Dinkins, not Stewart Desmond, a spokesman for the Parks Department, who said, referring to bridges, "While our goal is to repaint these structures with nontoxic paints to guard against future lead problems, we also need to act now to safeguard the health of children and families who use parks near bridges."


Diabetes Report May Lift Sales of Medical Devices
A group of medical technology companies stands to benefit from a new research report showing that the devastating complications of diabetes can be prevented or delayed by monitoring blood-sugar levels more closely and increasing injections of insulin.
The primary beneficiaries should be manufacturers of monitoring equipment, like the Lifescan Inc. unit of Johnson &amp; Johnson.
But makers of insulin delivery systems, like Minimed Technologies Inc., should also see more demand for their products, which are an alternative to syringes.


People
*
Richard Edelman, president and chief operating officer at Edelman Public Relations Worldwide, New York, was named to the additional position of managing director of Edelman Europe, assuming responsibilities from Rosemary Brook, who continues as chairwoman of Edelman's British company in London.
Also, James O. Cox 3d, executive vice president and general manager at Edelman's Houston office, was named to the new position of director of worldwide business development in the New York office.
Donald L. King, a senior vice president and general manager at the Churchill Group, Houston, will succeed Mr.
Cox. *
Elinore Carmody was named publisher of an as-yet untitled national magazine for teen-agers to be introduced in October by Hachette Filipacchi Custom Publishing, New York, and NBC.
Ms.
Carmody was previously advertising director at Mademoiselle magazine, New York.


Palomar Medical Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


F.D.A. Is Again Proposing to Regulate Vitamins and Supplements
The Food and Drug Administration will renew its efforts to control vitamins and other dietary supplements on Tuesday, when it announces plans to regulate health claims.
The agency will also seek advice on how to assure the safety of the products in the $4 billion market.
Those plans have been met with a vigorous counterattack by the supplement industry, which opposes any new regulations.


Needed: More High School Graduates
Good news: For the third year in a row, more New York City students are staying in school and not dropping out.
But there's a catch.
Even after spending up to seven years in high school, fewer than 60 percent of students receive a diploma.
That poses a real test of Schools Chancellor Joseph Fernandez's theory that students are more likely to succeed in smaller high schools.
It also poses a challenge to his successor: to push the graduation rate up while keeping the dropout rate down.
Deciphering New York's dropout rate has become an annual ritual.
In the early 1980's it was calculated to be as high as 42 percent.
Since 1986, however, the Board of Education has tracked through graduation the entire group of students entering ninth grade each year.
That at least has made year-to-year comparisons uniform.


Italian Group, Crippled by Debt, Sees Stock Dive
The stock of Italy's second-largest industrial group was selling well below $1 a share today on the Milan Stock Exchange after a decision last week to hand over financial control to five creditor banks.
The troubles at the group, Ferruzzi Finanziaria, which has holdings ranging from chemicals and energy to food and insurance, started to overwhelm it late last month when it announced that its financial holding company, Ferruzzi Finanziaria, had total indebtedness of $10.2 billion -- in Italian lire, almost twice its 1991 debt.
Then last week, the company's creditor banks demanded broad powers to oversee its business decisions.


Review/Pop; Toto's Debut, With Its Hits Of the Past
Maybe it's mere coincidence that Toto made its belated New York debut just as the hype for the movie "Jurassic Park" was peaking.
But nearly every song Toto played on Wednesday night at the Electric Ballroom (actually the Supper Club, minus most tables) could have been cloned from the DNA of extinct dinosaur-rock styles from the 1970's and 80's.
Toto, a group of Los Angeles studio musicians, swept the major 1983 Grammy awards thanks to hits like "Africa" and "Rosanna," then slogged along with intermittent commercial success through the 1980's.
It has just released a new album, "Kingdom of Desire" (Relativity) with Simon Phillips on drums replacing Jeff Porcaro, who died in August 1992.


Anne M. Johnson; Publishing Executive, 62
Anne M. Johnson, a former vice president of Beginner Books, a children's book division of Random House, died on Sunday at her home in Clifton, N.J.
She was 62.
She had a brief illness, said Robert L. Bernstein, with whom she had worked at Random House.


Robert D. Fowler; Georgia Publisher, 62
Robert D. Fowler of Alpharetta, Ga., former owner and publisher of The Gwinnett Daily News, died Sunday in Atlanta.
He was 62.
The cause was complications from heart failure, his family said.
Mr.
Fowler published the newspaper from 1964 to 1988, when he and his partners sold the News Company, including The Gwinnett Daily News, Winder News and Forsyth County News, to The New York Times Company.
The Daily News closed last year after a competitive struggle with The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.


Federal Trade Omission
"Get heart smart," implores a current magazine advertisement for a popular brand of margarine.
The illustration is a heart-shaped pat of margarine melting over string beans, reinforcing the implied claim that this is a sound choice to prevent heart disease.
This appeal to health-conscious consumers may be smart marketing strategy for the manufacturer.
But it's dumb national health policy to permit a misleading health claim in advertising that the Food and Drug Administration no longer permits on food package labels.
With six grams of fat per tablespoon, even this "extra light" spread is a fatty food that can actually help promote heart disease.


Reviews/Dance; A Modernist 'Coppelia,' With Balanchine's Touch
"Coppelia," one of the greatest of all comic ballets, was originally choreographed by Arthur Saint-Leon in Paris in 1870.
It was later offered in a revised form by Marius Petipa in St.
Petersburg in 1884.
On Sunday night, the New York City Ballet presented it as part of its Balanchine Celebration at the New York State Theater.
It did not seem out of place in a tribute to a distinguished contemporary choreographer.
Yet it still resembled a 19th-century ballet.
This is because when George Balanchine staged "Coppelia" for his company in 1974, he based his production upon that of Petipa and added new choreography of his own in the 19th-century style.
He was assisted in this venture by Alexandra Danilova, the ballerina and ballet teacher who was one of this century's finest interpreters of Swanilda, the work's starring role.
Together, they gave a sweet old ballet new life.


Intra-Party Fights Complicate Florio-Whitman Race
Jim Florio already has his hands full battling the Republicans in his gubernatorial campaign, and Christine Todd Whitman will be under constant fire from the Democrats.
That's to be expected.
But just to make things interesting, both candidates also face nagging problems in their own parties that at best are unwelcome distractions, and at worst could undermine efforts to get the vote out in November.


Unrest Shows Argentina the Perils of Privatization
While no one promised that running a privatized state company in Argentina would be easy, the Spanish and French investors who run Edenor S.A. did not expect to face jail for following what they regarded as prudent business practices.
The case of Edenor, which was created by the sale last year of Argentina's state power company, shows that even after privatization, companies in Argentina are subject to the power of public opinion and political pressure.


The Virus: Threat or Menace?
IN case you missed it, Wednesday was Virus Awareness Day.
Various computer industry groups went before Congress last week to testify about a growing menace of computer viruses and the need to protect the Clinton Administration's proposed "information superhighway" from viral attacks.
Although lacking in the popular appeal of other festive national commemorations like National Pickle Week, Virus Awareness Day did focus calm attention on a problem that normally suffers from too much agitated attention.


U.S. Aircraft Again Attack Somali Faction's Arms Sites
American aircraft struck at a Somali militia's storage sites in this city for a third consecutive day today.
No militia casualties were reported, but three civilians were reported wounded when a rocket apparently went awry and struck a sidewalk tea stall several hundred yards from the intended target.
The attack fed the growing anger in the capital against the United States and the United Nations.
At a rally in the middle of the city, several hundred people gathered to protest the air strikes, sitting on the ground and chanting "Down With Bill Clinton!"


Yes Clothing Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


L. F. McCollum, a Philanthropist And a Former Conoco Chief, 91
Leonard F. McCollum, a philanthropist and oilman who built the Continental Oil Company into the integrated worldwide energy giant known as Conoco, died Sunday at his home in Houston.
He was 91.
He had a short illness, his family said.


For Canada's New Chief, the Fight Has Just Begun
Kim Campbell has written herself into history books with a Tory leadership triumph that makes her the first woman to serve as Canada's Prime Minister and one of only 20 women to head a national government this century.
But she still faces the challenge of winning a mandate from the Canadian people.
Although she has promised Canadians "good government with thoughtful policies, honestly presented, openly arrived at, and implemented with competence and with care for every cent of your tax dollar," her honeymoon is likely to be brief.


Williams Grand Slam Wins It for Kamieniecki
All it took was one misplay and one beautiful swing and this game was all over.
Certainly, Scott Kamieniecki helped -- he came back from a brief visit to the minor leagues and pitched eight shutout innings for the Yankees, giving up three hits.
But as much as anything, it was a combination of Mo Vaughn and Bernie Williams that beat the Red Sox at Yankee Stadium last night.
Vaughn, the Boston first baseman, made a crucial error that helped load the bases in the fifth inning.
And Williams took advantage, sending an inside fastball from Danny Darwin into the right-field seats for his first career grand slam and a 4-0 New York victory.


Reviews/Dance; 6-Decade Retrospective
The New Dance Group has played an important though quiet part in New York cultural history over six decades as a place for dancers to learn, teach and practice their craft.
It was one of the first racially integrated dance schools and served as a home for all who saw dance as part of a larger social vision.
The New Dance Group Gala Retrospective, presented on Friday night at the theater of the Fiorello H. La Guardia High School of Music and the Arts, offered a remarkably fresh taste of that history and vision.
There were telltale signs of age in a few of the pieces.
But from the opening number, a hauntingly lyrical excerpt from Mary Anthony's 1956 "Songs," performed by seven members of Miss Anthony's company, the emphasis was on simplicity and an ageless craft.


G.O.P. Budget Would Deny Florio a Tax Cut
The Republicans who control New Jersey's Legislature today advanced a $15.4 billion budget that would deny Gov.
Jim Florio any share in providing an election-year tax cut.
Mr.
Florio's re-election depends on his overcoming voters' anger over the record $2.8 billion tax increase that he pushed through in 1990 within his first six months in office.
To take the onus off that memory, his administration had negotiated for weeks with Republican budget officers over using up to $100 million in surplus money to give New Jersey residents a direct cut in property taxes.


Hidden Economy: Immigrants Underground -- Third of six articles.; Few Emigres Can Fight Mistreatment on the Job
Last August, when K. Shah worked at a construction site renovating brownstones in Brooklyn, he complained to his bosses that he was suffering shooting pains in his arm.
The illegal Pakistani immigrant, assigned to heave 70-pound concrete blocks from the sidewalk to the fifth floor using a rudimentary block and tackle, was told to keep quiet and keep working.
Two days later, Mr.
Shah, 37, suffered a heart attack on the job.
It felt like his chest was on fire, he said.
Reluctantly, after warning him not to tell hospital officials where he worked, his bosses allowed him to leave and take a subway to North Central Bronx Hospital.
Two weeks later, he underwent bypass surgery.


Bosnians Reported to Repel Serb Attack
Bosnian Government troops repulsed new attacks by Serbian nationalist forces today on the "safe area" of Gorazde, the last Muslim enclave in eastern Bosnia that the Serbs have not overrun or neutralized, amateur radio operators reported.
After reports of Serbian artillery attacks on Sunday and infantry assaults that brought Serbian forces to within a few miles of the town of Gorazde, Bosnian officials demanded in Geneva today that the United Nations immediately deploy United Nations military forces in the Gorazde pocket, where some 60,000 people, including tens of thousands of refugees, are trapped.


CPAC Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Freudians Didn't Part Amiably With Masson
To the Editor:
A June 4 front-page article reports two statements Jeffrey M. Masson made about me that I wish to correct.
(1) When the board of the Sigmund Freud Archives, of which I was director, decided to discontinue Dr.
Masson's appointment as program director, I am alleged to have remarked, "Who knows that in a few years if we don't bring you back?" -- thus holding out the possibility of a future appointment.
But it is utterly impossible that I ever said anything of the kind, and it stands to reason that the archives' board could never maintain an official connection of any kind with anyone who without adequate cause publicly denounced Freud.


National Technical Sys.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


INSIDE
Haitians Leave Guantanamo
After 20 months of confinement, a group of H.I.V.-infected Haitians was flown to the United States.
Page A20.
Rules on Vitamins Sought
The Food and Drug Administration will renew its efforts to regulate dietary supplements.
Page A25.
Dispute Over Baby Formula
The American Academy of Pediatrics is accused of helping to fix baby-formula prices.
Page D1.
Doctors Plan Opposition
Leaders of the American Medical Association plan to oppose key parts of the Clinton health plan.
Page A20.


Havana Journal; 43,412 Stricken Cubans, and Not a Single Answer
On the 15th floor of the Hermanos Almeijeiras Hospital, the towering downtown complex that is the pride of Cuba's medical establishment, new patients arrive each day with a mysterious ailment that has left many people sightless and set off a global scramble to determine its cause.
Some patients with the disease, which has been variously described as optic neuropathy and peripheral neuropathy, writhe and grimace as muscles in their legs and arms flicker in and out of spasm.
Others lie listlessly, their vision blurred and their other senses confused.
Since the disorder of the nervous system first surfaced at the end of 1991, the illness has been diagnosed in 43,412 people, the Cuban authorities say.


Flaws Are Seen in Diagnosis And Control of Lyme Disease
Ah, the start of summer.
A time for bathing suits and cutoffs; carefree hikes in the woods; picnics in the meadow.
But this time of year, in places like northern Westchester County, people prepare to venture out into nature with the diligence of soldiers fitting up for war: pulling on long-sleeved shirts, tucking pants into socks and nervously inspecting their children each time they venture in from the yard.


Sunrise Leasing Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


NORTHWEST AIRLINES REMAINS FIRM ON CONCESSION NEEDS
Northwest Airlines told its unions yesterday that it would not negotiate on its goal of achieving $886 million in wage and benefit givebacks to avoid bankruptcy protection, though the airline left open the door to discuss ways of reaching that figure.
In a letter to the machinists' union, the carrier warned of the need to come to terms in the next few weeks.
Union officials could not be reached for comment last night.
Northwest needs the concessions to ease its debt burden of $4.6 billion.


New Assembly Gives Prince Sihanouk Broad Powers
The newly elected National Assembly met today for the first time and immediately voted to provide Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's ceremonial head of state and its former monarch, with all of the powers necessary "to save our nation" in the face of a secessionist threat and a continuing civil war.
While Prince Sihanouk did not immediately accept the wide-ranging powers offered to him by the 120-member assembly, the vote was proof of his indispensable role in international efforts to restore peace to this shattered country.


A 1993 MacArthur Award Adds New Joy to a Singer's Hallelujahs
Marion Williams was in church last Friday when she was called to the telephone: A philanthropy in Chicago wanted to tell her she had won $374,000.
No strings.
No conditions.
She would receive the money over the next five years to spend as she wished.


Prison Term For Doctor Convicted In Abortions
Calling the case one "that shocks us all," a judge yesterday sentenced the East Village doctor who severed the arm of a fetus in attempting an illegal abortion to 9 and two-thirds to 29 years in prison.
The lawyer for Dr.
Abu Hayat called the penalty a "a death sentence" for the 63-year-old doctor.
A lawyer for one of the victims, as well as an official of the District Attorney's Office, said they supported the sentence but were surprised by its severity.


Prism Entertainment Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Impact Systems Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


By Design; Sunflower Style
Everywhere you look, people are wearing flower prints.
No flower has been left unplucked, but the most special is the sunflower.
Perhaps because it personifies summer, the sunflower, with its plate-sized sunny "face," is the fashion flower of the moment.
Elizabeth Arden has even introduced a new fragrance called Sunflower, though its scent is not remotely earthy, like the real thing.


U.S. Open Usually Belongs to Americans
While the other major championships in golf have a distinctly international list of winners, the United States Open has traditionally been distinctly American.
The last foreign-born winner of the championship was David Graham of Australia, who won at Merion in 1981.
Before that, it was Tony Jacklin of England in 1970, and South African Gary Player in 1965.
Before that, you have to go back to 1927 and Scottish-born Tommy Armour.


Executive Changes
DUFF &amp; PHELPS CORP., Chicago, the credit rating agency, appointed Calvin J. Pedersen president.
DVI HEALTH SERVICES CORP., Irvine, Calif., named Michael O'Hanlon president of its DVI Financial Services unit, which provides equipment financing for the medical community.


No Program For a Recall Of Diet Pepsi
Pepsi-Cola said yesterday that it had no plans to recall Diet Pepsi in the Seattle area after two cans were found to contain syringes in separate incidents last week.
A company spokesman, Andrew Giangola, said that a third can containing a syringe was reported to have been found in New Orleans.
But neither he nor officials of the Food and Drug Administration, which is investigating the incidents, had any details of the latest discovery.


TCA Cable TV Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Magnetic Technologies Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Greenstone Roberts reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


And Now A Message From Mets' Youngsters
Play the kids.
Get dirty.
Let hunger loose.
Three months ago, the Mets derided the notions as empty advertisements that couldn't cut it in New York.
But now, the unthinkable has become the unavoidable, their roster stocked more with the raw than the rich.
Maybe it won't win much.
But it might sell.
It's not a bad bargain for the Mets to strike at the moment.


In the Race for Public Advocate, 6 Is a Crowd
With three months before the Democratic mayoral primary, the race for public advocate is shaping up as perhaps the most intriguing but most convoluted election in New York City.
There are six major Democratic candidates representing overlapping racial and ethnic categories, and even, on the part of one, a fusion with the Republican Party.
Meanwhile, Mayor David N. Dinkins is apparently reluctant to take sides because the contest includes several allies, including the son of one of his closest confidants.
What's more, most voters don't seem to know what the race is all about.


The Met Opera in the Parks, and Free
The Metropolitan Opera's annual series of free outdoor concerts opens tonight (Thursday in case of rain) with Puccini's "Madama Butterfly," at 8 o'clock on the Great Lawn in Central Park.
The series will offer a total of four performances of "Butterfly" and four of Donizetti's "Elisir d'Amore," in all five boroughs and in parks in New Jersey.
Other performances will take place at Prospect Park, Brooklyn ("Elisir," June 16); Cunningham Park, Jamaica, Queens ("Butterfly," June 18); Great Kills Park, New Dorp, S.I. ("Elisir," June 19); Van Cortlandt Park, the Bronx ("Butterfly," June 22); Brookdale Park, Montclair, N.J. ("Elisir," June 23); Waterloo Village, Stanhope, N.J. ("Butterfly," June 25), and Cooper River Park, Pennsauken, N.J. ("Elisir," June 26).


To Surf and Ski, the Japanese Are Heading Indoors
Beachgoing season is here and Norio Tsubokawa is sitting on the sand by the water's edge with his wife and daughter, watching body surfers ride the waves.
It is a typical summer scene except for a few details -- the "sand" is made from concrete and rubber, the waves are made by machine and the entire "beach" and "ocean" are inside a huge building.
Wild Blue Yokohama, complete with plastic palm trees, is one of several indoor beaches that have recently opened or are being built in Japan.
In a nation where most of the natural coastline has been paved over or filled in, and where the great outdoors is hard to reach from the big cities, people can now experience what might be called the "great indoors" instead.


Review/Opera; A 'Cinderella' in St. Louis Unites Lean Sets and Luxurious Voices
Written at the turn of the century and popular during its early years, "Cinderella" (nee "Cendrillon") had a rare revival at Loretto-Hilton Center on Saturday afternoon.
Massenet's setting invites spectacle on both the visual and the vocal scale.
The Opera Theater of St.
Louis has responded by avoiding the first and embracing the second.
Using a bare brick wall as background and a stage that reaches into the small audience space, Neil Peter Jampolis's design creates spectacle by inference.
Portraits are hung and sconces attached.
Lighting projections designed by Christopher Akerlind imply grand staircases, towering ballroom spaces or leafy arbors.
Such parsimony is turned to musical advantage, directing our attention to the displays of singing on which the opera's uneven virtues ultimately depend.


Legislators Deadlocked On Rent Laws
In what has become a ritual of the legislative session, the laws that limit rent increases on nearly 900,000 apartments in New York City and surrounding counties expire at the end of the day Tuesday, and state legislators remained deadlocked today on whether to extend them.
Every two years the state's rent-control and rent-stabilization laws expire, setting off a fight in the Legislature between supporters of tenants and landlords, who make competing calls to change the system.
In past years, legislators have waited until the 11th hour to resolve the issue, and then compromised by extending the existing rent rules another two years.


Digicon Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


A Leader in Black Business, Johnson Products, to Be Sold
The Johnson Products Company, whose portfolio of grooming and cosmetic products for minority consumers has made it one of the nation's largest black-owned businesses, will be acquired in a stock swap with the IVAX Corporation, the two companies announced today.
The deal could range in value from $61 million to $73 million depending on share prices of the two firms prior to the closing.


Corrections
A front-page article yesterday about the selection of Kim Campbell to be Prime Minister of Canada referred incorrectly in some editions to June Rowland, one of several other women who have assumed high office in Canada.
She is the Mayor of Toronto.


Mr. Clinton Picks a Justice
When he finally settled on a choice for Supreme Court justice, President Clinton chose one of the best sitting judges -- Ruth Bader Ginsburg, for 13 years a strong member of the U.S.
Court of Appeals in Washington.
She is an able jurist of moderate to liberal bent who does not frighten conservatives.
She is more besides: a pioneer lawyer for the modern movement of women toward equality under the law; a judge whose whole career, not only her gender, stands for the principle that people and ideas be accepted or rejected on their merits without prejudice or stereotypes.


Conner Presents Cup Sponsor
Just as his campaign to win the Whitbread Round the World Race is heating up, DENNIS CONNER is digging his heels deeper into his 1995 America's Cup yachting effort.
At a news conference yesterday at the "21" Club in Manhattan, Conner announced that Citizen Watch Company has become his first gold-level sponsor, a designation that translates into $3 million, a tenth of Conner's 1995 goal.


Market Place; Interest Rates' Effect on Bank Earnings May Be Exaggerated.
BANK stocks have been hurt recently by investor fears that higher interest rates would hurt earnings.
But many analysts say these fears are exaggerated.
The level of interest rates is essential to the way banks make money.
Even though they are trying to diversify, most banks make the bulk of their earnings by using money borrowed from depositors to make loans and invest in bonds.


Bowman to Coach Red Wings
SCOTTY BOWMAN, the coach with the most National Hockey League victories, is expected to be named coach of the Detroit Red Wings today.
His hiring has been widely reported for weeks, and the club has scheduled a news conference today at 11 A.M.
Eastern time, when the appointment is to be announced.
BRYAN MURRAY, Red Wings coach and general manager since coming to Detroit in 1990, will remain general manager.


Pacific Physician Services Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


THE SUPREME COURT: Woman in the News; Rejected as a Clerk, Chosen as a Justice: Ruth Joan Bader Ginsburg
In 1960, a dean at the Harvard Law School, Albert Sachs, proposed one of his star students to Justice Felix Frankfurter of the Supreme Court as a law clerk.
Justice Frankfurter told Professor Sachs that while the candidate was impressive, he just wasn't ready to hire a woman and so couldn't offer a job to Ruth Bader Ginsburg.
Judge Ginsburg, who now sits on the Federal appeals court and was chosen today by President Clinton for the Supreme Court, recently told that story to her own law clerks to explain how she became interested in the role of women in the eyes of the law.
Force Before the Court
In the years between that rebuff by Justice Frankfurter and her appointment to the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit in 1980, Ruth Ginsburg was a major force on the other side of the Supreme Court's high bench.


The Sand, the Sea, the . . . Light Bulbs?


TIFFANY TO TAKE TIGHTER REIN OF ITS JAPANESE BOUTIQUES
Tiffany &amp; Company said yesterday that beginning in July, it would assume direct responsibility for sales, merchandising and marketing in the 29 Tiffany boutiques now operated by Mitsukoshi Ltd., a large Japanese department-store chain.
The boutiques are in Mitsukoshi stores.
The change will cost Tiffany $57.5 million, which will be charged against earnings for the current quarter, which ends on July 31.
The company said the one-time charge would reduce after-tax earnings for the period by $32.7 million, or $2.04 a share.


Corrections
A chart on Sunday about reductions in New York City services outlined in the budget for the fiscal year that begins July 1 included an incorrect figure for the savings anticipated from cutting the expansion of tuberculosis clinics in half.
It is $865,000.


METRO DIGEST
EMIGRES STRUGGLE AGAINST MISTREATMENT
Although the city's growing underground economy provides jobs and opportunities for some, it condemns an increasing number of immigrants to a life of ever-worsening exploitation.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  BUDGET IS PASSED BY CITY COUNCIL
After nearly 12 hours of hearings and debate, the City Council formally passes a $31.2 billion budget package.
B3.


Analogic Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


As the World Turns
THE big programs get all the attention and respect and start the hottest arguments.
Here are two programs that probably will not provoke anyone to put up his dukes, but if you like them, you like them, and if you need them, you need them.
CNN Newsroom Worldclock Calendar Atlas offers views of the Earth, either as a globe or flat map; gives the local time at various spots; measures distances between two places; presents, both numerically and graphically, sunrise and sunset anywhere, and, optionally, shows latitude and longitude.
It can zoom out to show the whole world, or zoom in to an area as small as a particular ZIP code, in the United States.


Verdix Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


McCormick &amp; Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Peachtree Fiberoptics reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Total-Tel USA reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Mr. Banks, Unloved, Goes to Washington
Carl Banks traded uniforms but not road maps yesterday.
After nine seasons as a Giant, he wound up with a team he knows quite well: the Washington Redskins.
The former Pro Bowl linebacker signed a three-year deal worth a total of about $5.4 million, including a bonus and salary of $2.1 million for this year.


AEL Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Former School Custodian Accused of Theft
A former school custodian who the authorities said logged hundreds of hours piloting a corporate jet when he should have been at work in a Brooklyn public school was arrested yesterday and charged with theft and falsifying records.
The former custodian, Albert Friedland, 50, of Sterling Forest, N.Y., surrendered on a 43-count indictment handed down earlier this month by a Brooklyn grand jury, and he was arraigned last night before Acting Justice Barry A. Cozier of the Supreme Court.


Televideo Systems Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


EASTMAN KODAK SHARES RISE ON EXPECTED ANNOUNCEMENT
The price of shares of the Eastman Kodak Company jumped $2.625, to $53.75, in heavy trading yesterday as investors speculated that the company would announce at least parts of its reorganization plan at an analysts meeting and news conference today.
Kay Whitmore, the chairman, was scheduled to address both meetings.
He has been under pressure from Wall Street and his own directors to sell subsidiaries to reduce debt and improve cash flow.


Brown-Forman reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Forstmann &amp; Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Chang Exits Early  Michael Chang's final tuneup for Wimbledon ended abruptly yesterday when he was beaten, 6-3, 3-6, 6-3, by Bernd Karbacher in the first round of the grass-court tournament in Halle, Germany.
The event also marks Andre Agassi's return from a two-month layoff from right wrist problems.
Agassi practiced in private for 25 minutes before rain halted his workout.
He will play Carl-Uwe Steeb of Germany today.
Karbacher's victory was his third in three meetings -- and second in three weeks -- against Chang, who is seeded third at Halle.
The German defeated Chang in the second round of the French Open.
Yesterday, Karbacher broke Chang in the eighth game en route to winning the first set and again after falling behind by 2-0 in the second set.
Chang rallied to win that set, but another break by Karbacher in the final set spurred him to victory and brought Chang's warmup for Wimbledon to an abrupt end. (AP)
Sprinkles in Manchester: Henrik Holm of Sweden and Nicolas Pereira of Venezuela were the only winners yesterday when rain cut short the opening day of play at the Manchester grass-court tournament in England.
Holm, seeded second, dropped the first set against Brett Steven of New Zealand before rebounding to win, 3-6, 7-5, 6-4.
Pereira needed three sets and two tie breakers to beat Alex O'Brien of Amarillo, Tex., 6-7 (6-8), 6-3, 7-6 (7-4).
Five other singles matches were postponed until today, and qualifying rounds for the doubles competition were moved indoors.
Holm will next face either his countryman Anders Jarryd or Luis Herrera of Mexico.
Pereira, the world's top-ranked junior in 1988, will meet either eighth-seeded Guillaume Raoux of France or Gianluca Pozzi of Italy.  (AP)


Griffith Makes a Comeback
No one had ever hurt him that much in the ring.
But one night late last July, Emile Griffith found himself on a sidewalk in the Times Square area, an ache in the back of his neck, his sides hurting, his pockets empty.
"I wanted to get home to Queens," he recalled last week.
"But I took the D train uptown. I looked up and I saw I was at Yankee Stadium so I got out, went to the other side, and went downtown."


Worthington Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


An Employer Loses Ruling On Pensions
The Supreme Court unanimously upheld today the constitutionality of the Federal pension law that requires employers to make good on their financial obligations when they withdraw from an industrywide pension plan.
The case was an important test of the law Congress passed 13 years ago to remove employers' incentives to avoid financial liability by pulling out of weak pension plans.


Bank Tries to Bolster Securities Units
Deutsche Bank, the largest bank in Germany, announced plans yesterday to blend C. J. Lawrence, an American securities firm it has owned for nearly four years, more closely into the bank's other securities businesses in the United States.
The move is part of Deutsche Bank's effort to expand its American business from one centered on lending to large corporations.
Instead, Deutsche Bank is moving toward an operation that resembles J. P. Morgan &amp; Company, in which bank lending is just part of the corporate advisory and securities services offered to large companies.


PriMedex Health Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Linkon Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Tapistron International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Check Clearing House Appoints New President
One of the country's most elite banking organizations, the New York Clearing House, announced yesterday that it had chosen Jill M. Considine, the former superintendent of banks for New York State, as its president.
Ms.
Considine, 47, succeeds John F. Lee, 65, who is retiring after 26 years of running the organization that was formed 136 years ago to facilitate the clearing of checks by New York banks.


Music Notes; 2 New Competitions For Standout Pianists; No Prodigies, Please
Maurizio Pollini and Ivo Pogorelich thrive at opposite ends of the pianistic spectrum, the one taking a more cerebral, philosophical view, the other given to impulsive and often rather provocative recasting.
But one thing they have in common is that their careers began at the International Chopin Piano Competition in Warsaw.
Mr.
Pollini won the contest in 1960.
Twenty years later, Mr.
Pogorelich made headlines when his elimination before the final round caused a ruckus among the jurors.
Mr.
Pogorelich ended up far better known than that year's winner, the Vietnamese pianist Dang Thai Son.
Mr.
Pollini and Mr.
Pogorelich are about to have something else in common: both are involved with new piano competitions, and both are hoping, against the odds, that they can identify pianists who will stand out in the already overcrowded field of contest winners.
Both contests have unusual rules and requirements.


Can U.N. Survive Continued Failure in Bosnia?
To the Editor:
If the United Nations continues its ineffective policy in Bosnia, it could itself become the main casualty of the fighting.
Failure to bring a cessation of aggression and an end to the worst bloodshed in Europe since World War II will lead to a major global loss of faith in the world organization.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-18  U.S.
DRAWS LINE ON GLOBAL RIGHTS  At a conference in Vienna, the United States warned that it would oppose attempts to use religious and cultural traditions to erode the concept of universal human rights.
A1  DESTINY IS IN SIHANOUK'S HANDS  Cambodia's new Parliament met for the first time and gave Prince Norodom Sihanouk all of the powers necessary "to save our nation." A3


Abortion-Protest Case
The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether abortion clinics can use a Federal racketeering law that provides for triple damages to sue anti-abortion groups that organize demonstrations and blockades intended to shut down the clinics.
Article, page A22.


Goldman Losing a 2d Top-Ranked Analyst
A second top computer analyst is leaving Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
The analyst, Daniel Benton, will depart next week to join a money-management firm, Dawson Samberg Capital Management Inc.


When Doctors Used to Talk to Patients
To the Editor:
The insurance of medical care has had a number of unintended results, the major one being a vast explosion of demand for medical care, because it is paid for by other people's money, that is, medical insurance claim reimbursement.
I have observed another unintended result.
Since medical insurance reimburses doctors far more for procedures than for spending time listening to and talking to patients about their illnesses, many doctors have, where possible, shifted to an increased use of procedures.
There are many legitimate reasons for this -- for instance, new technology and fear of malpractice suits for not using the latest tools available.


Haitians With H.I.V. Leave Cuba Base for Lives in U.S.
They arrived at the airstrip here as the sun was rising, dressed in clothes sent them by relatives and quietly clutching their few possessions.
For 27 Haitian political refugees, 20 months of confinement in what a Federal judge has described as a squalid "H.I.V. prison camp" ended today with a flight to the United States and freedom.
The departure of the group, 21 adults who are infected with the virus that causes AIDS and six children who have not been tested for the disease, was the first step toward closing the military detention center, as ordered last week by Judge Sterling Johnson Jr. of the Federal District Court in Brooklyn.
Col.
Raymond A. Barbeau, commander of the camp, said he expected the remaining 113 Haitian refugees to leave "in the next 10 days to two weeks."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
2.93
3.50
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.04
3.66
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.18
3.17
3.75
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.59
5.58
6.87
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.81
6.80
7.85
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.75
7.75
8.77
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.86
5.86
6.59
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Battle for Baby Formula Market
The American Academy of Pediatrics, which has long basked in its role as a protector of infants and children, now stands accused by law enforcement officials and Nestle's United States unit of participating in a price-fixing scheme by the country's biggest infant formula producers.
The 45,000-member medical group is a defendant in two lawsuits that charge it conspired with major formula companies that promote their products through doctors and hospitals.
The suits say the academy and the companies tried to stifle competition from other manufacturers that reach the public directly by advertising.
The doctors have long held that advertising infant formula would persuade new mothers not to breast-feed, the form of feeding that experts agree is nutritionally preferable. 'Caught Up in Greed'
But court documents indicate that the medical group, while repeatedly pressing for an advertising prohibition, looked for but could not find any scientific evidence to support its claim that advertising formula deterred breast-feeding.
Meanwhile, over the last decade, the group took millions of dollars from formula makers like Abbott Laboratories, Bristol-Myers Squibb and American Home Products, which use doctors and hospitals to promote their products.


Somali Warlord, Still at Large, In a Test of Wills With U.N.
During three days of attacks, AC-130 gunships have blasted Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid's weapons sites.
Cobra helicopters have attacked the Somali warlord's radio station.
And today an attack helicopter demolished one of his rocket launchers.
But the United Nations forces in Somalia have yet to arrest the man who Washington has said is at the heart of the problem there.


Books of The Times; Decline of America's Landscape and the Blame
The Geography of Nowhere  The Rise and Decline of America's Man-Made Landscape  By James Howard Kunstler  303 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.


Gore Promises U.S. Leadership On Sustainable Development Path
The United States emerged from the Earth Summit last year in Rio de Janeiro, in the view of many delegates who attended, not as global leader on the environment but rather as global foot-dragger.
Today, exactly a year after the meeting adjourned, Vice President Al Gore told a new United Nations commission charged with carrying on the gathering's work that those days are over.
At Rio, nearly 180 nations committed themselves to policies that would enable them to develop their economies while preserving the environment and the renewable natural resources on which future prosperity depends -- "sustainable development," it was called.
They also put together a broad blueprint, called Agenda 21, for arresting environmental degradation.


Classical Music in Review
Festival Ensemble Society  American Academy and Institute of Arts and Letters Washington Heights
"All races have inheritances: left to their own devices, they will naturally follow their native bent. An effort from the outside to lay down rather strict lines along which their art should develop can only result in self-consciousness and, consequently, in inartistic and insincere results." These are words of R. Nathaniel Dett, a black American composer who lived from 1882 to 1943 and who dedicated himself to the preservation and musical elaboration of spirituals and folk songs.
He called his mission "the emancipation of Negro music."


'Handedness' Seen in Nature, Long Before Hands
BITE scars found in the fossils of ancient shellfish have yielded strong evidence that half a billion years ago animals had already evolved "handedness," the kind of behavior that makes most human beings favor one hand or the other.
A new study shows that certain sea creatures that evolved even before animals first colonized the land -- and long before the evolution of the hand -- persistently turned toward their favored sides when attacking prey or evading predators.


A Mansion Out of Place, And Maybe Out of Time
JOSEPH MIRABELLA'S family is only the second to live in the old mansion on the corner of Martin Luther King Boulevard.
The way things look, it will also be the last.
A big yellow "For Sale" sign hangs conspicuously on the black wrought-iron fence that has protected the four-story brick building since 1906.
But no one expects a family that can afford to pay $695,000 to spend it on a place surrounded by tenement houses and abandoned buildings, a hop from the projects in Newark's South Bronx.


Ex-Kremlin Figure Returns to Power in Azerbaijan
In a remarkable political comeback, a former K.G.B. general, former Communist Party boss and former Politburo member in the Kremlin has maneuvered his way back into power here, saying he is a democrat and promising to turn his native Azerbaijan back from the brink of civil war.
"Let there be no doubt about my purpose," Heydar Aliyev, 70, said in his acceptance speech upon being voted into the office of Chairman of Parliament today.
"I will devote the time God has left me to protect the independence of Azerbaijan and promote the rule of law, democratic pluralism and the development of a market economy."


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal National Mortgage Association, known as Fannie Mae, is offering $250 million of medium-term notes due in 2003 at 100 to yield 6.38 percent.
The issue is callable in three years. *
Duquesne Light Co., Pittsburgh, a unit of DQE Co., is offering $200 million of debt securities in two parts through Merrill Lynch.
The first part consists of $100 million of 7.55 percent first collateral trust bonds due in 2025 at 98.398 to yield 7.685 percent.
The second part consists of $100 million of 6.625 percent first collateral trust bonds due in 2004 at 99.024 to yield 6.752 percent.
The issues, callable in seven and five years, respectively, are rated Baa-1 by Moody's Investors Service, BBB+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and A- by Duff and Phelps.


Corrections
A front-page profile yesterday about Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg rendered the name of a former Harvard Law School dean incorrectly.
He is Albert Sacks.


Bowe's New Look A Matter Of Style
Oh, sure, Riddick Bowe, the newest Fila spokesman, was saying yesterday.
He has worn a lot of warm-up suits with a famous name on them.
"They were called hand-me-downs," Bowe, who holds the World Boxing Association and International Boxing Federation heavyweight crowns, said with a big grin.
"You know, they had Mark Breland's name, something he was tired of."


A 2d Asian Body Found Off Queens
The body of a man was found yesterday morning floating off Queens at Fort Tilden Gateway Beach, a short distance from where another body was found on Monday, the police said.
There was no immediate identification of either body, but both men were Asian and the police said they believed the two had come from the Golden Venture, which ran aground off the Rockaway Peninsula last week carrying about 300 illegal Chinese immigrants.
The body found yesterday was floating a half-mile west from where the ship went aground.


Senators See Easy Approval for Nominee
Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg went to Capitol Hill today to meet with senior senators, and Democrats and Republicans predicted she would breeze through confirmation proceedings to become the 107th Justice of the Supreme Court.
"Never have I been so optimistic nor as pleased with a Supreme Court nominee as I have been with Judge Ginsburg," said Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., the Delaware Democrat who heads the Judiciary Committee.
"I have every expectation that Judge Ginsburg will be met with wide approval by liberals, conservatives, moderates and the Senate as a whole."


AIDS as a Killer of Young Men


Florence W. Hartstein; Leader in Jewish Groups, 74
Florence W. Hartstein, a leader in Jewish community organizations in this country and in Israel, died on Friday at the Perlow Hospice of Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
She was 74.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, said her son, Norman.


How Honda Slipped From Its Perch
Honda. For years the name struck fear and awe into the American auto industry.
But with a strong yen forcing up prices and with many Detroit models flourishing on the strength of improved quality and creative design, the Honda Motor Company is stumbling -- still profitable, but not the powerhouse it once was.


State Tax on Long Distance Carriers Overturned
New York State would be forced to refund more than $30 million in taxes paid by American Telephone and Telegraph Company, and millions more paid by other long distance carriers, under an appellate court ruling that found the state's method of taxing long distance companies unconstitutional.
A panel of the Appellate Division of State Supreme Court ruled that the state violated the United States Constitution's ban on states' interference in interstate commerce by calculating an income tax deduction for a long distance company based on the percentage of its property that lies in New York.
The decision, released yesterday, overturned an earlier decision by Justice Edward H. Lerner of State Supreme Court in Manhattan.


A Season in the Park Begins With Puccini


Ruling Cambodia Party Says Deal Has Been Made on Power Sharing; Secessionists Flee
A secessionist movement in Cambodia's eastern provinces appeared to collapse today as the United Nations said its leader had fled across the border to Vietnam with dozens of his followers.
United Nations peacekeepers on Cambodia's eastern border said that the secessionist leader, Prince Norodom Chakrapong, crossed into Vietnam early this morning in a convoy of about 20 vehicles and that he had turned over a cache of weapons to startled Vietnamese border guards.


Bramalea Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


LAWMAKERS FIGHT NEW ATOMIC TESTS
Democratic lawmakers have mounted a strong effort to dissuade the Clinton Administration from a plan to resume tests of nuclear weapons after a Congressional moratorium expires July 1.
The plan calls for the United States and Britain to conduct nine underground explosions in Nevada before 1996, when the Administration wants a complete test ban to go into effect.


From a No Name, Majerle Emerges As Suns' Hot Shot
As popular as Dan Majerle is in Phoenix, it is difficult to imagine that he was once booed by Suns fans.
It happened the day Majerle was drafted, in 1988.
Most people in Arizona had never heard of him.
So when Majerle was announced as the Suns' first-round pick, the 14th pick over all, the fans booed.


NEW EQUIPMENT FOR ELECTRONIC MAIL MESSAGES
Three major computer and telecommunications companies announced a package of equipment and software to let mobile professionals send a lengthy electronic mail message as easily as a beeper screech.
The package costs $775 with a monthly service fee of $75.


Wickman's Night Begins in Folly and Ends in Glee
He went into the Yankee clubhouse at the close of the fourth inning, let the door slam behind him with a thump of disgust.
Bob Wickman did not want to watch the rest of this ball game, did not want to stare up at the Yankee Stadium scoreboard at those awful five runs he had given the Red Sox.
His team had none and Boston had five, and Wickman figured it was near to hopeless.
He figured he was due -- deservedly due -- his first loss of the year.


Rangers' Shopping Days Dwindling
There is no escape this time.
There is no room for procrastination, for explanations, for talk of future deals.
The New York Rangers have been unsuccessfully trying to trade one of their two goaltenders -- Mike Richter or John Vanbiesbrouck -- for more than two years.
They have until 5 P.M.
Sunday to actually do it, or they will almost certainly lose one, with no compensation, in the National Hockey League's expansion draft next week.


KEMPER SAYS SECURITIES UNIT IS NOT FOR SALE
The Kemper Corporation said yesterday that Kemper Securities, its securities brokerage subsidiary, was not for sale and that offers to buy the company were too low.


Irish Begin to Liberalize Laws on Sex and Family
For centuries overwhelmingly Roman Catholic Ireland has clung proudly to conservative, even strait-laced attitudes toward sexual morality.
Literary dissenters like James Joyce and Edna O'Brien were voices of a small minority.
But now, as a result of economic, social and political changes, the Government has begun to move steadily toward a liberalization of laws involving families and sex in ways that are generally opposed by the Catholic Church.


60-Minute Gourmet
GLAZES are sauces that are so thoroughly reduced that they can be used to coat meat, poultry or seafood.
Sometimes bound with butter, glazes give food a glossy, attractive look.
They are full flavored because of the heavy reduction.
Some glazes are made from reduced stocks and might be added to a sauce as a thickening and flavoring agent, or used as a base for a different sauce altogether.
Sometimes, cold glazes are brushed over poached meat or fish, often on elaborate buffet displays.
A wonderful summer lunch is poached chicken in a chicken-stock glaze garnished with fresh tarragon leaves.
Technically speaking, desserts can have glazes, too, like fruit tarts that are brushed with flavored gelatins.


Alexander's Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Asylum Reform Has to Respect Human Rights; Still Waiting
To the Editor:
Anyone who has had contact with the Immigration and Naturalization Service would agree with Andrew Stephen in "Doctors, Spaghetti and My American Wife" (Op-Ed, June 7) that something is drastically wrong.
I too am a green card holder trying to become a United States citizen.


COMPANY NEWS
BOMBARDIER INC.  will build an intercontinental business jet and pursue studies to build a 70-seat version of its existing Dash 8 family of turboprop passenger planes, company executives said at the Paris Air Show.
The new business jet, the Challenger 604, will be a longer-range version of its existing Challenger 601-3R, with a nonstop range of about 4,400 miles.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Washington Falls in Wimbledon Tune-Up  Top-seeded MaliVai Washington was upset in the first round at the Direct Line Insurance Manchester Open grass-court tournament in England yesterday.
The 23-year-old American, runner-up here last year, was beaten by Chris Bailey of Britain, 7-6 (7-5), 6-2.
"I didn't play great throughout the whole match," Washington said.
"But I have several days left to rest, and come Wimbledon I'll be ready. I had a whole bunch of matches last week and one today, so I feel confident on the grass." Washington won three matches last week at Rosmalen in the Netherlands before losing in the semifinals to Wally Masur of Australia.
He will be the No. 14-seeded player at Wimbledon, which starts Monday.
Washington's first-round opponent there will be Guillaume Raoux of France.
Joining Washington on the sideline yesterday was the Olympic champion Marc Rosset of Switzerland, seeded fifth, who lost by 6-1, 6-4 to the French qualifier Philippe Pech.
Andrei Chesnokov of Russia, seeded sixth, beat Bryan Shelton of Atlanta, 6-4, 6-4, and No. 7 Richard Fromberg of Australia advanced with a 6-4, 7-6 (7-4) victory over Daniel Vacek of the Czech Republic.
Defending champion Jacco Eltingh of the Netherlands also reached the second round, beating Rodolphe Gilbert of France, 6-3, 6-3. (AP)
Navratilova In, Fernandez Out: Top-seeded Martina Navratilova won two matches yesterday at the rain-disrupted Eastbourne grass-court tournament in England, while No. 3-seeded Mary Joe Fernandez was upset in her second match of the day.
Fernandez, playing for the first time since losing to Steffi Graf in the French Open final 10 days ago, defeated the Briton Shirli-Ann Siddall, 6-4, 7-5, in her opening match.
But three hours later, Fernandez was knocked out of the $375,000 event by her fellow American Ginger Helgeson, who is ranked No. 55, 6-2, 6-2.
"The French Open final was in the past; I have to look to the future," said Fernandez.
"It takes me awhile to adapt to the grass, and today Ginger played a very, very good match." Navratilova needed just 52 minutes to earn a 6-1, 6-2 victory over the Romanian qualifier, Ruxandra Dragomir.
She then beat her fellow American Robin White, 6-2, 6-2, in one hour.
No. 2-seeded Gabriela Sabatini of Argentina won her second-round match, beating Claudia Porwik of Germany, 7-5, 6-1. (AP)


Senators Seek to Ease Filibuster's Grip on Campaign Finance Bill
Senate Democrats struggled today to keep campaign finance legislation alive by dealing with moderate Republicans who want to eliminate almost all public financing from the bill but keep its voluntary spending limits.
If all the elements of the emerging plan fall into place -- and significant opposition to several of its parts seems certain -- the negotiators hope to win a vote on Wednesday to end a filibuster against the bill.
Supporters of the bill lost just such a vote earlier today, falling 8 votes short of the 60 required to cut off debate.


INSIDE
Verdict in Principal's Death
Three teen-agers were convicted of killing a popular elementary school principal in Brooklyn.
Page B1.
Soda Tampering Mystery
Reports of syringes in cans of Pepsi spread to 11 states, and the Food and Drug Administration is investigating the 16 incidents.
Page A16.
Sex and the Law in Ireland
Ireland has begun to move steadily toward a liberalization of laws involving families and sex.
Page A10.


Review/Television; Cultures Clash on 'American Playhouse'
Much to its credit, public television's "American Playhouse" makes periodic forays into Latino culture in this country.
Past efforts include the films "El Norte" and "The Ballad of Gregorio Cortez." Tonight at 9 on Channel 13, it's "La Carpa," directed by Carlos Avila, an American with Peruvian roots.
Set in the Southern California town of Florencia in 1938, the story, written by Mr.
Avila and Edit Villareal, revolves around a Mexican-American vaudeville troupe, the kind that used to tour the Southwest performing in their own small tents, or carpas.
Devised for Mexican and Chicano workers and their families, the programs of comedy, songs and dances used the broad strokes and colors of folklore, and often incorporated local concerns into the material.
A similar approach can be found today in Chicano theater groups like Luis Valdez's "Teatro Campesino," a training ground for many of the actors in this film.


John Connally of Texas, a Power In 2 Political Parties, Dies at 76
John B. Connally, the former Governor of Texas who served in two Presidential Administrations and who was wounded when President John F. Kennedy was assassinated, died yesterday at Methodist Hospital in Houston.
He was 76.
The cause was complications of pulmonary fibrosis, said a hospital spokeswoman, Blythe Schaffer.
Mr.
Connally had been admitted to the hospital May 17 with breathing problems.


Review/Pop; The Somber Rituals Of Leonard Cohen
Leonard Cohen's audience roared when he sang, "I was born with the gift of a golden voice" at the Paramount on Monday night.
His voice isn't golden; like a rusty old farm implement, it rasps and creaks, moving out of a deep monotone only with great effort.
It can be a whisper, a growl, a croak; it suggests deathbed confidences or prophecies from beyond the grave.
When Mr.
Cohen sings a lover's promises, as he sometimes does, the words sound desperate and ominous.
Mr.
Cohen, who is 58, has carried on a remarkably consistent career since his first album appeared in 1967.
He writes stately, imagistic songs with zingers every few lines: "It's lonely here, there's no one left to torture," he sings in the title song of his current album, "The Future" (Columbia).
In early songs like "Suzanne" and "Sisters of Mercy," romance and religiosity are intertwined; soon, his concerns about doom and salvation extended beyond the personal sphere, leading to profoundly cynical, black-humored litanies of bad news like "Everybody Knows" and "There Is a War."


JAPANESE LEADER IS DEALT SETBACK
Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa's future as Japan's leader was shaken today when his biggest goal, a political reform bill, was declared dead by leaders of his own party and his opponents pressed for a no-confidence vote this week.
The failure of the bill, which had been aimed at restoring faith in government after years of corruption scandals, raised the possibility that Mr.
Miyazawa may be forced to dissolve the Parliament and begin an election campaign before the summit of the seven largest industrialized nations three weeks from now.


Debussy's 'Pelleas et Melisande' Is Unexpectedly a la Mode Again
As our own fin de siecle -- or fin de millenaire -- approaches, attention to that archetypal artifact of the last fin de siecle, "Pelleas et Melisande," has quickened.
What's curious, however, is the way that major stage directors, most recently and unambiguously Peter Sellars in Amsterdam, are determined to purge Debussy's opera, and the Maurice Maeterlinck play on which it is based, of the very wispy ephemerality once presumed to be its essence.
Composed in the mid-1890's and first performed in 1902, "Pelleas" has always occupied a place in the operatic pantheon, albeit a side niche.
But of late new productions have popped up nearly everywhere, notably in Chicago and Seattle in the United States.
In Europe, Claudio Abbado revived his Antoine Vitez production from Vienna for the Royal Opera in London this season, and his Deutsche Grammophon recording tops the British operatic Hit Parade.


A Savory Guide To the Exotica Of Chinatown's Food Vendors
A THOUSAND years ago, in the villages of China at the beginning of the Sung dynasty, before there were restaurants, and before peasants had ovens, food vendors roamed mud streets.
From morning to night, the vendors hawked fried puffy breads, sweet sticky rice and plump barbecued chickens.
They brought the food from larger, nearby towns where the chickens were roasted in ovens, then tucked into tiered bamboo baskets that hung on poles slung across their shoulders.
The food was humble, but tasty -- tasty enough that the tradition is alive today on the streets of Beijing, Hong Kong and Manhattan.


General to Be Disciplined For Disparaging President
An Air Force inquiry has concluded that a two-star general made disparaging remarks about President Clinton, and the general now faces disciplinary action that will effectively end his career, senior Air Force officials said today.
The Air Force inquiry found that the officer, Maj.
Gen.
Harold N. Campbell, called Mr.
Clinton a "dope-smoking," "skirt-chasing," "draft-dodging" Commander in Chief, in a speech last month in the Netherlands.


GenCorp Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Backed by Kemp, Giuliani Says He Expects to Ride Winning Tide
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor, received the endorsement of Jack Kemp yesterday and promised to be the next Republican to ride to victory on a tide of fiscal conservatism tempered by social concern.
Both he and Mr.
Kemp, who is considered likely to run for President in 1996, scrambled to jump on the bandwagon of recent Republican victories across the country yesterday and to sound the theme of a Republican Party driven by notions of inclusion and social justice.


Phase One of Kodak's Revamping Plan: A Spinoff
The Eastman Kodak Company, under pressure from investors to pare down its $9.5 billion in debt, said yesterday that it would spin off its chemical manufacturing business to Kodak shareholders.
The move is expected to let Kodak trim its debt by $2 billion.
Decisions to part with major lines of business are not made quickly or lightly at the photographic giant's headquarters in Rochester, company officials acknowledged yesterday.
"We have been talking about this for three years and intensively for the last four months," Kay R. Whitmore, Kodak's chairman, said.
"This is a big decision for us."


Dart Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Handicaps Are No Bar, A Medical School Says
After fighting for more than two years to get into medical school, a 23-year-old quadriplegic has been accepted by Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.
When the wheelchair-bound student, James B. Post 4th, graduated last year from King's College in Wilkes-Barre, Pa., his grade-point average was 3.922 and his medical-school admission test scores were above average.
But his application was rejected by 10 medical schools; he said they told him they could not accommodate a quadriplegic student.


Final Buzzer in Caldwell's Bid for Trial
JOE CALDWELL, the former All-Star basketball player who charged that the owners of the Spirits of St.
Louis of the old American Basketball Association conspired to keep him out of basketball in 1974, has been denied a trial in Federal court in Manhattan.


Daniel Ransohoff, 71, Booster for Cincinnati
Daniel J. Ransohoff, a tireless booster of his native Cincinnati as a planner, tour guide, historian, professor, photographer and fund-raiser, died at a hospital there on May 29.
He was 71.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Despite Farm Pact, France Still Talks Tough on Trade
Despite recent indications that France was seeking to be more accommodating in international trade talks, its Prime Minister, Edouard Balladur, said today that he could not accept an international trade agreement that would hurt the French economy.
Last week, France agreed to an agricultural agreement between Europe and the United States that reduced production of the European Community's oilseed crops.
But Mr.
Balladur said today that this did not mean that France would automatically acquiesce to calls for Europe to shrink the amount of subsidized grain it exports.


Campus Journal; Drexel U. Hopes to Ride Its Solar-Powered Car Into the Limelight
Drexel University is not an athletic Goliath like the University of Michigan.
But when the solar-powered car designed by engineering students from the private liberal arts institution here upset Michigan's defending national champion car in a race this year, there was plenty to celebrate.
The victory catapulted Drexel's solar car, which looks like an oversized wafer with three wheels, to the role of a favorite in the 1,000-mile race of solar-propelled cars from 36 colleges and universities.
The race will start in Arlington, Tex., on June 20 and finish in Minneapolis on June 27.


No Haven for Hate Crimes
This nation proudly protects the right of people to think and say what they please, including hateful things.
But those treasured freedoms of thought and expression do not protect a person whose bigoted thought turns into criminal action.
The law may give separate, extra punishment for crimes motivated by racial hatred and other bias.
That is the welcome message of a unanimous Supreme Court, which last week upheld a Wisconsin hate crime law and vindicated similar laws in half the states.
Congress and the remaining states need to act on this affirmation of constitutional power.


New Teaching Method Puts Math in Real Life
Peek into the third-grade classroom of Diane Lang and see the future of math education.
Gone are the addition and subtraction drills, the mind-numbing handouts.
This generation of students at Church Street Elementary School learns math by testing the acidity of the nearby Bronx River over several days, one of many exercises requiring students to calculate the math, explain how they got their answer and then chart the results on a graph.


Green Wants to Trim Fat
Dallas Green, continuing his campaign to enforce order on the Mets in their mess of a season, held a meeting today with a handful of players who he has determined have gained an inappropriate amount of weight and told them it would not be tolerated.
Green marched Anthony Young, Eric Hillman, Chico Walker, Charlie O'Brien, Jeff Kent and Sid Fernandez into his office this afternoon upon their arrival at Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium before the Mets' game with the Braves.


Manhattan Company Is Coaxed Away
Claiming another prize in the regional battle for jobs, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of Connecticut announced yesterday that the Witco Corporation, a Manhattan-based manufacturer, was moving its headquarters -- and 800 jobs -- to a vacant office building in Greenwich.
The state is providing Witco with $8 million in grants.
Mr.
Weicker took the occasion to defend the state's aggressive economic development campaign and to respond to remarks this week by Secretary of Labor Robert B. Reich, who said the states should stop using grants to compete with one another and instead spend the money on schools, roads and bridges.


Asylum Reform Has to Respect Human Rights
To the Editor:
"The Golden Venture, Plus 100,000" (editorial, June 9), recommending "stricter standards of proof" and expedited asylum hearings for the nearly 300 Chinese who survived the voyage of the freighter Golden Venture misses an important point.
While the United States asylum system is indeed inundated with a backlog of more than 250,000 cases, last year only 3,440 Chinese asylum claims were received by the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
Indeed, 85 percent of those Chinese cases were approved by the agency on the ground that the individuals were refugees with a well-founded fear of persecution.


Ted Oh's Excellent Adventure
The toughest championship in golf is already taking its toll.
Two days before the first official shot will be hit at the 93d United States Open here at Baltusrol, faces are harder, practice sessions longer, and, among players not at the top of their games, a sense of doom is palpable.
And then there is Ted Oh.


I.B.M. INTRODUCES SERIES OF PORTABLE COMPUTERS
The International Business Machines Corporation yesterday broadened its assault on the fast-growing market for portable personal computers by introducing a series of lower-priced machines.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  DEMOCRATS FIGHT NUCLEAR TESTS  Democratic lawmakers have mounted a strong effort to dissuade the Clinton Administration from a plan to resume limited nuclear weapons testing after a Congressional moratorium expires next month.
A1  MIDEAST PEACE TALKS RESUME  The Middle East peace talks reconvened with little change in the roles the parties had carved out at the end of the last round.
The Palestinians were pessimistic.
The Israelis seemed to be grasping for any sign of progress.
Other Arab delegations were waiting to see what would happen, and the Americans were scrambling for a formula that would push matters forward.
A3


Colangelo Took Bait All the Way to Finals
The man who dangled Charles Barkley and the man who snapped him right off the hook got to talking again at a National Basketball Association owners meeting this past April in New York.
Then Harold Katz, who owns the Philadelphia 76ers, and Jerry Colangelo, who operates the Phoenix Suns, stepped into the hotel bar for a drink.
They were soon joined by another team owner, who couldn't help but wonder, out loud, whether he was witnessing a re-creation of the great Barkley caper.


JOHNSON &amp; JOHNSON DEVELOPS NEW CONTACT LENSES
Johnson &amp; Johnson said it had developed the world's first disposable contact lens designed for only one day of use before replacement.


Frank C. Campbell Music Librarian, 76
Frank C. Campbell, a former executive with the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts at Lincoln Center, died on Saturday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 76.
The cause was heart failure, the hospital said.


CHRONICLE
Washington political and diplomatic circles will see an unusual tie-in between celebrating Father's Day this Sunday and fostering peace in the Middle East.
Some 150 people, including several ambassadors, have been invited to spend Father's Day at a barbecue in the backyard of ZBIGNIEW and MUSKA BRZEZINSKI in McLean, Va.
The party will benefit Seeds of Peace, a program that will send about 60 children, ages 11 to 14, from Israel, the West Bank, Egypt and Morocco -- and, the organizers hope, Jordan, Syria and Lebanon -- to a camp in Maine at the end of the summer.


History, They Insist, Isn't All His
Evalyn A. Clark remembers well why she joined the Berkshire Conference of Women Historians in 1939.
Like other female scholars, she was excluded from most prestigious history conferences of the day, which were dedicated, as she put it, to "introducing grand old men to young men of promise."
Miss Clark, a 90-year-old professor emeritus at Vassar College here, is now herself a "grand old woman" in a tradition she helped to build.


Carl Karcher Enterprises Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 17


Sprint to Provide Lines for a Computer Network
Reaching for its own spot on the information superhighway, the Sprint Corporation announced today that it would link business customers over Internet, the fast-growing family of computer networks.
The new venture will be a joint effort with the Microelectronics and Computer Technology Corporation, a research consortium in Austin, Tex., owned by large computer companies.


Women Seize Focus at Rights Forum
On the crowded first floor of the United Nations complex here, every imaginable oppressed cause seems to be represented, each displaying its own set of atrocity photographs in a macabre competition for attention during the World Conference on Human Rights this month.
For hundreds of organizations, it is a rare chance to throw the spotlight on some distant corner of suffering.
There are stands or posters dealing with crises in Peru and Tibet, graphic accounts of human rights abuses in Kurdistan and Kashmir, and photographic displays of the horrors of the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Adobe Ships Acrobat Amid High Hopes
Adobe Systems Inc. said today that it had begun shipping copies of Acrobat, a new software program that the Silicon Valley company hopes will have as broad an impact as its Postscript desktop publishing software had when it was introduced eight years ago.
Acrobat is intended to let users transmit newsletters, annual reports, newspapers and even magazines via computer networks or as floppy disks.


Survey Finds Major Gains In Cutting Blood Cholesterol
Blood cholesterol levels among adults dropped significantly over 12 years, and about half of all Americans now have readings in the desirable range, experts said today.
Results from a new national health survey showed a 4 percent decline in the average cholesterol level, to 205 milligrams per deciliter of blood in 1990 from 213 milligrams in 1978.
A level below 200 milligrams is considered desirable.
The survey also found that the proportion of adults with very high blood cholesterol levels fell to 20 percent from 26 percent.


Heinz (H.J.) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to April 28


CHRONICLE
JOHNNY HALLYDAY, the French rock idol, turned 50 yesterday, and all of France celebrated, or so it seemed judging by the avalanche of tributes and celebrations.
The Reuters news agency reported that newspapers printed special supplements, television stations ran long tributes, and tickets for three special concerts at the 50,000-seat Parc des Princes soccer stadium in Paris were snapped up.
"Old, me?" Mr.
Hallyday, who recorded French versions of Elvis Presley, Chuck Berry and Jimi Hendrix numbers in the 1960's, said in a birthday interview in the Parisien newspaper.
"Can a rocker be old?"


Court Protects Identity of Doctors Under Disciplinary Review
New York State's highest court ruled today that the state must keep its disciplinary proceedings against doctors secret unless it finds them guilty of misconduct.
The decision ends a decade-old practice intended to extend consumer protections to patients.
The unanimous decision by the Court of Appeals overturned a policy allowing the State Health Department to release the names of doctors charged with medical misconduct, which includes negligence, sexual misconduct, working while intoxicated and violating state laws.


Market Place; Bad Weather Has Been Very Good for Elcor, But Can It Last?
TAKE some folks on a drive through Dallas and at some point, someone may say, "My, don't these homes have nice-looking roofs?"
They certainly do, because a large portion of the housing stock in Dallas was damaged during the last year by huge hailstorms that stripped off hundreds of thousands of roofing tiles, all of which had to be replaced.


No-Smoke Ways to 'Burn' Wastes
Everybody agrees that toxic wastes are nasty.
But getting rid of them has become increasingly difficult as environmentalists and regulators have recognized the danger of stashing pesticide residues, chemical industry leftovers and paint sludges in landfills, where the toxins can seep into public water supplies.
Unfortunately, one of the few alternatives to dumping, the incinerator, also has a flaw: the smokestack.
As waste is burned, hot gases spew into the atmosphere, carrying with them any toxic materials not consumed by the flames.
The Clinton Administration recently imposed a ban on new hazardous-waste incinerators.


Corrections
A chart yesterday with biographical information about the Supreme Court Justices misstated Justice David H. Souter's previous position.
At his appointment, in 1990, he was a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, in Boston.


Milton Tatelman, 50, An Adman and a Critic
Milton J. Tatelman, an advertising creator and entertainment critic, died on Friday at his home in Provincetown, Mass.
He was 50 and also lived in Manhattan.
The cause was AIDS-related lymphoma, his family said.


Old Brooklyn, Old Men And a Worn Old Wall
"YOU know what this is," Sam Cohen said.
"This is the one-wall handball capital of the world for old players."
"It's also the prostate capital of the world, everybody here has had a prostate operation" Frank Oster said for the benefit of his cohorts playing and watching at the municipal handball court just off the boardwalk where Coney Island runs into Brighton Beach.
There were about 20 of the old-timers; the youngest in their 60's, the oldest in their 80's.
They had nicknames like Louis Blue Shoes, Hy the Truck Driver and Abe the Gonif, who despite his Yiddish honorific was said to be more a rascal than a thief.


Women at the Top
Two more countries elected women as their Prime Ministers last weekend, but that's hardly news anymore.
The list of women who head or have headed their governments grows by the year, and notably in countries where feminist movements are weak or nonexistent.
Following in the giant footsteps of Israel's Golda Meir, Britain's Margaret Thatcher, India's Indira Gandhi, Pakistan's Benazir Bhutto, Sri Lanka's Sirimavo Bandaranaike and still others, the current roster includes:


Girl Athletes to Be Honored by P.S.A.L.
The top girls in a dozen sports will be honored by the New York City Public Schools Athletic League tomorrow at the 13th Pegasus Outstanding Athlete Awards Dinner at the Tavern on the Green.
Two schools, Midwood and Tottenville, accounted for half the winners, with three each.
They are CHIA SHAFIROFF (bowling), TAMARA HENRY (cross-country) and JAMILA CODRINGTON (outdoor track) from Midwood; and THERESA CATALANO (gymnastics), KRISTEN MURRAY (soccer) and TONE BRATTENG (indoor track) from Tottenville.
The other winners are YOLANDA HARRELL, Thomas Jefferson, (basketball), SHIRELLE CHRISHON Boys and Girls, (handball), DANIELLE DECARLO, Port Richmond (softball), MARIEJO PASION, Stuyvesant (swimming), GINA MAJMUDAR, New Dorp (tennis) and ADAMILKA GIL, George Washington (volleyball).


N.E. Auerbach Dies; Oversaw the Growth Of Accounting Firm
Norman E. Auerbach, who as a World War II veteran in need of a job became an accountant at Coopers &amp; Lybrand at the age of 27 and retired 35 years later as chairman, died Sunday at Tucson Medical Center in Arizona.
A Tucson resident and former New Yorker, he was 73.
The cause was a heart attack, said his son, Dr. Gary A. Auerbach of Tucson.


Rent Curbs Are Passed In Albany
With rent regulations on nearly 900,000 apartments in New York City and surrounding counties expiring last night, legislative leaders forged a last-minute agreement that extended the laws for another eight days and prevented them from lapsing for what would have been the first time in their 46-year history.
While the agreement provided a brief reprieve for tenants in rent-stabilized and rent-controlled apartments, it remains to be seen whether state lawmakers can reach a long-term compromise that will allow the laws to be extended for at least another year. 'Luxury Decontrol' at Issue
Still unresolved was whether the Democrat-controlled Assembly would consider a Republican Senate proposal known as "luxury decontrol," which would essentially lift limits on rent increases for apartments occupied by upper-income tenants.
One Senate proposal defines upper income as those families that earn more than $100,000 a year.


Metro-North Looking at Going to Beach
The next time you are on the way to the beach, rather than at the beach, because of traffic on the highways and bridges, think about boarding an air-conditioned Metro-North train in Yonkers or Tarrytown, whisking through Penn Station and then out to Jones Beach, the Fire Island ferries or even Montauk.
Sound attractive?


3 Suppliers Are Selected For Big U S West Project
U S West Inc., which announced in February a sweeping plan to create a system for consumers to order movies on demand and talk on video phones, said yesterday that it had decided which companies would supply equipment for the network.
U S West said its suppliers would be the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, the DSC Communications Corporation and Scientific-Atlanta.
It said detailed agreements were being negotiated on supplying the network, which will cost $500 million or more.


Bridge
The final of the Reisinger Knockout Teams a week ago echoed an earlier occasion.
In 1955 George Boehm and Victor Mitchell were members of the winning team.
This year August Boehm, George's son, was on the winning team, and Jacqui Mitchell, Victor's wife, was on the losing team.
Although Mrs.
Mitchell did not win the title, she won plaudits for an episode in an earlier round on which she sat West.
Her opponents, who were leading the match at this point, were headed for a laydown seven-heart contract and South had used the five no-trump grand slam force.
The normal response by North would have been seven hearts, but he bid seven clubs, a minuscule technical improvement that expects partner to revert to seven hearts.


F.D.A. SEEKS RULES ON DRUGS' TESTERS
The Food and Drug Administration is planning to require that pharmaceutical companies disclose any important financial connections they have to doctors testing drugs and some medical devices as part of the new drug application process.
The Commissioner of Food and Drugs, Dr.
David A. Kessler, said the new policy, expected to be sent out for public comment later this year, was intended to prevent bias in drug testing that might result if doctors stood to gain financially from positive results of experiments.


Eating Well
RECENTLY, two colleagues in my office went on diets.
Nothing new there, except that this time they bought some herbal diet pills by phone.
The material that came with the pills included a low-calorie diet.
Anyone on a low-calorie diet will lose weight.
The problem with such diets is that after a few days, the dieter gets hungry and gives up.
But this one promised to be different.


Serbs Go To Serbia, But Feel Unwanted
Back in Sarajevo, Slavica Stepanovic and her two children used to lead "a good life" with a three-room apartment, a car and a cabin up in the mountains to get away on hot weekends.
Now as Serbian refugees in a workers' barracks outside Belgrade, they are reduced to a 12-by-8-foot room with only three beds and a table, a single hot-plate across the hall for cooking and communal toilets that overflow.


General to Be Rebuked
The Air Force has concluded that a general disparaged President Clinton,who plans to discipline him, effectively ending his career.
Page A20.


For Homebodies, A Cookbook Trail Is High Adventure
SUMMER stay-at-homes who thrill at a taste of the exotic can find plenty of inspiration in new cookbooks.
They explore places like Southeast Asia and Africa and yes, even Florida -- places uncomfortable to visit in the heat of summer.
All the better to read about them and to sample their foods at home.
The ones in this selection provide excellent recipes for summer entertaining and offer intriguing glimpses of gastronomic traditions.
THE BEST OF BURMESE COOKING by Aung Aung Taik (Chronicle Books, $11.95), a slender volume, explains in a personal way the cuisine of this country that is bordered by India, Thailand and China.
Its neighbors clearly help define a cuisine that is little known in America.


Downing of Korean Jet Laid to Soviet Error
A United Nations inquiry has concluded that Soviet military officials had "assumed" that the South Korean airliner shot down in 1983 was a United States reconnaissance plane.
The report said, however, that at least two top officers in the Far East Defense Command suggested about 10 minutes before the attack that the plane might be a passenger craft.


Personal Health; For Many, Air Travel Means a Trip to the Doctor.
AIR travel, while a boon to long-distance vacationers and business travelers, has also become an increasing source of pain, discomfort and even illness among passengers and crew members in recent years.
While no systematic study has been done on the incidence of flight-related health problems, complaints from passengers have ranged from headache, nausea and backaches to colds, pneumonia and blood clots in the lungs.
Airlines have also greatly reduced the influx of fresh air on planes to save money, worsening health problems.


Ruled Dead by Medical Workers, A Brooklyn Woman, 40, Is Alive
A 40-year-old Brooklyn woman, pronounced dead by emergency medical technicians, lay on the floor of her apartment for nearly three hours on Monday night until an investigator from the city Medical Examiner's office heard a gurgling sound and realized that she was alive.
The woman, Nancy Vitale, was unconscious and in critical condition yesterday at Coney Island Hospital.
Her mother said Ms.
Vitale had recently been upset because she had been let go from her job as a teacher at a Catholic elementary school.


In City Budget Package, a Modest Arts Increase
The city's cultural institutions, their finances hurt by the recession, have received a modest but significant lift from the budget package worked out last weekend between the Mayor and the City Council.
Under the agreement between Mayor David N. Dinkins and City Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone, the funds budgeted for cultural programs and other noncapital expenses were increased by $9 million, bringing the total to $89 million for the fiscal year starting next month.


Honors
*
Brian Morris, the executive vice president and general manager at Dailey &amp; Associates, Los Angeles, was re-elected president of the Western States Advertising Agencies Association, Los Angeles.
Brad Ball, the president and executive creative director of Davis, Ball &amp; Columbatto, Los Angeles, and Bart Young, the president of Speer Young &amp; Hollander, Los Angeles, were elected co-vice presidents; Breena Gold, the senior vice president of business development at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising, Torrance, Calif., was elected secretary-treasurer and Bob Elen, the president of Robert Elen &amp; Associates, Los Angeles, was re-elected chairman.


Williams's Star Keeps Rising
Bernie Williams isn't used to making curtain calls.
They don't do them in the minor leagues.
He was reluctant to come out of the dugout and tip his cap Monday night after his grand slam lifted the Yankees over the Red Sox, 4-0.
He could have taken several curtain calls last night after his eighth-inning home run gave the Yankees a 9-7 lead.


Christopher, in Unusual Cable, Defends State Dept.
In an effort to reassure his diplomatic corps that the Clinton Administration is capable of leading the world, Secretary of State Warren Christopher has sent a classified cable to all ambassadors listing what he described as several important accomplishments.
In his cable, dated June 7, Mr.
Christopher all but conceded that President Clinton had got off to a slow start in foreign affairs, but he said problems inherited from the Bush Administration forced the new team to navigate "between submerged rocks and whirlpools on every continent."


Time to Look for Galarraga in the Small Print
ANDRES GALARRAGA is about to become a statistic. Finally.
Today, look for Galarraga to be listed atop the major league batting leaders with his .400-plus average for the Colorado Rockies.


Excerpts From Clinton's News Conference at the White House
Following are excerpts from President Clinton's news conference today, as recorded by the Federal News Service, a transcription company: OPENING STATEMENT
Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. I'd like to make a couple of opening remarks.


Harry E. Neal, 87, Secret Service Aide And Prolific Author
Harry Edward Neal, who retired as a top Secret Service official and started a second career as an author, writing 31 books, died Monday at a hospital in Culpeper, Va.
He was 87 and lived in Culpeper.


Washington at Work; Senator Commands Stage Far Bigger Than Oklahoma by Defying Clinton
At home in Oklahoma, Senator David L. Boren was once portrayed by newspaper cartoonists as the Pillsbury Doughboy.
In the cloakrooms of the Senate, he was dismissed as a glad-hander who craved approval more than power.
That was before Mr.
Boren went on a diet and reassessed his career after the death of his father, an irreverent Democratic Congressman who rebelled against Franklin Delano Roosevelt.
Then the Senator took on President Clinton's economic package.


Budgeting for Re-election
New York City officials finally came to terms on a budget for the new fiscal year in the wee hours of Sunday morning -- as if pressed by a deadline.
The deadline was still more than two weeks away, but perhaps they hoped the dark of night might conceal what they were up to.
State law requires that the city balance its budget each year.
So Mayor David Dinkins and the City Council declared it balanced.
But no one should be surprised if they have to cut more spending to reach that balance as the year unfolds -- say, sometime after Nov. 2, when both the mayoral and Council elections are safely past.


Sales of Domestic Vehicles Continue Gains
The auto industry's recovery that began in early April appears to be continuing, according to the nation's auto makers, which reported today that sales of domestically built cars and light trucks rose 15.5 percent in early June.
Sales of cars built in North America rose 8.8 percent between June 1 and June 10 from the similar period last year, to 203,304.
Sales of light trucks, which include mini-vans, pickups and sport-utility vehicles, rose 25.4 percent, to 157,156.
Over all, vehicle sales totaled 360,460.


Public &amp; Private; Ban the Bollix, Bill
When I found myself wondering whether Ruth Bader Ginsburg had paid taxes for her household help and whom she'd hired to care for her two children, now grown, I knew something had gone awry with the search for public servants in the Clinton Administration.
On my desk were encomiums galore, sent to the President in support of Judge Ginsburg from lawyers and scholars, rabbis and deans.
Michael Sovern, until recently the president of Columbia University, wrote, "She would, put simply, make the Court as an institution look good." Janet Benshoof, the president of the Center for Reproductive Law and Policy, called her "a distinguished jurist whose deep commitment to justice and exceptional treatment of the law is inspiring."


Daniel P. Warner; AIDS Group's Founder, 38
Daniel P. Warner, a founder and a former executive director of a Los Angeles group that helps AIDS patients, died Monday on his 38th birthday at his home in San Francisco.
The cause was complications of AIDS, said Tom Christie, a friend in Los Angeles.


Hoboken Gets a New Mayor


Eagle-Picher Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Reports of Needles in Soda Cans Climb
Reports of cans of Pepsi-Cola products containing syringes and hypodermic needles continued to be recorded yesterday, with the police in Illinois, Michigan, Missouri, Pennsylvania and Oklahoma saying that consumers told them they had found the objects in soft drinks.
The six new reports brought to at least 16 the number of incidents reported in 11 states in six days, and the authorities were trying to determine whether the materials were put in the cans during production or later, or whether some reports were hoaxes.


First Lady Aids Dance
Hillary Rodham Clinton will be the honorary chairwoman of the Fourth International Ballet Competition awards night on June 28 at 7:30 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall.
Forty-eight dancers from around the world will participate in the competition, which begins on Tuesday and is held every three years.
Tickets for the semifinals and finals are $25 and are available from Center Charge at (212) 721-6500.
Tickets for the awards ceremony and performances by the winners are $55.
Tickets for the show and dinner afterward are $250.
Information: (212) 956-1520.


Food Notes
Greenmarkets in Bloom
The Greenmarket season is now in high gear.
Produce is becoming more abundant each week and many of the markets that are open only in warm weather have been set up.
Greenmarkets in Manhattan are at City Hall at Park Row, on Tuesdays and Fridays; Federal Plaza at Broadway and Thomas Street, on Fridays; Washington Market at Greenwich and Reade streets, on Wednesdays and Saturdays and at the St.
Marks Place market at 10th Street and Second Avenue, on Tuesdays.


Three Sides in Bosnia Sign One More Cease-Fire
On another day marred by clashes between Bosnian Army forces and Serbian and Croatian militias across this war-savaged land, the commanders of the three military forces here agreed today to a yet another cease-fire.
After a four-hour meeting at the Sarajevo airport, Rasim Delic, the Bosnian commander, Gen.
Ratko Mladic of the Bosnian Serbs and Milivoj Petkovic, the Croatian commander, put their signatures to a document pledging unconditionally "to freeze all military activities" by noon Friday local time.
But dozens of earlier countrywide cease-fire accords have never yielded more than a few days of peace.
Most have been stillborn.


People
*
Brenda Saget, the associate publisher at Elle Decor magazine, New York, was named advertising director at Elle magazine, New York, succeeding Thomas Hartman, who left to become the advertising manager at Vogue magazine, New York.
Also at Elle, Lynne Dominick was named beauty director, assuming some responsibilities from Tracee Lee Kiner, Elle's beauty manager, who left to become the beauty director at YM magazine, New York.
Ms.
Dominick was previously the beauty market manager at Allure magazine, New York.


The Pop Life
Bridging Troubled Waters
Paul Simon's series of concerts at the Paramount in October, featuring a retrospective of his career and a reunion with Art Garfunkel, is being billed as "The Concert Event of a Lifetime." It's been at least too good to pass up for tens of thousands of fans.
All 10 shows have sold out and six more performances are to be added today.
"It's an enormous undertaking and wasn't something I was planning on doing," Mr.
Simon said in a telephone interview from his apartment in Manhattan, explaining how the concert series came about.
The concerts are to include the Simon and Garfunkel years, Mr.
Simon's early solo music and his later efforts, "Graceland" and "The Rhythm of the Saints." "But Warner Brothers is issuing a retrospective of my career in the fall, something like a 50-song boxed set, and got permission from Sony to use some of the Simon and Garfunkel masters, which means you can show the way my career evolved. I guess that's where the idea for the concerts came from."


Royal Crown Places Account in Review
The Royal Crown Cola Company, based in Miami Beach, Fla., said yesterday that it had placed its estimated $8 million to $10 million account in review after ending an eight-month relationship with Crispin &amp; Porter in Miami.
Lynn Sokler, a spokeswoman for Royal Crown, confirmed a report of the review in Adweek this week.
She said the review had been prompted by the recent sale of the company and changes in its top management.


Wine Talk
Champagne may be the drink of celebration, but the people who make it have little to celebrate these days.
Battered by rising costs, a depressed market and growing competition from cheaper sparkling wines, Champagne sales have been slipping steadily for several years.
Three events in France last week served to underscore the extent of the problem:
*
In case they were unaware of its gravity, shareholders of the parent company of the biggest Champagne producer, Moet &amp; Chandon, were told on Thursday that Champagne was in the midst of an "unprecedented crisis" that was not about to disappear soon.
The grim news came from Bernard Arnault, the president of Moet's parent company, the luxury-goods conglomerate LVMH Moet-Hennessy Louis Vuitton.
"We're not deluding ourselves," Mr.
Arnault said at the LVMH annual meeting.
"This is going to last several years."


Condensing a Riot's Cacophony Into the Voice of One Woman
One day after her triumphal opening night in Los Angeles, complete with a standing ovation and more flowers than she could carry, Anna Deavere Smith sat slumped in a quiet West Hollywood restaurant still puzzled, even dazed, by the fear and confusion that grips the city after last year's riots.
"I have very haunting dreams," said the 42-year-old performer, writer and Stanford University professor.
"What's around is very grave. But I believe things can change. And even though I've spent time talking to people in a tragic moment, dramatically and linguistically it couldn't be more fascinating."


Ex-Chief of I.B.M. Signs On At Lorenzo's Budget Airline
John F. Akers, the former chairman of I.B.M., has signed on as a director and investor in Frank Lorenzo's fledgling venture to operate a low-cost airline along the East Coast.
An odd couple?
Not at all, the two executives say.
Their partnership makes perfect sense in light of their shared interests and backgrounds, they maintained yesterday in interviews.


Youthful Landlords Check Out Falcons' New Quarters


Giants Tell Simms That He's The Boss
It has been three years since Phil Simms has seen this kind of serenity surrounding the Giants' quarterback situation.
Simms doesn't have to look over his shoulder or play diplomat or field questions about whose style best suits the offense.
There are even fewer questions about whether his age, 36, will hinder him from capably guiding the Giants this season.


U.S. Taking Misguided Approach to Iran
To the Editor:
The Clinton Administration has adopted a tough new policy aimed at isolating Iran, based on a decision that the United States and its allies should treat Iran as harshly as Iraq.
But is this really a wiser policy than the previous, nuanced carrot-and-stick approach, as the architects of the new policy contend?


In Pursuit of Safer Dental Anesthesia
FOR anxious patients in the dentist's chair, the little mask delivering nitrous oxide and other anesthetic gases has been a salvation, rendering them oblivious to the chiseling, drilling and tugging going on in their mouths.
But for a few healthy patients that mask has brought not salvation but coma or death.
Last month, Mark Bistany, a 6-year-old from Bethpage, L.I., received anesthesia in an oral surgeon's office while having a tooth pulled and spent the next three weeks in a deep coma.
He is now in a rehabilitation hospital recovering from serious neurological injuries.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Consumer prices inched up one-tenth of 1 percent in May, all but burying inflation fears.
The report, combined with last week's data showing no inflation at the producer level, was seen as proving that price jumps earlier this year were temporary.  [ Page D1. ]
Sales of domestically built vehicles rose 15.5 percent in early June, indicating that the auto industry recovery continues.  [ D13. ]


Metropolitan Diary
TIMES SQUARE at midday.
My southbound cab dives to a stop at a red light next to the traffic island, where a leggy blond female tourist, 20 or so and dressed in tennis whites, very carefully poises an exquisite little black camera on the thin rim of a trash container and triggers the shutter countdown.
"Ten seconds," she coos, sprinting past the cab to the far end of the island where she embraces her lover or new husband, also 20 or so, also dressed for tennis and also golden blond and leggy.
The camera catches the perfect pair clowning an elaborate kiss against the sleazy panorama.


How Penn Defended The First Amendment
To the Editor:
I greatly appreciate "Don't Burn Hackney at the Stake" (editorial, June 10), supporting my nomination by President Clinton to head the National Endowment for the Humanities.
Given the distorted image of me that is being energetically propagated by a few journalists, it took a good bit of skill and not a little gumption to sort through the chaff and arrive at a balanced judgment.


In the Cards
Stock of the Topps Company, maker of Bazooka bubble gum and sports and movie trading cards, has suffered this year, falling as low as $6.625 a share in February.
It also slipped yesterday, but the Brooklyn company stands to gain from exclusive rights to make comic books and cards for two summer movies, "Jurassic Park" and "Last Action Hero."


CLINTON, DEFENDING HIS RECORD, INSISTS HE HASN'T WAVERED
President Clinton today presented his first six months in office as an aggressive and largely successful attempt to reinvigorate government, dismissing all assertions that he had been indecisive and portraying himself as a world leader penalized for making tough calls at home and abroad.
"No President's budget has been taken seriously in this town for a dozen years," Mr.
Clinton said.
"Three-quarters of the Republicans in the House of Representatives voted against President Bush's last budget. I sent a budget up there that passed -- the budget resolution passed on time for the first time in 17 years. And we're out here fighting for these tough decisions. Shining Up His Image
"This is the most decisive Presidency you've had in a very long time on all the big issues that matter," he continued.
"And I might say, all the heat we're getting from people is because of the decisions that have been made, not because of those that haven't."


Lobbying Rule of 1990's: Show the Most Vulnerable
Jan Bergwall, a waitress from a small town in Maryland, drove down to Washington this morning and, at a news conference, stood before a microphone to say she feared that she might lose her job if Congress approved President Clinton's proposal to reduce the tax deduction for business meals.
Lobbyists and other officers in the National Restaurant Association's Washington office recruited Mrs.
Bergwall a few days ago.
They put her in a commercial that is set in the restaurant where she works and is being televised in four states.
Then they put on the news conference here this morning.


Drive for Brooklyn Academy
A campaign to raise a $22.5 million endowment for the Brooklyn Academy of Music was the centerpiece of a party last night to honor the 25th anniversary of Harvey Lichtenstein as the institution's president and executive producer.
"The Campaign for BAM," the first such plan in the institution's 132-year history, is already nearly halfway to its goal with commitments totaling $10.25 million to date.
These include $5 million from the Lila Wallace-Reader's Digest Fund to endow community programs, and $1 million from Richard B. Fisher, the chairman of the Morgan Stanley Group.


Where Necessity Ends for Hospital Care
The Julia L. Butterfield Hospital, which sits on the outskirts of this tiny town, is not much to look at.
Its melon and gray facade is hardly beautiful.
There are cracks in the tiles on the upstairs halls.
Although the emergency room was renovated last year, the X-ray machine dates back four decades and the ventilation system is almost as old.
For years the 2,200 residents of Cold Spring have seen the hospital as evidence that they have a basic right to immediate and total health care.
Reluctantly, others came to a different conclusion: that the price of keeping the hospital open -- $2 million to save 35 beds -- is too high.


Price Data Aid Short-Term Issues
There was more good news on inflation yesterday, which gave a lift to shorter-term Treasury securities.
But the price of the 30-year bond slipped in part because traders and investors had already pushed it up Friday when the the Labor Department reported that May producer prices were unchanged.
Some traders said that despite the gains for short-term and intermediate Treasury securities, there was selling yesterday that indicated to them that the market was still locked in a tight trading range even with the positive news on consumer price inflation.
This selling ate into gains made early in the day.


Executive Changes
A.T.&amp; T., Basking Ridge, N.J., named Ron J. Ponder senior vice president and chief information officer.
MONTGOMERY WARD &amp; CO., Chicago, named Richard Bergel to the newly created position of vice chairman for operations and specialty catalogues.
He will have responsibility for all store operations and retain his duties as chief executive for Montgomery Ward Direct, a specialty catalogue joint venture with Fingerhut Cos.


Missile Blown Up During Launching Starts Fire


Corrections
The crossword puzzle yesterday included an incorrect definition for 22 Across.
It should have read "Gray's Warbucks," not "Gould's Warbucks." (The answer was "Daddy.")


Ukraine Lawmakers Balk at Anti-Crisis Plan
The Ukrainian Parliament balked today at President Leonid M. Kravchuk's latest attempt to solve the country's growing economic and political crisis, and gave the Government two days to come up with an emergency economic recovery plan.
As labor unrest continued to spread through eastern Ukraine, Mr.
Kravchuk called for parliamentary elections this winter, along with a referendum on his leadership.
But that proposal was voted down by Parliament on a vote of 331 to 138, according to the news agency Interfax.


Corrections
A brief article in some copies yesterday about the arrival of 13 Haitian immigrants in New York rendered the name of the executive director of the Coalition for the Homeless incorrectly.
She is Mary Brosnahan.


Court in South Carolina Upholds Jailing of Loud Street Preachers
The South Carolina Supreme Court today narrowly upheld the constitutionality of a local ordinance under which nearly 50 street preachers were jailed last May for shouting their sermons and accosting people.
In a 3-to-2 decision the state's highest court ruled that in regulating the time, place and manner of the downtown preaching, the coastal city of Beaufort had not abridged the preachers' right of free speech.


Sports of The Times; The Bulls Need Their Attack Dogs
WHILE the Bulls may give it other labels, like lack of focus, for example, or loss of intensity, or point out that the Dobermans -- what the Bulls call their defensive aces -- were never unleashed, it seems apparent that last Sunday against Phoenix they were suffering from a huge helping of overconfidence.
Johnny Bach, the coach of the Bulls' defensive unit, generally considered the best in the National Basketball Association, said it another way yesterday when he described one of the elements needed for the Bulls not to lose tonight to the Phoenix Suns in Game 4 of the playoff finals.
And not, thereby, have the series tied, embarrasingly at two games apiece.


Doctors Add Homosexuals To Group's Anti-Bias Rules
In a move long sought by gay-rights advocates, the American Medical Association revised its bylaws today to make clear that the organization will not discriminate against any doctors because of their sexual orientation.
At the same time, the association took two actions sure to infuriate consumer groups.
It called for repeal of a 1988 Federal law that sets standards for medical laboratories, and urged "dissolution" of the National Practitioner Data Bank, which keeps track of doctors who have been disciplined for misconduct.


Duck Head Returns Its Account to Buntin
The Duck Head Apparel Company in Winder, Ga., has returned its estimated $5 million to $7 million men's division account to Buntin Advertising in Nashville from Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond in New York.
Buntin, which handles the apparel company's women's division, had handled the men's account for two years before it was awarded to Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond.
Jeffrey W. Buntin, the president and creative director of Buntin, confirmed a report of the shift this week in Adweek.
He said a campaign is expected to begin in the fall.


A Fresh New Take on Chicken Salad
CHICKEN salad, in the old days, was made with mayonnaise.
It may have also had fruit, black olives, celery, mustard or Worcestershire sauce in it.
In this updated version, the chicken is still warm, the mayonnaise has been changed to yogurt, the celery is now fennel and the olives come from Italy -- or Greece or France.
To make it a complete meal, pasta has been added.


Review/Dance; A Cluster of Stravinsky
George Balanchine choreographed to Igor Stravinsky's music from the beginning of his career in the 1920's.
Unsurprisingly, the chronological survey in the New York City Ballet's Balanchine Celebration has now reached a cluster of Balanchine-Stravinsky works, drawn from the festivals that the company devoted to the composer in 1972 and 1982.
"Scherzo a la Russe," which will be repeated on Saturday afternoon at the New York State Theater, and "Danses Concertantes," which returns on June 25, have been revived for the celebration.
Like "Divertimento from 'Le Baiser de la Fee,' " which has remained in the repertory, they date from the 1972 festival.


Condemned Man Found Dead
An inmate scheduled to be executed next month was found dead in his cell on Sunday, an apparent suicide, prison officials said.
The body of the inmate, Wayne K. Delong, 36, was discovered by inmates at Mecklenburg Correctional Center.
Officials said today that a syringe had been found near his body but that the cause of death had not been determined.
Mr.
Delong was to have been executed on July 15 for killing a Richmond police detective in 1986.


Accounts
*
Wilsons the Leather Experts, Minneapolis, to Chuck Ruhr Advertising, Minneapolis, for its estimated $6 million account, previously at DDB Needham Los Angeles.


AT DINNER WITH: Susan Isaacs and Elkan Abramowitz; They'll Take the Suburbs, Thank You
WHEN Susan Isaacs gets out of her red Jeep to meet the 5:03 P.M. train from Penn Station, she immediately apologizes.
"I'll change my shoes as soon as we get home," she says.
The gold sandals match her cream pants striped with gold and her gold-embroidered cream blouse.
"I'm too dressed up," she continues nervously, eyeing her visitor's T-shirt and leggings.
"As soon as someone is coming from New York, I automatically think I have to get dressed up."
Anyone coming from New York to this leafy Long Island suburb next to Port Washington to meet this particular woman would be a fool to dress up.
Ms.
Isaacs has written five best-selling mystery novels, starting with "Compromising Positions" in 1978.
Invariably, the heroine is an unfashionable, slightly overweight suburban wife or ex-wife who wears T- shirts, and the villains, though not necessarily the murderers, are the (younger) size 2 career sharpies who dress in spike heels, bodysuits and expensive panty hose.
What would you wear?


Book Notes; More Lessons to Learn Before Oprah Tells All
It was supposed to be the big book of the fall, with a superstar author and an ad campaign in the hundreds of thousands of dollars.
But Oprah Winfrey's autobiography, which has been lavished with extraordinary advance attention by Alfred A. Knopf, was abruptly postponed yesterday, at the request of Ms.
Winfrey herself.
No new publication date has been set.
In a statement put out by Knopf, Ms.
Winfrey said her recent appearance at the American Booksellers Association convention in Miami, in which she generated waves of adoration from booksellers wherever she went, had caused her to reconsider the project.
"I am in the heart of the learning curve," she said.
"I feel there are important discoveries yet to be made."


Tondo Journal; On Scavengers' Mountain, a Few Scraps of Hope
Anywhere else, the closing of a garbage dump would be an occasion for local residents to rejoice.
But here at the internationally infamous Smoky Mountain, thousands of people live in the dump and survive by scavenging its fetid rubble.
Now that Smoky Mountain is being closed, they are apprehensive about losing their homes and livelihoods, no matter how squalid and demeaning these may seem to outsiders.


Fairness Debated in Quick Transplant
Since Gov.
Robert P. Casey of Pennsylvania received a new heart and liver in a 15-hour operation on Monday, the question being asked by doctors, experts in medical ethics, radio talk show hosts and their call-in listeners is: How did the Governor jump to the head of the organ-transplant line?
It took less than a day to find a suitable donor for Governor Casey, in contrast to average patients who wait 67 days for a new liver and 198 days for a new heart.


Books of The Times; Clarence Darrow's Trial on a Bribery Charge
The People v.
Clarence Darrow  The Bribery Trial of America's Greatest Lawyer By Geoffrey Cowan  Illustrated. 546 pages.
Times Books. $27.50.
Reading Geoffrey Cowan's well researched account of the personal trials of Clarence Darrow calls to mind some lighthearted lines by Carl Sandburg in his Whitmanesque paean to Americans, "The People, Yes":
"Have you a criminal lawyer in this burg?"


Consumer Prices Post Scant Rise
All but burying fears of worrisome inflation, consumer prices inched up one-tenth of 1 percent in May as lower prices for gasoline and clothing offset increases for vegetables, used cars and the fees charged by physicians and lawyers, Labor Department figures showed today.
The report, combined with a similar one on Friday showing no inflation at the producer level, was widely seen as proving that prices remained in check and that jumps earlier this year were temporary and in some cases more statistical than real.


Marketers are chasing a younger class of viewers of 'Beverly Hills, 90210.'
MARKETERS interested in licensing and merchandising promotions pegged to "Beverly Hills, 90210" are discovering an unusual demographic phenomenon: the older the cast of the television series gets, the younger the audience gets.
The drama about the fictional West Beverly Hills High School, where angst afflicts the student body far more often than acne, will begin its fourth season this fall on the Fox network; reruns are broadcast on Tuesdays and Wednesdays at 8 P.M., Eastern daylight time.


Stocks Mixed in Ho-Hum Reaction to Prices
The release yesterday of consumer price figures for May confirmed for the stock market what it already knew: higher inflation is not currently a threat.
Trading was mixed, with blue-chip issues down and the broader market showing a little more strength than the Dow Jones industrial average.


Allen-Farrow Case Moved Through Courts at Record Speed
To the Editor:


EXPECTATIONS LOW AT MIDEAST TALKS
The Middle East peace talks reconvened today with little change in the roles the parties carved out at the end of the last round of discussions.
The Palestinians were pessimistic.
The Israelis seemed to be grasping for any sign that progress toward peace was being made.
The other Arab delegations were waiting to see what would happen between the Israelis and Palestinians.
And the Americans were scrambling behind the scenes to find a formula to push the process forward.


House Passes Bill to Ban Replacement of Strikers
The House voted today to prohibit employers from hiring permanent replacements for union members who strike, but Senate Republicans immediately said they would stage a filibuster to kill the measure, organized labor's biggest legislative priority.
The same legislation passed the House last year but was killed by filibuster in the Senate.
Its prospects appear somewhat better this year, largely because President Clinton favors the bill and could sway some crucial Democratic Senators.


Trade Sanity With Japan
In trade talks last week with Japan, the Clinton Administration turned from bullying to constructive negotiating.
Instead of repeating threats to punish Japan for behavior the U.S. unilaterally decides is wrong -- a tactic designed to curry favor with protectionists in the Democratic Party -- the Administration set out reasonable ways to help U.S. exporters without risking a trade war.
Yet the old threats haven't been disowned, which makes U.S. policy appear contradictory.
The Administration's overheated rhetoric risks creating unrealistic expectations that could make the modest gains of reasonable policy look like a retreat.


Scotty Bowman Gets His (Red) Wings
The winningest coach in the National Hockey League has moved again, this time to the Detroit Red Wings.
The Red Wings hired SCOTTY BOWMAN, a Stanley Cup winner with Montreal and Pittsburgh, as its new coach.


Clinton May Shun Fray Till Budget Goes to Conference
As the Democratic senators on the Finance Committee struggled today to find a compromise they could all support on the budget, President Clinton suggested that he would stay out of the fray until the legislation gets into a House-Senate conference.
"The Senate Finance Committee has some tough decisions to make," the President said at a news conference.
"I don't expect to agree with all of them."


On Privacy and Equality; Judge Ginsburg Still Voices Strong Doubts on Rationale Behind Roe v. Wade Ruling
Standing by President Clinton's side on Monday afternoon as the first Supreme Court nominee of a Democratic President in a generation, Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg relied on an unlikely source to explain her judicial philosophy to a public that knew her scarcely, if at all.
She approvingly quoted Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, a bete noire to Democrats for most of that time, as saying that a good judge is bound to apply the facts and the law to come up with a decision, even if it is "not what the home crowd wants."


Nordstrom Plans Men's Boutique
Nordstrom Inc. removed the wraps yesterday from its plans to open a men's boutique on Fifth Avenue in New York, which may be the first step on a new growth path at the specialty store company.
The boutique, which will open Oct. 1 at Fifth Avenue and 54th Street in the location formerly occupied by Gucci, will be called Faconnable (pronounced fas-o-NA-bleh) and will feature a line of tailored men's clothing, sportswear and furnishings by the same name.
It will be Nordstrom's first presence in New York City, although it has three full-line Nordstrom stores in New Jersey.


James Hunt, 45, Race-Car Driver Known for Style as Well as Title
James Hunt, the British driver who won the 1976 Formula One world championship and was one of the last of the breed of drivers who made it their business to have as much fun outside the car as in it, died in London yesterday.
He was 45.
Mr. Hunt died of a heart attack, his family said.


Man Kills Boy and Injures 2 With Machete
A man whose parents took him in last year after he had spent months living on the streets took a machete this morning and hacked to death his 17-month-old grand-nephew and injured his 3-year-old grand-niece and his father, the Nassau County Police said.
The man, Mark Mitchell, 36, was arrested about 9:20 A.M. as he sat calmly on the steps of his parents' home, across from his bleeding father, Thomas, 67, said Lieut.
Frank Guidice.


A Massacre Remembered in a Fest
Angelina Spicer is a devotee of Gap color-coordinated outfits and popular music, a typical sixth grader.
But a trip to a continent thousands of miles away last summer transformed her forever, she says, into an emissary for Africa, a global student.
"A lot of things I heard from here about Africa were horrendous -- jungles, Tarzans, dirt roads, commuting by foot," said the 12-year-old from Crown Heights, Brooklyn.
"But I saw friendship. I saw love. I didn't see anger toward others."


Corrections
An article on Saturday about a housing desegregation case in Yonkers misstated the number of families that have received approval as tenants from cooperative building boards.
Only one of the four qualified families needs the approval of a cooperative board, and that family has not yet received such approval.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 11
June 4
June 12
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.6
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.0
3.1
3.0
Gasoline stocks
224.7
225.8
220.4
Distillate stocks
103.5
101.8
98.7
Crude imports, daily
7.6
5.7
6.4
Product imports, daily
1.5
2.0
1.5
Crude stocks
343.4
350.2
347.2
Crude production, daily
6.8
6.9
7.2
Refinery utilization (%)
92.6
91.3
91.2
Source: American Petroleum Institute


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  POLICING A SHADOWY ECONOMY
Trying to police the city's swelling underground economy and the multiplying number of immigrants in it is grueling work nettled with frustration.
The realm is too large, too slippery.
Finance Department officials often brood about how outnumbered they are.
A1.
A DEATH THAT WASN'T
A 40-year-old Brooklyn woman, pronounced dead by emergency medical technicians of the city's Emergency Medical Service, lay on the floor of her apartment for at least three hours until an investigator realized she was alive.
A1.
RENT CURBS ARE EXTENDED
The New York State Legislature extended the rent-control and rent-stabilization laws for eight days minutes before they were due to expire at midnight.
The extension permitted more time for bargaining between the Democrat-majority Assembly and Governor Cuomo and the Republican-controlled Senate.
B3.
KEMP BACKS GIULIANI
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor, has received the endorsement of Jack Kemp.
Mr.
Giuliani promised to be the next Republican to ride to victory on a tide of fiscal conservatism and social concern.
B3.
DAY OF THE AFRICAN CHILD CELEBRATED
More than 700 New York City schoolchildren descend on the United Nations to celebrate through music, dance and prose the worldwide Day of the African Child.
Officially marked in many schools throughout the United States, the observance commemorates the 1976 massacre of students in Soweto, South Africa.
B3.
REGION  WITCO MOVING TO CONNECTICUT
Claiming another prize in the regional battle for jobs, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. of Connecticut has announced that the Witco Corporation, a Manhattan-based manufacturer, is moving its headquarters -- and 800 jobs -- to a vacant office building in Greenwich.
B5.
METRO-NORTH CONSIDERS L.I.
SERVICE
The Metro-North Commuter Railroad is about to sign a $250,000 contract with a market research firm to evaluate the demand for summer weekend service to Long Island.
B5.
CHILD KILLED, 2 HURT BY MACHETE WIELDER
A man whose parents took him into their Roosevelt, L.I., home last year after he had spent months living on the streets took a machete and hacked to death his 17-month-old grand-nephew and injured his 3-year-old grand-niece and his father, the Nassau County Police said.
B5.
SECRET PROCEEDINGS ORDERED BY COURT
New York State's highest court has ruled that the state must keep its disciplinary proceedings against doctors secret unless it finds them guilty of misconduct.
The decision ends a decade-old practice intended to extend consumer protections to patients.
B6.
TAXING METHOD RULED UNCONSTITUTIONAL
New York State would be forced to refund more than $30 million in taxes paid by A.T. &amp; T., and millions more paid by other long distance phone companies, under an appellate court ruling that found the state's method of taxing long distance carriers unconstitutional.
B5.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman B3  Chronicle B6


Corrections
The stock options table in Business Day yesterday was incomplete in some editions because of transmission problems at Tribune Media Services.
Readers wishing copies of the complete table may write to the Business Editor, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


James Madison High School's Tradition of Success; From Cousin Brucie to Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Students and Graduates Earn Top Honors
There's plenty of talk at James Madison High School about Ruth Bader Ginsburg, the 1950 graduate who was nominated on Monday to the Supreme Court.
But in the halls of the red brick school in southeast Brooklyn these days, there is even more talk about State Regents exams, scholarships, colleges and all the other academic hurdles that are to frame the students' futures.
Just as in Judge Ginsburg's day, James Madison today seems to be a rarity in American education -- an ethnic melting pot of scholastic overachievers, of whom Judge Ginsburg is only one of hundreds who have made names for themselves in the professions and the arts.


Wieden &amp; Kennedy Gets Jockey Account
Jockey International Inc., based in Kenosha, Wis., said yesterday that it had awarded its account, previously in-house, to Wieden &amp; Kennedy, in Portland, Ore.
Jockey spent about $5 million last year to advertise its underwear brands.
Advertising Age estimated that the account would be worth $15 million to $20 million.


Pursuing Tax Cheats in Land of Opportunity
They tailed him for several weeks, and then they laid their trap.
On a tranquil avenue in Elmhurst, Queens, two nondescript cars and a van melted into the buzzing traffic.
Wedged inside were the enforcement officers, their faces graven with patience, their eyes trained like cameras on a basement apartment.
It was early morning, and in the air a chill lingered.
A half-hour passed, an hour.
At a little past 9, the door of the apartment opened and the target marched out.
Car doors swung open and the men moved fast.
As he bent over the trunk of his Buick, an unsmiling, shocked Hange Lai, a Chinese immigrant, was set upon by the officers.
They rummaged through his car and found 109 cartons of cigarettes stamped from Virginia.
Satisfied, the enforcement officers escorted him to a nearby police station for booking.


Brush-a, Brush-a, Brush-a Just Isn't Enough Anymore
TOOTHBRUSHES may seem unimportant, or even distasteful, but they're getting a lot of attention these days as companies try to convince consumers that newly designed brushes will help them keep their teeth in good shape longer.
Dozens of new models have turned up in stores in the last 18 months, many with curved or twisted handles and brushes of varying sizes that are quite different from the old standard with its straight handles and bristles evenly lined up like soldiers.
There is, of course, a reason, beyond cosmetics.
They are aimed at the growing numbers of people who have reached their 30's and 40's, the age when gum disease begins to strike and keeping gums intact is more of a challenge than keeping cavities at bay.
The old-style brushes were fine for keeping teeth clean, but many new ones promise to do more: to brush under the gum line and between the teeth where plaque, the dental world's word for dirt, lurks.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
3.06
3.74
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.04
3.63
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.14
3.18
3.72
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.56
5.59
6.82
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.82
6.81
7.83
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.75
7.75
8.72
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.85
5.86
6.56
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


No Headline
"We should do what people do in Mudpuddle, Utah. Make quilts, bake cakes -- it seems like an awfully cheap price for a hospital." -- JACQUELINE LOFARO of Cold Spring, N.Y., on efforts to keep the local hospital open.  [ B5:3. ]


Youths Guilty In the Slaying Of a Principal
Three teen-agers were convicted yesterday of murdering Patrick Daly, a revered elementary school principal slain when he walked into the crossfire of a gun battle in a Brooklyn housing project.
In a case that drew national attention to the random perils of urban neighborhoods filled with guns and drugs, jurors found that although the authorities could not say which defendant fired the single bullet that tore into Mr.
Daly's chest, all three were equally culpable for creating what prosecutors called a "killing field" resulting from their "private war on a public street."


Barkley Says His Injury Will Not Keep Him Out
Charles Barkley, the Suns' All-Star forward, said today that his injured right elbow was still swollen and sore, but that he would be in the lineup Wednesday night when Phoenix meets the Chicago Bulls in Game 4 of the National Basketball Association finals.
"Some more fluids built up, and we might have to drain it before the game tomorrow," said Barkley, who injured the elbow in Game 2 last Friday night in Phoenix.
"But we'll just have to go out and do the best we can. It's sore and it's tender."


Asylum Reform Has to Respect Human Rights; A Burdened Agency
To the Editor:
Andrew Stephen (Op-Ed, June 7) should cheer up.
It's not as bad at the Immigration and Naturalization Service as he might wish.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Activated Mike Butcher, pitcher, from the 60-day disabled list and optioned him to Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.


Test for Budget Cutters
To the Editor:
Politicians scarcely get the last word of a proposal out of their mouths today before a reporter asks, "How much will it cost and will you raise taxes?" It is easy to ask and makes a reporter seem tough.


The Loss Hurts Franco More Than Other Mets
The Mets can't play.
Their 20-42 record underscores that.
The Mets can't rage right, either, and last night's temper tantrum by John Franco resulted in the closer having his right hand wrapped in bandages.
Franco, the left-hander who yielded the decisive ninth-inning sacrifice fly in a 2-1 defeat to the Braves, suffered a bad gash on his right hand after punching an object in the clubhouse after the game.
Franco was expected to receive stitches, and his status is uncertain.


Wausau Paper Mills Co.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Review/Television; A Familiar Formula in a New Bottle
Going "Eye to Eye With Connie Chung" on the first edition of the new CBS magazine program tonight at 9 is Roger Clinton, the President's wayward half brother.
Mr.
Clinton, who did prison time a few years ago for trafficking in cocaine and was recently involved in an altercation at a Knicks-Bulls playoff game, is now performing as a rock singer, through the useful offices of big brother's Hollywood pals.
The nicely tuned combination of sympathy and skepticism with which Ms.
Chung elicits the story of how Roger supposedly got the way he is reflects the spirit of the program and perhaps of the series.
In tonight's second segment, Bernard Goldberg takes a similar attitude toward the family of a Marine colonel, James Sabow, who officials say committed suicide in 1991; his wife, children and brother maintain that he was murdered, probably by military brass trying to cover up their activities in the drug trade.
And in the final segment, Edie Magnus commiserates with a California girl who complains of being called rude names by boys in school hallways, but Ms.
Magnus also questions the seriousness of such goings on.


COMPANY NEWS
TW HOLDINGS INC., a food service and restaurant holding company based in Spartanburg, S.C., has changed its name to Flagstar Cos.
UNITED TECHNOLOGIES INC., East Hartford, Conn., announced that its Pratt &amp; Whitney subsidiary had received a $280 million order from the Dutch aircraft trading and leasing company Partnairs N.V.


Review/Met Opera; 'Butterfly' Opens Free Concerts in Parks
The Metropolitan Opera's annual contribution to the urban summer is a series of free concerts in parks in the five boroughs and New Jersey.
This year's run, which opened with Puccini's "Madama Butterfly" on the Great Lawn of Central Park on Tuesday evening, is the Met's 27th season of outdoor performing.
The Met's park concerts have traditionally been sponsored by a corporation, typically a bank.
This year the series is being paid for with a $1.9 million grant from the Lila Acheson and DeWitt Wallace Fund for Lincoln Center.


F.C.C. Faulted for Delaying Cost-Saving Cable TV Rules
Members of Congress and a leading consumer advocate charged today that Federal regulators would unnecessarily cost consumers as much as $300 million this year by delaying rules that would slash cable television prices.
The chairman of the House subcommittee on telecommunications today hastily summoned the three members of the Federal Communications Commission to a hearing on the issue scheduled for Thursday morning.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with the obituary of John B. Connally incorrectly described a picture of him and President John F. Kennedy.
The car in which the two men were sitting was not the limousine in which Kennedy was assassinated, but a smaller car they used earlier that day.
The caption also misstated Mr.
Connally's location in the later motorcade.
He sat in a jump seat between the front and rear seats of the limousine, not in its front seat.


Norstan Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Maximum Term in Gap Employee's Murder
The man convicted in the January 1992 murder of the assistant manager of a midtown Manhattan children's clothing store was sentenced yesterday to 25 years to life in prison.
Calling the murder "a crime that was heinous beyond comprehension," Acting Justice Harold J. Rothwax sentenced Anwar Abdul, 20, a former store employee, to the maximum under state law.
The minimum sentence for murder is 15 years to life.


Measurex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Vera, 84, an Artist and Designer Famed for Her Signature Scarves
Vera, the artist and designer whose name has been emblazoned on brightly printed scarves, bed and table linens, draperies and sportswear for nearly 50 years, died on Tuesday at Phelps Memorial Hospital in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
She was 84 and lived in Ossining, N.Y.
The cause was cardiac arrest after surgery, said Tom Costello, a friend and business associate.


Du Pont Plans Inquiry on Pesticide Crop Damage
Stung by accusations that it was concealing information about extensive crop damage caused by one of its pesticides, the nation's largest chemical company said yesterday that it would conduct an internal investigation of whether the charges were true.
But Edgar S. Woolard Jr., the chairman of E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, said that he would defy a subpoena issued last week by the Florida Commissioner of Agriculture to testify about the pesticide in Tallahassee on July 20.


Suspect in the World Trade Center Blast Case Decides Against Changing Lawyers
Mahmud Abouhalima, a major suspect in the World Trade Center bombing, said last week that he wanted to change lawyers, spurring new talk that he might become a cooperating witness.
But then he changed his mind, telling a judge yesterday that he would stick with his latest lawyers after all.
The decision by Mr.
Abouhalima, which took place behind closed doors in the chambers of Judge Kevin Thomas Duffy in Federal Court in Manhattan, raised questions about his intentions and dumbfounded the lawyer who said he had been called by Mr.
Abouhalima to take over his defense.


Saks Chairman Forms Firm
The outgoing chairman and chief executive of Saks Fifth Avenue, a former president of the Limited Stores Inc. and an architectural designer announced yesterday that they were joining forces to form a retail consulting firm.
The new firm, Retail Options Inc., already has the home-shopping channel QVC Network Inc. as a client.
Retail Options' three partners are Melvin Jacobs, whose 11-year tenure at Saks will end on June 30; Verna K. Gibson, formerly of the Limited and who now has her own consulting firm, and Kenneth Walker, founder of the Walker Group.


Bulls Fly Air Jordan to 3-1 Lead Over the Suns
Asked why the Chicago Bulls won tonight, Paul Westphal, the Phoenix Suns' coach, may have summed it up best.
"The biggest difference in the game tonight was that they had Michael Jordan and we didn't," said Westphal.


Don't Treat Air Quality in Planes as a Luxury; Getting Off the Ground
To the Editor:
As a former airline executive, author of two books on the airline industry and industry consultant, I am concerned by the rumblings emanating from the 90-day airline commission headed by Gerald Baliles, former Virginia governor.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  U.S.
Loses to Uruguay, 1-0, in America Cup  The United States, making its debut in the America Cup, the South American championship, lost by 1-0 to Uruguay yesterday before a capacity crowd of 20,000 in Ambato, Ecuador.
Santiago Ostolaza scored on a header in the 50th minute against a United States squad that stayed with the Uruguayans most of the way but could not provide any finishing power around the net late in the game.
In the second half, United States goalkeeper Brad Friedel saved a shot by Adrian Paz in the 47th minute.
Ruben da Silva then hit the post in the 50th, Ostolaza -- unmarked during a corner kick -- delivered his header 30 seconds later.
In another America Cup game last night, Colombia defeated Mexico, 2-1. (AP) Ireland Downs Lithuania on Ricochet Goal: Steve Staunton scored on a free kick in the 38th minute to lead Ireland to a 1-0 victory over Lithuania in a World Cup Group 3 qualifying match yesterday in Vilnius.
Ireland is now the leader of the Group 3 with 15 points after nine matches.
Staunton's shot ricocheted from defender Virginius Baltusnikas's leg past Lithuanian goalie Valdemaras Martin.
Ireland, unbeaten, moved to the top of Group 3, with 15 points from nine games.
The Irish will advance to the 24-nation finals with 4 points from its last three games.
In other European games yesterday, Czechoslovakia beat the Faroe Islands, 3-0, in Group 4; Iceland downed Hungary, 2-0, in Group 5, and Finland drew, 0-0, with Israel in Group 6.
In Asia, Iraq advanced to the second round of qualifying with a 3-0 victory over Yemen in Chengdu, China. (AP)


Solitude at Lunchtime


Banker Seeks Uses for Military Technology
Jon B. Kutler, an investment banker who has been raising money for military industry buyouts, hopes to use that expertise in his own company by hunting for aerospace technology that could be converted to civilian products.
In January, Mr.
Kutler founded Quarterdeck Investment Partners Inc. after leaving the Los Angeles office of the investment banking company Wasserstein, Perella &amp; Company, which he had headed since 1988.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Changing Levels
Q.
I have a steeply graded garden area where I would like to add some steps.
What do you suggest? -- Leah Spiegel, Leesburg, Fla.
A.
Wood is a glorious material, especially for informal stairs, although it does need to be treated with a preservative to prevent rotting.
Possibilities include using log sections or railroad ties for risers, with planks, gravel or brick for treads.
Materials for garden steps that need no preservative include slate, millstones, concrete pads or flagstones.


Don't Treat Air Quality in Planes as a Luxury
To the Editor:
One step forward, two steps back.
I was astonished to read "Frequent Fliers Saying Fresh Air Is Awfully Thin at 30,000 Feet" (front page, June 6), on the reduction of circulation of fresh air on newer airplanes.
Just as we were permitted to breathe more freely when smoking was eliminated on short flights, we learn that the quality of the air in the cabins has been decreased.


The Inside Pitch on Brawls? It's the Inside Pitch
Cal Ripken Jr. almost sat out a game June 7, something he hasn't done since May 29, 1982.
Why?
The day before, the Baltimore Orioles' iron-man shortstop had hurt his ankle in a brawl between his club and the Seattle Mariners.


Dimark Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Hurt O'Brien Wins Decathlon; Joyner-Kersee Wheezes and Breezes in Heptathlon
Having fouled twice today on his first two discus throws, Dan O'Brien stood again at the decathlon precipice.
A cockier O'Brien, the one who no-heighted last year in the pole vault at the Olympic Trials and never made it to Barcelona, Spain, might have spun crazily around and attempted one last Herculean hurl.
He might have fouled, been disqualified, and lost his invitation to the world track and field championships at Stuttgart, Germany, in August.


Virginia Moore, 89, Poet and Biographer
Virginia Moore, a poet and biographer, died on Friday at Westmoreland, a nursing home affiliated with Lake Forest Hospital in Lake Forest, Ill.
She was 89 and lived in Scottsville, Va.
The cause was cancer, said her daughter-in-law, Betty-Ann Moore.


Tale of a Screening That Might Not Have Been
Movie studios and journalists are often like a warring married couple enduring a love-hate relationship: divorce is rare because each side needs the other to survive.
Yet Columbia Studios, a movie heavyweight in this town, has served notice on The Los Angeles Times, the town's newspaper heavyweight, that it is "out of business" starting on Monday unless The Times bars a reporter from covering the studio.
Columbia executives are angry because of what one of them calls "an utterly irresponsible and untrue account" published in the paper about "Last Action Hero," the studio's big action-adventure summer movie opening on Friday.


Sex Disparity in Tests
To the Editor:
John Beasley's concern about the science education of his two daughters in "Isn't Sex Disparity in Tests a National Scandal?" (letter, June 6) is justified.
The disparity in scores between girls and boys was found in all 17 countries in which testing was done.
But in one important set of test questions girls did as well as boys.


Rally Held for Investigation Into Crown Heights Disturbances


Truck Full of Buttons Gets Stuck on Port Authority Ramp


AT HOME WITH: Carol Rasco; She's the Advocate She Once Needed
AT first glance, it seems a simple portrait of privileged Southern living --  a sparkling backyard pool, a family gathered in a comfortable den, a four-foot-wide television that flickers with camcorder images of a relative's sprawling new home.
Only one thing suggests that Carol Rasco has seen more than suburban comfort.
That is the figure strapped in a wheelchair.
That is her son, Hamp.


St. John's Extends Mahoney's Contract
BRIAN MAHONEY, voted coach of the year in the Big East Conference in his first season as LOU CARNESECCA's replacement, was given a seven-year contract extension by St.
John's yesterday.
Mahoney coached St.
John's to a 19-11 record and second place in the conference in what was supposed to be a rebuilding season.
The Redmen made the second round of the National Collegiate Athletic Association tournament where they lost to Arkansas, 80-74.


Less Indifferent, the U.S. Is Year From Cup
In precisely one year -- June 17, 1994 -- the World Cup soccer tournament will strike the shores of the United States with the impact of an uncharted hurricane.
The sheer scale of the extravaganza will be stunning to those Americans who are not prepared for it: A total of 3.5 million spectators will fill the nine stadiums selected as the host sites for the monthlong tournament, with every ticket purchased well in advance.
And about 31 billion people, worldwide, will watch the event on television, living and suffering with every raised offside flag.


Handleman Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


After a Bombing, the Uffizi Begins Recovery
The white walls are now bare and cracked, and where a window once was is a gaping space, 10 feet high and nearly as wide.
The room in the Uffizi Gallery, formerly hung with paintings by the Italian 16th-century master Dosso Dossi, looks directly over the narrow street on which a car bomb exploded one night late last month.
Through that enormous opening in the wall, the view is breathtaking and horrific: set against the backdrop of the soft Tuscan hills and the great dome that Brunelleschi designed for the cathedral are the shattered red tile roofs of the buildings across the street from the Uffizi and the crumbled shell of an adjacent tower, in which a family killed in the explosion used to live.
A few household belongings can still be seen on what remains of the tower's top floor, reduced to barely more than a roofless platform.
Historic agricultural archives housed in the tower were destroyed.
If it weren't for the backdrop, the whole scene would bring to mind Sarajevo instead of Florence.


Kohl Plans to Ease the Path for New Citizens
Responding to growing pressure after fatal attacks on Turks here, Chancellor Helmut Kohl announced new steps today that will make German citizenship easier to obtain.
Many longtime foreign residents of Germany, including Turks who have spent most of their lives here and their children who were born here, complain that German laws keep them from becoming citizens.
Mr.
Kohl made clear today that he sympathizes with these complaints, though he did not say precisely what new formula he would favor.


Detroit Station To Paramount
Paramount Communications Inc. said yesterday that it had agreed to buy WKBD-TV in Detroit from Cox Enterprises Inc.
No price was disclosed, but one executive with knowledge of the deal valued it at $100 million to $200 million.
WKBD-TV is the leading independent station in its market and is among the top affiliates of Fox Broadcasting.
Paramount owns six other independent stations.
With WKBD-TV, it would reach 20 percent of American households.


Brooklyn Man Held in Killing of Youth, 16
A Brooklyn man has been arrested in the killing of a 16-year-old student near a school for the emotionally disturbed, a shooting that the police said was carried out despite the victim's pleas for mercy.
The suspect, Gregory Gooding, 21 years old, is also wanted for questioning in another shooting in a housing project near where he lived, which is about half a mile from the school where the student was shot.


INQUIRY THREATENS A WHISTLE-BLOWER
A military whistle-blower is threatened with blacklisting by an Army investigation into his testimony to Congress about secret military programs, according to court documents and Pentagon officials.
The whistle-blower, William T. Golden, a 30-year veteran in Army intelligence work, has been sitting for three weeks with his wife, three children, four cats and two birds in a motel in Huntsville, Ala.
He is barred from taking a post overseeing secret programs at the Air Force Intelligence Command in San Antonio, Pentagon officials say.


Report Describes Jordan's Aid to Iraq During War
As King Hussein of Jordan prepares to meet for the first time with President Clinton on Friday, a Congressional report has confirmed that during the Persian Gulf war, Jordan was simultaneously receiving American military aid and helping Iraq by giving it American technolgy and intelligence information.
While many of the allegations about Jordan's cooperation with neighboring Iraq after its invasion of Kuwait and during the gulf war in 1991 have been known, the recently declassified report provides new concrete evidence about the depth of the relationship between the two countries, despite United Nations sanctions against Iraq.


Dow Climbs by 19.65 on Program Trading
Airlines and technology stocks weighed on the market, but the Dow Jones industrial average, pushed by a burst of program trading, ended yesterday with a 19.65-point gain at 3,511.65.
The late trading came in advance of the "triple witching" expiration of options and futures today.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange rose to 267.5 million shares, up from 234.1 million on Tuesday.
Advancing stocks led declining ones by a ratio of 9 to 8.


Alan F. McHenry; Foundation Officer, 78
Alan F. McHenry, president and treasurer of the Richard Lounsbery Foundation of Manhattan, which is devoted primarily to biomedical research, died on Friday in Cold Spring, N.Y.
He was 78.
The cause was heart failure, the foundation said.


Campaign Bill Clears Hurdle
Senators made a series of deals that ended a Republican filibuster on campaign-finance legislation, all but assuring its passage.
Page A20.


Supreme International Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Corrections
A chart in SportsWednesday yesterday about the Yankees' victory over the Boston Red Sox incorrectly described the way New York scored its last three runs in an eight-run fifth inning.
Paul O'Neill's single to right field scored Jim Leyritz and Danny Tartabull.
Dave Silvestri's single to left scored Mike Stanley.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  A SETBACK FOR NIGERIAN REFORMS  Nigeria's planned return to civilian rule was suspended when a commission appointed by the military leaders set aside the results of Saturday's presidential elections.
A1  ALLIES STRIKE MOGADISHU  American and allied forces launched a major strike against the dominant Somali warlord in an effort to destroy his base of operations in Mogadishu and rout him from his headquarters.
A1


Corrections
Because of an editing error, the Advertising column on the Media Business page yesterday, about the marketing of the television show "Beverly Hills, 90210," omitted the full name and affiliation of one of the people quoted.
He was Robert Sigman, executive vice president and general manager of Worldvision Home Video Inc.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
BUILDING simple utilitarian stairs and a landing, the type appropriate for the back door, is usually a not-too-difficult exercise in many basic carpentry skills.
The design described here is sturdy and versatile and can easily be modified to suit individual requirements.
Before starting, consult your local building inspector to check on permits, codes and other regulations that may apply.
Pressure-treated lumber, which is injected with a preservative at the mill, is recommended because of its relatively low cost and minimal maintenance requirements.
Untreated construction-grade lumber, which costs less, can be used, but it must be coated regularly with a preservative or paint.
Cedar, redwood and other naturally decay-resistant woods that do not require a finish usually cost more than pressure-treated lumber.


Retired Police Officer Shoots Man in Yankee Stadium Lot
A retired police officer shot a man trying to steal a car from one of the Yankee Stadium parking lots during Tuesday night's game against the Boston Red Sox, the police said.
The suspect was wounded in the left wrist and arrested, they said.
Security in parking lots at the stadium is one of several issues that George Steinbrenner, the Yankees' owner, has brought before Mayor David N. Dinkins as Mr.
Steinbrenner considers moving the Yankees out of the Bronx.


Charting a Course After Graduation
COLLEGE graduation is over, and you've tasted your last sip of champagne, posed for the final photograph and slept in your dormitory room for the last time.
Now you have to answer the question your parents have thrown at you for the last several months: What are you going to do with your life?
Reading Nietzsche seemed so much easier.


Essay; Blood and Irony
The lights may not be going out all over Europe, but the gates are surely slamming in the faces of immigrants and asylum-seekers.
As recession bites, xenophobes use foreigners as scapegoats.
In France, a demeaning "zero immigration" is proclaimed as a goal; in Germany, the asylum law compensating the world for accepting refugees from Hitler has been repealed.
Who gets the blame for unemployment, crime, homelessness?
Outsiders.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
WHEN Dr.
A.
G.
Monaco was head of personnel at the New York Zoological Society a few years ago, he would receive hundreds of letters a month from people who wanted to become zoo keepers or wildlife biologists.
Many of the letters came from adolescents who envisioned themselves feeding and playing with wild animals all day.
"They had no idea what those careers entailed," said Dr.
Monaco, who is now the director of human resources at Oberlin College in Ohio.
In response, he started a series of workshops on choosing a career for junior high and high school students to help them see the connections between the world of adult work and the things they were learning in school.


Rally Assails Inquiries Into Violence
About 1,500 people attended a rally in City Hall Park yesterday to protest what they called unacceptable delays in the investigations of racial disturbances in Crown Heights two summers ago.
Although billed as a nonpartisan rally, the demonstration was dominated by supporters of Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for Mayor, and the tenor of Mr.
Giuliani's remarks suggested he would continue to raise the Crown Heights issue throughout the mayoral campaign.


Braves Bury Schourek And Mets in the First
The Mets have spent the season making remarkable dramas of the most modest assignments.
Win a game? Oh, once in a while.


Agreement On Stiffening License Laws
Legislative leaders said today that they had agreed to stiffen penalties on motorists caught driving with suspended licenses.
For the first time, authorities would be able to bring felony charges against the most serious repeat offenders.
The legislation, in a slightly tougher form, was first recommended by the New York City Police Department, which was reacting to three recent, highly publicized incidents in which pedestrians were killed by drivers who had long records of license suspensions or who had no licenses at all.


Ameritech Appoints President
Richard C. Notebaert, who is 45 years old, was named president and chief operating officer of the Ameritech Corporation yesterday and designated as the successor to William L. Weiss as chairman and chief executive when the latter retires next May.
Mr.
Notebaert (pronounced NOTE-a-bart) had previously been one of three vice chairmen of the Chicago-based regional telephone company, which has annual revenues of more than $11 billion.
The other two, Richard H. Brown, who is 46, and Louis J. Rutigliano, who is 54, will continue in those positions, reporting to Mr.
Weiss.
The changes take place on July 1.


A Test of Wills; In Albany Rent Stabilization Battle, G.O.P. Is Standing Firm on Changes
The system of limiting rent increases on apartments in New York City and surrounding counties is under the most determined attack in nearly two decades, with the system's defenders and opponents in the Legislature locked in an uncommon test of wills.
The current law, known as rent stabilization, was to expire at midnight Tuesday.
But with only minutes to spare, the Legislature passed, and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo signed, an extension of the law that will last eight days, allowing a continuance of the fight over one of the most sensitive laws on the books of New York.


COMPANY NEWS: Old-Timers Day for Snack; Cracker Jack Takes Itself Out to Ballgame
The Cracker Jack division of Borden Inc. has figured out a variety of ways to celebrate the 100th anniversary this year of the invention of its famous candy-coated popcorn and peanut snack, but there is not much doubt that the high point will have to be a party here at the Chicago Cubs' historic Wrigley Field.
Although Cracker Jack began making a name for itself as soon as it was introduced at the Chicago World's Fair of 1893 by a local popcorn company, it has been inextricably linked with baseball in the imagination since 1908.
That was the year that "Take Me Out to the Ballgame," in which the singer jauntily demands peanuts and Cracker Jacks, became a music hall hit.


The Knowable Knack of the Knockoff
ONCE upon a time in the Philippines, 10,000-odd miles from the nearest Knoll International furniture showroom in New York City, Charlotte and Jacques Raven, young residents of Manila with a penchant for classic modern furniture, bought a pair of Ludwig Mies van der Rohe's chrome-and-leather Barcelona chairs for at least $1,000 less than the original.
They were knockoffs, of course, made to the German architect's original 1929 specifications by Filipino artisans, but the two X-frame chairs with matching ottomans cost the Ravens 50 percent less than the Mies-approved editions manufactured by Knoll.
Better yet, the imitations looked just as good as the real thing.
Only an expert could spot the difference; five years later, a child could.


Let's Stop Using 'Liberal' as a Dirty Word
To the Editor:
Your June 6 front-page report of a New York Times/CBS News poll finding that most Americans view President Clinton as "liberal" was incomplete and carried a hidden bias.
While the poll indicates a growing perception of the President as liberal, another message seeps through: "liberal" as negative.


Rockefeller Center With Clay Feet
There is something fascinating about seeing the rich get poorer, and the spectacle is even more engrossing when it involves a storied location -- Rockefeller Center -- and storied owners as well.
It was just a few years ago -- 1989 to be exact -- when the Rockefeller family created an uproar by selling 80 percent of the center's owner, the privately held Rockefeller Group, to the giant Mitsubishi Estate Company of Japan. (The other 20 percent of this symbol of American capitalism remained in the family's hands.)


Eunice S. Carroll, 73, Executive at Sotheby's
Eunice Saunders Carroll, an employee of Sotheby's for 40 years and the director of its Special Client Services Department, died on Sunday at New York Hospital.
She was 73.
A Sotheby's associate said the cause was pneumonia.


U.S. Official Has Doubts About Pepsi Tampering
Consumers' complaints that they were finding syringes, hypodermic needles and other objects in cans of Pepsi-Cola continued to mount across the country today, but the nation's chief food and drug regulator expressed doubt that many of the reports, or even any, would prove valid.
The official, Dr.
David A. Kessler, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, said in an interview that Federal investigators had been unable to confirm even one case of tampering among dozens of such reports that the Food and Drug Administration had received.


Search for Health-Research Director Narrows to 2
The field of candidates to fill the most prominent and influential post in biomedical research has been narrowed to two scientists who differ in virtually every professional particular beyond their ability to inspire zealous devotion from their advocates.
The finalists under consideration to serve as director of the National Institutes of Health are Dr.
Harold E. Varmus of the University of California in San Francisco, a molecular biologist who has won wide fame and a Nobel Prize for his work in analyzing the genes that cause cancer, and Dr.
Judith Rodin, the provost of Yale University and a psychologist known for her research on obesity and aging, Federal officials said.


Expansion in a Country-Music Town
The Carlson Hospitality Group announced plans yesterday for three hotels and a restaurant in Branson, Mo., a country-music village of 3,700 in the Ozarks that is said to attract more than five million visitors a year.
The hotels, projected to be open in 1995, will add 725 rooms to the 12,000 now available in the southwestern Missouri community.
Still, Branson is isolated as things go, a four-hour drive from big cities, and it does not now have commercial air service.
That, plus the fact that its popularity as a tourist attraction has developed mostly in the last few years, means that few hotels in the area are now owned or managed by major hotel corporations.


FSI International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Topics of The Times; Correction
Yesterday's editorial on women as prime ministers misidentified the Governor General of Canada.
He is Ramon John Hnatyshyn.


Review/Opera; Mozart in Which Machinery Is Minimal and Hell Madness
The Opera Theater of St.
Louis finds itself at the edge of real operatic eminence in this country, and Sunday night's performance of "Don Giovanni" at Loretto-Hilton Center helped explain why the company has come so far and why it has not quite arrived.
Its best singers for this Mozart production arrive in pairs: Christopher Robertson and Thomas Barrett as the Don Giovanni and Leporello, the first smoothly convincing, the second with a boyish charm; then there are Christine Brewer and Patricia Racette, both powerful performers as the Donnas Anna and Elvira.


Housing Starts Rose Only 2.4% During May
Builders broke ground for new homes at only a modestly faster pace in May, despite a reported early-spring sales boom and a rise in construction jobs, the Commerce Department reported today.
The somewhat disappointing 2.4 percent rise in housing starts meant this crucial sector is likely to contribute almost nothing to gross domestic product for the April-June quarter despite the lowest mortgage rates in about 20 years and a reversal of lumber prices that soared over the winter.


CALVIN KLEIN REPURCHASES $55 MILLION IN NOTES
Calvin Klein Inc., the New York designer's privately held company that licenses and markets apparel and accessories, said yesterday that it had refinanced most of its long-term debt by repurchasing $55 million in notes from David Geffen, the entertainment executive.


Home Video
Not ones to pass up the "Jurassic Park" phenomenon, video distributors are in the promotional thick of it with a spate of titles like "Danny and the Dinosaur" (Wood Knapp), "Adventures in Dinosaur City" (Republic), "The Wondrous World of Weird Animals" (from MPI's Videosaurus series), "Land of the Lost" (the ABC-TV series from Worldvision) and perhaps the flagship of the genre, "Dinosaur," with Walter Cronkite (Arts &amp; Entertainment).
Still to come is the made-for-video movie "Prehysteria," to be released on June 30 by Full Moon Entertainment, whose films are distributed by Paramount.
From its timeliness to its approach, the movie is an example of how one film maker is working to fill video niches.


U.N. Approves Ban On Shipments of Oil To Haitian Military
The United Nations Security Council voted today to impose a worldwide ban on oil shipments to Haiti but backed away from authorizing the United States or other countries to enforce the ban with a naval blockade.
The sanctions, which were approved unanimously, are aimed at forcing Haitian military leaders to accept the return of the elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
They were weakened in response to objections by Brazil to a clause that called for the inspection of ships trying to enter Haitian ports.


Corrections
A brief front-page summary yesterday about an Air Force general who was found to have disparaged President Clinton misstated the prospective disciplinary action in some copies.
It is the Air Force, not the President, that plans to reprimand the officer, Maj.
Gen.
Harold N. Campbell.


Advances in Detection Create Dilemma on Prostate Cancer
Prostate cancer is being diagnosed at a higher rate than ever before, according to new data from the National Cancer Institute.
And as more cancers are diagnosed, record numbers of men are undergoing radiation or operations to remove the prostate.
But no evidence exists to show that this aggressive effort to diagnose and treat the cancer has had any effect in improving survival.
And most of the increase in diagnosis can be attributed to new, more advanced diagnostic techniques, researchers say. 16% Increase Reported
In fact, they say, more cancers are being caught at an earlier, more treatable stage.
The real risk is in the treatment.
Removal of the prostate not only has a higher death rate than comparable kinds of surgery, but it can also cause impotence and incontinence in large numbers of patients.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about MacArthur Fellowship winners rendered the name of a University of Massachusetts professor incorrectly.
He is John Edgar Wideman.


Good Demand Seen for Trump Notes
He is still Donald J. Trump.
He still has financial problems and a history of stinging his bondholders.
But it appears that his re-entry into the bond market with two issues backed by the Trump Plaza casino may be greeted with a lot of demand.
And if this is the case, Mr.
Trump's bankers are probably going to be very happy.
Because instead of accepting securities with no immediate interest payments they will walk away with cash.


U.S. Seeks to Protect Fruits Of Tax-Supported Research
Federal officials said today that they might take legal action against the country's largest private research institute because of its plan to sell all its discoveries, even those made with public money, to one pharmaceutical company for the next 20 years.
Officials of the National Institutes of Health on Friday notified the Scripps Research Institute, a private concern that gets both Federal and private money, that its proposed $300 million deal with the Sandoz Pharmaceutical Corporation was probably illegal and that the Government might take action to strip Scripps of its patent rights to any discoveries made with Federal money.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Democratic Senators on the Finance Committee agreed on tax increases and spending cuts, pushing deficit-reduction legislation one step closer to becoming law.
The accord incorporates much of what President Clinton proposed and the House approved but contains significant differences, most notably a 4.3-cents-a-gallon increase in the Federal sales tax on gasoline and diesel fuel, rather than the broader tax on energy consumption that the President had sought.  [ Page A1. ]
Delays in enforcing new cable television rules could cost consumers as much as $300 million, legislators said.
F.C.C. commissioners were summoned to a hearing today.  [ D1. ]


Republican Tax-Cut Plan May Be Political Problem
The Republican Speaker of the New Jersey Assembly, Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian, has drafted legislation to cut the state income tax beginning next year -- a proposal with tricky political implications in this election year.
A permanent cut in state income taxes would introduce a new dimension into campaign politics.
Ordinarily, a tax cut would seem a boon for a governor and state legislators seeking re-election.


Bay Bank Systems Picks 3 Finalists
Bay Bank Systems in Waltham, Mass., said yesterday that it had selected three finalists to compete for its consolidated creative and media-buying account, with billings estimated at $9 million.
The creative portion was previously at Houston, Effler &amp; Partners in Boston, and the media-buying portion was previously at Pro Media in Needham, Mass.


Future Doctors Hold Memorial for 'First Patients'
IT had all the trappings of a traditional memorial service.
There were remembrances of the departed, prayers, floral arrangements and even organ music, albeit from a portable synthesizer.
But there was one distinguishing feature of the somber gathering that took place today at New York Medical College in Valhalla.
The departed that were being honored were cadavers -- the bodies that had been used by first-year medical students in their introductory gross medical anatomy class.


'Freeze!' and Other Helpful Phrases
Under pressure to keep other Japanese travelers from suffering the fate of a 16-year-old exchange student who was shot to death in Louisiana, the Government here has rushed to publish a small guide for Japanese headed to the United States, filled with helpful tourist phrases like "Hands in the air!"
As summer tourists head for the airports next month, Japan's Ministry of Transportation plans to distribute, through travel agents and airlines, several hundred thousand copies of the new guide to staying alive on America's mean streets.
While the final version has yet to be set in type, its authors say they are combing the American vernacular for phrases that no Japanese should leave home without.


Grand Union Holdings Corp. reports earnings for Year to April 3


New Party Joins the Salk Addition Dispute
The Federal Advisory Council on Historic Preservation has joined a protracted dispute over an addition to the Salk Institute for Biological Sciences, the landmark building in La Jolla, Calif., designed by Louis I. Kahn.
The Advisory Council voted last week to ask Donna E. Shalala, Secretary of Health and Human Services, to investigate whether the addition has received Federal assistance.
Although construction on the addition is under way, the council's action could open the way for a formal review of its design.
The addition is being built on a site formerly occupied by a eucalyptus grove that formed a landscaped entrance to the laboratory complex.
Since the institute unveiled the plan two years ago, it has been criticized by architects and historians who regard the Salk complex as one of the most important buildings of the 20th century and maintain that the landscaped setting is integral to Kahn's design.


Yeltsin, Near Accord, Pushes Work on Constitution
President Boris N. Yeltsin today extended for another 10 days the assembly he called to discuss a new constitution, saying there were grounds to declare that "a single, agreed draft of a new constitution is being born."
Mr.
Yeltsin told delegates to continue working in committees and to meet together on June 26.
"In principle, everything is moving at such a pace that we should actually finish our work in June and move on to early parliamentary elections," he said, adding that they could be held in September.


CHRONICLE
EVAN STEADMAN, the producer and the lyricist of a musical based on the life of Robert Maxwell, the publishing tycoon who died at sea in 1991, vowed yesterday that the show would go on, despite the threat of legal action by KEVIN MAXWELL, Mr.
Maxwell's younger son.
"Maxwell: the Musical," a comedy with lyrics set to familiar tunes by Gilbert and Sullivan, is scheduled to open in the West End, London's theater district, in November, two years after Mr.
Maxwell's death.


Sharks Name Youngest Coach in N.H.L.
The San Jose Sharks named KEVIN CONSTANTINE as the team's coach yesterday.
Constantine, 33, spent the last two seasons as coach of the Kansas City Blades, the Sharks' International Hockey League affiliate.
He becomes the youngest coach in the 26-team National Hockey League.
The Sharks went 11-71-2, breaking the record for most single-season losses.


Blyth Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Prospect Park to Have Even Less Safety Under New Zoo Plan; A Wake-Up Call
To the Editor:
Contrary to your June 7 report that the distressing slaying of Allyn Winslow, a bicyclist, has cast a pall over Brooklyn's Prospect Park, the killing has been a wake-up call to many in the neighborhoods surrounding the park.
We have been complacent about the services due us from New York City and have become inured to the violence to both person and property that affects us daily.


Stadium Protest Is Canceled
A coalition of civil-rights activists led by the Rev.
Jesse Jackson and Al Sharpton has called off a demonstration at Yankee Stadium that was planned for Saturday afternoon.
However, the group left open the possibility of holding a demonstration at Shea Stadium on June 21, when the Mets return from their current road trip.
The proposed demonstration at Yankee Stadium was called off yesterday after a meeting Tuesday in George Steinbrenner's office at Yankee Stadium.
In the meeting, the Yankee owner discussed the team's minority-group hiring patterns with Sharpton; Roscoe Brown, president of Bronx Community College, and Dennis Walcott, president of the New York Urban League.


Costco Wholesale Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 9


Major League Baseball Moves Closer to Expanding Playoffs
Major league baseball appeared to move one step closer yesterday to expanding its post-season playoffs from two teams in each league to four for the 1994 season.
But the Players Association indicated the proposed new format may not happen so quickly.
The owners' schedule format committee, meeting in Denver, voted 4-3 to recommend to the full ownership meeting today that a round be added to the playoffs, with the first-place team in each division playing the second-place team in a three-of-five-game series.
The winners in that round then would play for the right to advance to the World Series.


Another 99 Years of Shakespeare in New York


SENATORS ON FINANCE PANEL REACH ACCORD ON A BUDGET WITH GAS TAX AND NEW CUTS
The Democratic senators on the Finance Committee agreed today on a set of new tax increases and spending cuts, pushing deficit-reduction legislation one step closer to becoming law.
The agreement, struck after days of agonizing bargaining, incorporates much of what President Clinton proposed and the House of Representatives approved last month.
But it differs from the President's plan in important respects.


A Troubled Life Ends
In a sense, Johnny Ray Cromartie never really left his old neighborhood.
In 1971, his mother moved the family out of its apartment at 147th Street and Frederick Douglass Boulevard in Harlem, but Johnny kept going back.
It was in that neighborhood, dotted with trash-strewn vacant lots and buildings long missing their window panes, that he had most of his numerous run-ins with the law in the 1970's.
People in the area recall that in recent years, a time when he stayed out of trouble, the heavy-set, soft-spoken man still came around regularly.


First Team Sports Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Filibuster Is Ended by Accord On Campaign Financing Bill
Senate Democrats made a series of deals today that all but assured passage of campaign-finance legislation that would impose voluntary spending limits but eliminate most of the public financing President Clinton had proposed.
After extracting concessions from the Democrats, 7 Republicans joined with 55 Democrats to end the nearly three weeks of debate on the bill.
The vote was 62 to 37, or two more than necessary to break a Republican filibuster.
A final vote is scheduled for Thursday.


Penwest Ltd. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Rival Parties in Cambodia Agree To Form a Coalition Government
Cambodia's two major political parties agreed today to put aside years of brutal conflict to share power in an interim government that will almost certainly be led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the 70-year-old former monarch.
The power-sharing arrangement between the political arm of the current Vietnamese-installed Government and the royalist opposition party may mean an end, for now, to the chaos that last week produced a secessionist movement among several eastern provinces and the threat of an expanded civil war.


Rail Link Would Cross The Hudson
Metro-North Commuter Railroad said yesterday that a bridge or tunnel across the Hudson River to link Rockland and Orange counties with Grand Central Terminal would pay for itself in revenues, commuting time saved and congestion and pollution reduced, even though it would cost up to $1.76 billion.
But the railroad rejected, at least for now, a bolder plan to continue the trans-Hudson tracks eastward across Westchester, through White Plains to Port Chester.
Such a line would break the radial nature of the train system by connecting the Hudson, Harlem and New Haven lines, allowing people to move easily by train among suburbs and satellite cities rather than simply commuting in and out of Manhattan.
But the railroad said that a train would draw only about 15 percent of the people who drive, because their destinations on the Westchester-Connecticut side are so diffuse.
Wanted: A Direct Route
In contrast, the railroad said, 60 percent of the people who commute to Manhattan from New York west of the Hudson during peak hours would do so by train if one were available that took a reasonably direct route.
By way of comparison, the railroad said that in Westchester it captures 75 percent of those passengers.


Oxxford's Chief Executive Moves Ahead to Reinvigorate the Clothing Company.
OXXFORD CLOTHING INC., perhaps the closest thing America has to Savile Row, is planning a new advertising campaign, the company's first since World War II.
Undaunted by the sorry state of the men's tailored clothing business, Chrys Fisher, the company's new president and chief executive, is forging ahead with plans to reinvigorate Oxxford by expanding distribution, extending the brand name and starting a major corporate advertising effort to reach a new audience.


CLINTON SEES CUT IN SPACE STATION
President Clinton has decided not to kill the eight-year-old space station project but to proceed instead with a slightly slimmed version of the original design, costing about $10.5 billion over five years, a senior Administration official said today.
That price tag would be at least $1.5 billion more than the President said he wanted to spend, but still falls well below the $17.6 billion it would have cost to complete the latest version of the original design.


The Man Behind the High Court Nominee
In 1980, a handful of Republican senators appeared to be reluctant to confirm another Carter appointment to a Federal Court in an election year, so the prospective judge's husband mentioned the problem to a client.
The husband, Martin D. Ginsburg, told the client, Ross Perot, along with other influential friends in academic and political and corporate circles.


Topps Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Somali Clan Chief Poses Tough Problem for U.N.
Five days after United States warplanes first attacked the radio station and arms depots of Mohammed Farah Aidid, the Somalia warlord held responsible for the killing of some 23 Pakistani United Nations troops, the question being raised by diplomats here is not whether he should be arrested, but what to do about him if he is detained.
Arresting and trying criminals is completely uncharted territory for the United Nations, and although American officials last Friday said Mr.
Aidid would be apprehended, he has openly mocked the United Nations and the United States by appearing in public, almost daring them to seize him.


EXEL Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Infinity to Buy 2d FM Station in Los Angeles
In what would be the highest price ever paid for a single radio station, the Infinity Broadcasting Corporation of New York agreed today to buy KRTH-FM, Los Angeles, from the Beasley Broadcast Group for $110 million in cash.
The deal, which is subject to approval by the Federal Communications Commission, would be the first in the huge Los Angeles radio market since the commission last year eased ownership rules to enable a single owner to buy up to four radio stations in one metropolitan area.


Guatemala Journal; A Tall Order From an Improbable New President
As he hurried off to his first day of work at the National Palace, the former human rights ombudsman who had suddenly become President of Guatemala, Ramiro de Leon Carpio, still did not have a Cabinet, a Vice President or much by way of policy plans.
"I have to go step by step," he said.
He had little doubt about which step to take first.
Within hours he had purged the Defense Minister and other military officers who had backed the seizure on May 25 of nearly dictatorial powers by Mr. de Leon Carpio's predecessor, Jorge Serrano Elias, and, under broad civilian pressure, overthrew Mr.
Serrano on June 1.


Padres' Sheffield Gets Out of Jail for $500
San Diego Padres third baseman GARY SHEFFIELD was released from jail on a $500 bond after being arrested early yesterday after arguing with a Houston police officer at an all-night restaurant.


Sports of The Times; Open Open To Pro Tour Winners
THE United States Open, which begins today at Baltusrol, is the world's best golf tournament.
But it could be even better.
All the big names will be teeing off: Kite, Faldo, Langer, Azinger, Ballesteros, Stewart, Couples, Woosnam, Norman, Price, Daly, Strange, Olazabal, Pavin, Love, Lyle.
So will the other fascinating foreign names: Montgomerie, Ozaki, Els, Singh.
And so will most of the revered names: Nicklaus, Watson, Irwin, Floyd.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.14
3.72
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
3.04
3.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.13
3.14
3.69
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.54
5.56
6.80
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.81
6.82
7.81
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.75
7.75
8.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.83
5.85
6.55
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


American United Global Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


FINANCIER IN INDIA ACCUSES PREMIER
A powerful Indian financier, who is the main figure in a billion-dollar banking and securities scandal, said today that he had paid a bribe of more than 10 million rupees, or about $300,000, to Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao to secure political backing.
Mr.
Rao, who has held office for two years, strongly denied the charge today, saying he was "shocked and pained" by it.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Cleveland Electric Illuminating Co., a unit of Centerior Energy Corp., is offering $100 million of 7.375 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2003 at 99.958, to yield 7.38 percent through Morgan Stanley.
The noncallable bonds are rated Baa-3 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB- by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
*
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp., or Freddie Mac, is offering $200 million of step-up notes due in 1998 at 100, to yield 4.55 percent, through Kidder, Peabody.
The issue is callable in two years.


Baltusrol Blueprint: Drive It Straight And Drive It Long
On the eve of the first round of the 93d United States Open, here at Baltusrol, 156 players went to bed massaging their psyches for the most ego-deflating test in golf.
But although it is the most nerve-racking, demanding and arguably the most important of golf's four major championships, the United States Open is often the least exciting.


Of Brodkey and AIDS: Laugh a Bit, Cry a Bit
Even in the best of times, Harold Brodkey can be difficult.
He tends to turn the tables on an interviewer, spending more time asking questions than answering them.
He probes.
He ponders.
He plays.
So it should come as good news to members of the cultlike Brodkey following -- the fans of his books and his New Yorker articles -- that despite his announcement in the magazine this week that he has AIDS, he remains true to form.


Sheldon Keck, 83, Pioneer in the Field Of Art Conservation
Sheldon Keck, a pioneer in the field of art conservation, died on Saturday at the Bassett Hospital in Cooperstown, N.Y.
He was 83.
The cause of death was complications after a stroke, said his wife, Caroline.


Minimum Tax Closes Corporate Loopholes
To the Editor:
"Liberals Fight Clinton Plan to Ease Tax on Companies" (Business Day, June 10) states:


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Optioned John Farrell, pitcher, to Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.
Recalled Hilly Hathaway, pitcher, from Vancouver.
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Placed Kirk McCaskill, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to June 15.
Purchased the contract of Scott Ruffcorn, pitcher, from Birmingham of the Southern League.
Signed Gregory Norton and Benjamin Boulware, infielders.


Events: Museum Trips, Lectures and Concerts
Talks, Tours, Trips  Cooper-Hewitt Museum, 2 East 91st Street; (212) 860-6321.
On Wednesday, at 6:30 P.M., there will be a talk on American garden furniture.
Admission is $15; members, $10.
Other lectures will include British textiles (June 28) and Oriental rugs (July 12); all are at 6:30 P.M.
Day trips include tours of private gardens in Nyack, N.Y., on Monday, from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M. (fee, including lunch, $75; members, $60) and of Yankee Stadium, on Tuesday, from 2:30 to 5 P.M. (fee is $30; members, $20).


Costco Set To Merge With Price
In a deal that would create the nation's largest warehouse club, the Price Company and the Costco Wholesale Corporation said yesterday that they would merge in a stock swap valued at more than $2 billion.
The move by the companies -- ranked second and third, respectively, in the industry by annual sales -- is the latest sign of the winnowing of the warehouse industry.
Same-store sales have faltered as the mammoth discount retailers saturate markets and encounter stiffer competition from supermarkets, as well as from category killers like Office Depot and CompUSA.


Science Education Must Discover Real World
To the Editor:
As a graduate of the California Institute of Technology, I share the pain of the capable young men and women who find their futures clouded by the uncertainty in science and engineering careers (front page, June 6).
Caltech and its sister institutions are in trouble.
The roots of this problem are deep.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  ARREST MADE IN SLAYING
A Brooklyn man has been arrested in the killing of a 16-year-old student near a school for the emotionally disturbed, a shooting that the police said was carried out despite the victim's pleas for mercy.
The suspect, Gregory Gooding, 21 years old, is also wanted for questioning in another shooting, in a housing project.
B3.
BLAST SUSPECT RETAINS HIS LAWYERS
Mahmud Abouhalima, a major suspect in the World Trade Center bombing, has told a judge that he was dissatisfied with his lawyers but stopped short of dismissing them.
His decision followed conversations in which Mr.
Abouhalima had said that he wanted to change lawyers, which spurred new talk that he might become a cooperating witness.
B3.
STATE INVESTIGATION IN E.M.S.
CASE
The New York State Health Department says it will investigate an incident in which two New York City emergency medical technicians mistakenly pronounced a Brooklyn woman dead, leaving her without medical aid for several hours.
Emergency Medical Service officials have cleared the two technicians of any wrongdoing and said that the technicians had followed state procedures.
B2.
REGION  TAX CUT IS PROPOSED
The Speaker of the New Jersey Assembly, Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian, a Republican, has drafted legislation to cut the state income tax beginning next year -- a proposal with tricky political implications.
B7.
PLAYGROUND FIGHT CALLED SEXUAL ABUSE
Everyone agrees that a boy and girl got in an argument Friday on the playground of a west side Yonkers elementary school.
School officials described the gang-up that happened next as "roughhousing." The police, however, say it was a case of sexual abuse.
B7.
THOSE WHO DONATE BODIES ARE HONORED
There was one distinguishing feature of the somber gathering that took place today at New York Medical College in Valhalla.
The departed that were being honored were cadavers -- the bodies that had been used by first-year medical students in their introductory gross medical anatomy class.
Vahalla Journal.
B7.
METRO-NORTH BACKS HUDSON CROSSING
Metro-North Commuter Railroad says that a bridge or tunnel across the Hudson River to link Rockland and Orange counties with Grand Central Terminal would pay for itself in revenues, commuting time saved and congestion and pollution reduced, even though it would cost up to $1.76 billion.
But the railroad rejected, at least for now, a bolder plan to continue the trans-Hudson tracks eastward across Westchester, through White Plains to Port Chester.
B7.
D'AMATO OUTBURST IS DESCRIBED
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato poked his finger into Lieut.
Gov.
Stan Lundine's chest and shouted obscenities at him during a rally at the Plattsburgh Air Force Base, Plattsburgh's Mayor has said.
B6.
Maple syrup production in New York fell to a record low this year because of bad weather, the State Agricultural Statistics Service says.
B6.
Chronicle B5


Maryland Federal reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Barkley Confident the Suns Will Rise in Game 5
Charles Barkley fell to one knee and gripped his shaved head not in agony, but in deep disappointment.
He knew it was over.
It was in the final seconds of the fourth game of the National Basketball Association playoff finals at Chicago Stadium, and he had helped bring his Phoenix Suns back into contention, only to have Michael Jordan send them out of it.


Showalter Loses His Cool and Yanks Lose the Game
Buck Showalter waved his arms.
He kicked the dirt.
He screamed.
And he tried ejecting an umpire after he had already been thrown out of the game for arguing a controversial call.
It does not work that way.
Sweat poured off his face and his mouth flapped on, but the Yankee manager did not secure the result he desired.
Neither did the Yankees.
Showalter trudged into the clubhouse, frustrated and frazzled because what apparently was a bunt single by Bernie Williams in the third inning was called a foul ball.


Langer May Miss U.S. Open
Bernhard Langer, the Masters champion, had severe stiffness in his neck today and may be unable to play here at Baltusrol in the 1993 United States Open, which starts Thursday.
Langer said he strained his neck during practice Tuesday and went through three hours of physical therapy that night.
But he awoke in pain today and was only able to chip and putt during the day.
He spent most of the late afternoon in the PGA Tour's fitness trailer, where he was given massage and ultrasound treatment, but had seen little improvement by the time he left the course.


State to Investigate Case of Woman Left for Dead
The New York State Health Department said yesterday that it would investigate an incident in which two New York City emergency medical technicians mistakenly pronounced a Brooklyn woman dead, leaving her without medical help for several hours.
The woman, Nancy Vitale, a 40-year-old parochial-school teacher, was in critical condition yesterday in the intensive-care unit of Coney Island Hospital, said Ken Kiernan, a hospital spokesman, although he added that she had regained consciousness and was speaking with doctors.


Executive Changes
AMERIHOST PROPERTIES INC., Des Plaines, Ill., a hotel developer, named Charles R. Barcus senior vice president of development and acquisitions.
ATRIX LABORATORIES INC., Fort Collins, Colo., named John E. Urheim vice chairman and chief executive.


INSIDE
Plan From Serbs and Croats
Serbian and Croatian leaders proposed scrapping the Bosnian peace plan and placing Muslims in two separate landlocked areas.
Page A3.
Easing German Citizenship
Responding to pressure after fatal attacks on Turks in Germany, Chancellor Helmut Kohl announced steps to make citizenship easier.
Page A6.
Doubts in Pepsi Tampering
Reports of syringes in cans of Pepsi-Cola mounted, but the nation's chief food and drug regulator expressed doubt about their validity.
Page A16.
Window on Immigrant Crime
Because of its drug dealing, money laundering and prostitution, Jackson Heights, Queens, offers a glimpse into immigrant crime.
Page B1.
Bulls Close In on Title
The Chicago Bulls got 55 points from Michael Jordan and beat the Phoenix Suns, 111-105, to move one victory away form the N.B.A. title.
Page B13.


The Unyielding AIDS Epidemic
The international AIDS conference in Berlin last week left a depressing message: no scientific breakthrough is apt to wipe this scourge from the earth any time soon.
Indeed, the existing medical weapons against AIDS are less successful than once believed.
There is little choice now but to shift the emphasis to prevention programs.
The drug AZT, long the mainstay of AIDS treatment, has only limited value for a limited time -- and is highly toxic to boot.
Worse yet, it apparently has little or no effect when given to people who are infected with the virus but have not yet developed symptoms.
That dashes the hopes of millions of infected individuals that early treatment might ward off death.


EMPIRE SAYS DATA ON INSURANCE LOSS WERE ERRONEOUS
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield acknowledged yesterday that the company had repeatedly sent erroneous reports about its finances to New York State insurance regulators.
The action came as state officials accused Empire's executives of obstructing state insurance examiners for years.
Kevin Foley, New York's deputy insurance superintendent, said Empire's executives made "misstatements" to the Insurance Department, told "falsehoods" and were slow to provide information requested by insurance examiners.
Sometimes they claimed information did not exist, when it did, he said.


Bad Weather Forces Maple Syrup Crop to a Record Low
Maple syrup production in New York fell to a record low this year because of bad weather, the State Agricultural Statistics Service has reported .
For consumers, that may mean higher prices later this year, but several farmers said the shortage would probably be overcome by imports from Canada, which has a large surplus from last year.


Market Place; A Lender and a Holder of Student Loans May Face Different Futures.
PRESIDENT CLINTON'S proposal to put the Federal Government in the business of lending money directly to college students is sending the stocks of two companies involved in private lending in opposite directions.
When the Administration began pushing its plan to eliminate private lenders from the federally insured student-loan program, the shares of the Student Loan Marketing Association, known as Sallie Mae, and those of the Student Loan Corporation, a unit of Citicorp that is 20 percent publicly owned, both suffered.
Student Loan is the nation's largest student-loan lender and the No. 2 holder of loans.
Sallie Mae, created by Congress in 1972 to support a secondary market for student loans issued by private lenders, is the largest holder of loans, though it makes few student loans itself.


Galen Health Care reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Under Siege, Pepsi Mounts a TV Counteroffensive
As several new reports emerged yesterday of cans of Pepsi-Cola containing needles or syringes, executives at the company's headquarters in Somers, N.Y., intensified their efforts to allay fears that public safety was at risk.
In general, the company won high marks for its response from marketing experts and stock analysts, and also from its retailers, nearly all of whom continue to sell Pepsi products.
However, some crisis-management consultants questioned whether the company was doing enough.


The Capital Press and the President: Fair Coverage or Unreined Adversity?
Though mutual distrust is routine in Washington, President Clinton's conflicts with reporters have raised, somewhat earlier than usual, the question that arises in every Administration: whether the nation's news organizations are being fair to the President.
For months now, the press has had little good to say about President Clinton, and he has sometimes been unable to contain his obvious frustration with the press.


Baker and Johnson Clear Air on Comments
San Francisco Giants Manager DUSTY BAKER, disturbed about possible racial implications in a comment attributed to DAVEY JOHNSON about inexperienced managers getting jobs, asked the new Cincinnati Reds manager about it.
Baker said he had heard that Johnson said he couldn't understand why men like Baker, former Reds Manager TONY PEREZ and DON BAYLOR of the Colorado Rockies were landing major league jobs while Johnson had no job offers for three years.


U.S. Intensifies Attack to Oust A Somali Clan
United States and allied forces mounted a major strike tonight against the leader of the dominant Somali faction in an effort to destroy his base of operations in Mogadishu and rout him from his headquarters.
United States officials said the aim of the air and ground attack on the commander, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, was to end his ability to disrupt United Nations operations and to eliminate him as a factor in Somali politics.


4 Convicted of Attempted Murder of Bishop
Four men were convicted of attempted murder in Brooklyn yesterday in the attack on a Greek Orthodox Bishop last year, District Attorney Charles J. Hynes of Brooklyn said.
The four men, aged 18 to 20, each pleaded guilty to trying to kill Bishop Alexios Panagiotopoulos during an attempted robbery outside his home in Crown Heights on Feb. 26, 1992, Mr.
Hynes said.
The maximum prison term for the crime is 8 1/3 to 25 years.


Review/Ballet; Mannerisms Of the 1800's Are Given Modern Flair
"Le Tombeau de Couperin," presented by the New York City Ballet on Tuesday night at the New York State Theater, is a ballet that seems to grow and deepen with almost every viewing.
Though the piece was one of the few enduring works to come out of the company's 1975 Ravel Festival, it looked at first like a ravishingly pretty trifle, full of light, air, simplicity and order.
Created by George Balanchine for 16 City Ballet corps dancers, "Le Tombeau de Couperin" made it possible to savor the dancers' individual gifts and presences.
At the same time, the dancers served almost symphonically to augment each formal pattern and courtly, gracious mannerism.
Each was performed by a group split into two quadrilles, or ensembles.


Topics of The Times; Wanted: Summer Jobs for Teens
The latest national figures show an increase in job growth and a slight easing of the unemployment rate, from 7 to 6.9 percent.
But the picture is not so rosy for teen-agers, particularly urban youths.
Nationwide, about 20 percent of teen-agers are unemployed.
However, New York City officials report that 40 percent of city teens were jobless during the first three months of this year.
That's about twice the rate of just two years ago -- and the highest recorded level in 25 years.


Books of The Times; Starring in Tocqueville's Crystal Ball
Commager on Toqueville By Henry Steele Commager 130 pages.
University of Missouri Press. $24.95.
Henry Steele Commager's brilliant new interpretation of Alexis de Tocqueville's "Democracy in America" offers this astute comment: "He had an instinct for the jugular vein in history."


John Campbell, 41, Guitarist and Singer
John Campbell, a blues guitarist and singer, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 41.
The cause was heart failure, said a statement from Elektra Records.


Hunt Manufacturing Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Report's Proposals Due Today
The long-awaited and often-delayed report by the Governor's Advisory Commission on Racing in the 21st Century will finally be released today, and racing people are speculating that it might take until the 21st century to implement its proposals.
The report is subtitled "A Plan to Reform, Restructure and Revitalize the Horse Racing, Parimutuel Wagering and Breeding Industry in New York State," but it has already touched off controversies that might require action in the Legislature or the courts to resolve.


A 25 1/2-Hour German Epic of Discovery and Art
The statistics are daunting.
The German director Edgar Reitz's 25 1/2-hour epic film, "Heimat II: Chronicle of a Generation," has 2,143 pages of script and consumed more than a million feet of exposed film.
It took six years to write, 557 days to shoot and 117 days to edit.
The cast includes 71 leading roles, 310 smaller ones and 2,300 extras.
The product of this prodigious teamwork is an alternately gripping and lyrical 13-episode serial about German life in the 1960's that is being shown in roughly four-hour installments at the Joseph Papp Public Theater through July 29.
Handsomely photographed and superbly acted, with English subtitles and a remarkably evocative soundtrack, it might be the ultimate highbrow soap opera for couch potatoes except that there are no plans to show "Heimat II" on television in the United States.


Heilig-Meyers Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Bergen Brunswig Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Vincent Hamlin, Cartoonist, Dies; Creator of Alley Oop Strip Was 93
Vincent T. Hamlin, who created the popular Alley Oop cartoon strip, even though he had been thrown out of art class, died on Monday at a rest home in Spring Hill, Fla., at the age of 93.
He had been in declining health, his family said.


Paul Hirsch, 78, Head Of Large Philanthropy
Paul Hirsch, former director general of the Lampadia Foundation, the wealthiest philanthropy in southern South America, died on Monday in a hospital in Buenos Aires.
Mr.
Hirsch was 78.
The cause was abdominal cancer, said his niece, Prof. Andree Hayum.


Agents Says 49ers' Young Won't Jump
STEVE YOUNG's agent yesterday played down reports that the San Francisco 49ers quarterback might take advantage of his free-agent status to jump to another team.
LEIGH STEINBERG said free-agency restrictions make it unlikely Young will sign with anyone else.
"This form of free agency means Steve is about as free as the People's Republic of China," he said.


Taylor Is in Rare Form: He Attends a Mini-Camp
Lawrence Taylor had mentioned his off-season preference for putting greens over artificial turf, but two days after his new coach sharply criticized him for failing to attend the team's mini-camp, Taylor dropped his clubs and showed up today at Giants Stadium for the team's third and final session.
Taylor, looking fit in street clothes, said he last attended a mini-camp in 1982 though he did appear in 1986 for a physical.
The linebacker met with Coach Dan Reeves for about 15 minutes to clear up what the 10-time Pro Bowl performer termed a misunderstanding between the two.
The 34-year-old outside linebacker missed the final seven games last season with a severed right Achilles' tendon, then signed a contract he had agreed to two months earlier, for a reported $5.05 million for 1993 and 1994.


Stiffening License Law
Legislative leaders in Albany said that they had agreed to toughen penalties on motorists caught driving with suspended licenses.
For the first time, the authorities would be able to bring felony charges against the most serious repeat offenders.
Article, page B1.


Economic Scene; The Risks For Clinton in His New Trade Policy Toward Japan.
FOR months, the Clinton Administration has been scolded for failing to spell out a trade policy toward Japan that went beyond rhetorical cheap shots.
Now the White House has obliged, staking out a "results oriented" middle ground apparently calculated to disarm Japan-bashers without touching off a trade war.
From this limited perspective, the policy will probably succeed.
Hard-core protectionists in Congress will be isolated, at least for the moment.
And while the Japanese Government is unhappy with President Clinton's casual dismissal of what it views as major concessions negotiated with the Bush and Reagan Administrations, Japan has a facility for making lemonade out of lemons.
"There is absolutely no question the talks will be successful," assured Hiromoto Seki, the consul general of Japan in New York.


2 Leaders Propose Dividing Bosnia Into Three Areas
The leaders of Serbia and Croatia, the two most powerful republics in the old Yugoslav federation, today proposed scrapping the international plan for ending the civil war in Bosnia and Herzegovina and offered one of their own.
President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia said the plan he and President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia were offering would preserve the nominal unity of the country.
But in other respects the proposal described by Mr.
Tudjman resembled the current situation on the ground: three separate ethnic areas, with Muslims confined to two separate landlocked pockets of territory, one around Sarajevo, Zenica and Tuzla and the other in the northwest around Bihac.


A Window on Immigrant Crime; In Jackson Heights, Drugs, Dirty Money and Prostitution
No one knows how much criminal money flows through Jackson Heights, but no one doubts the current is steady and strong.
On its busy and peaceful surface, the Queens neighborhood is like so many others where immigrants settle into new lives.
People work hard, buy houses and shops and send money to the places they once called home.
Most of the enterprise is legal.
But Jackson Heights is also the home to Little Colombia -- where high-level drug dealers operate and where much of their cash is laundered through travel agencies and wire transfer services that line Roosevelt Avenue in conspicuous numbers.
By coincidence, the community is also the city's new capital for houses of prostitution.


Payless Cashways reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Disputes Grow After Arrests of Yonkers Schoolchildren
Everyone agrees that a boy and girl got in an argument Friday on the playground of a west-side elementary school here.
School officials described the gang-up that happened next as "roughhousing"; the police say it was sexual abuse.
On Tuesday, eight students, ages 9 to 13, were arrested and charged with sexual abuse and assault, both misdemeanors.


News Report Hurts Stock Of Hewlett
The Hewlett-Packard Company, one of the current darlings of Wall Street, was deserted by its high-strung admirers yesterday, apparently following what the company called a mistaken news report from Europe that revenue growth was slowing in the third quarter ending July 31.
On the New York Stock Exchange yesterday, shares of Hewlett, which dominates the laser printer market and makes other computer and electronics equipment, opened at 9:30 A.M. down $6.25 a share, to $80.75.
The stock recouped briefly, then took another fall an hour later.
By the end of a frenzied trading session in which the company felt compelled to disclose new information about its current performance, its shares began to recover.


Armenian Units Press Attack in Azerbaijan
Armenian forces in the disputed territory of Nagorno-Karabakh are continuing an assault on a western Azerbaijani city and are close to encircling it, military officials said today.
More than 100 soldiers and civilians were reported killed in an attack today on the city, Agdam.
There was no independent confirmation of the toll.


Finding of 3d Body Raises More Questions About Ship
For the third time this week, the body of an Asian man believed to have been a passenger on a stricken vessel smuggling illegal Chinese immigrants was found yesterday morning floating off Fort Tilden Gateway Beach in Queens, authorities said.
If the Medical Examiner's office determines that the three bodies were from the ship, the Golden Venture, the death toll in the disaster would rise to nine.
The ship foundered off the Rockaway Peninsula on June 6 with about 300 illegal Chinese immigrants aboard.


Clinton Wins Key Votes on Plan For Service Tied to School Loans
With overwhelming bipartisan support, Senate and House committees today approved President Clinton's national service program to enlist volunteers to do social, law-enforcement and environmental work in return for payments toward education loans.
Democrats and Republicans harkened back to the initiation of the Peace Corps and Vista (for Volunteers in Service to America) in the 1960's as they voted for a program designed to spur community spirit, broaden access to higher education and engage new graduates in socially useful work.


Corrections
An entry in the Finance Briefs listing in Business Day on Tuesday misidentified a company that issued $200 million in notes, and misstated the location of its headquarters.
It was the Primerica Corporation, which is based in New York, not its defunct subsidiary, Primerica Finance, in Baltimore.


CHINA WINS FIGHT ON RIGHTS GROUPS
In what was seen as a victory for China's campaign to limit international monitoring of human rights, nongovernmental organizations attending the World Conference on Human Rights were ejected today from the committee drafting the meeting's final document.
The nongovernmental organizations, which include powerful groups like Amnesty International, protested angrily that the United Nations had allowed itself to be browbeaten by China, which had threatened to boycott the drafting committee if independent human rights representatives were present.


Nigeria Suspends Results of Vote That Was to Restore Democracy
Nigeria's planned return to civilian rule was suspended today when a commission appointed by the military leaders set aside the results of Saturday's presidential elections.
There had been growing indications that the candidate of the Social Democratic Party, Moshood Abiola, was well on his way to a resounding triumph over his rival, Bashir Tofa, of the National Republican Convention.
Both had campaigned against military rule.


Cracks in South Africa's White Monopolies
From the early days of independent South Africa, whites have tacitly divided power: Afrikaners ran the state, English-speakers ran the economy.
While the Afrikaners conceived apartheid, the English bred corporate giants.
During the decades of South Africa's isolation from a disapproving world, the business behemoths fed on each other and on the carcasses of abandoned foreign ventures.
Today, just four colossal corporate groups control more than 80 percent of the value of all the companies listed on the Johannesburg Stock Exchange.


Topics of The Times; Taming Toxic Goop
Who says New Yorkers don't recycle?
On a recent blustery Sunday, 275 Brooklynites bearing hazardous waste arrived by car and on foot at an exquisitely appropriate site -- a parking lot overshadowed by the blackened smokestacks of the Greenpoint incinerator and sandwiched between the settling tanks of the Newtown Creek sewage plant.
There they surrendered to the city's Department of Sanitation substances like oven cleaners and flammable solvents as well as seemingly innocuous garbage like household batteries, nail polish, art supplies and mothballs.
When tossed in the regular trash, such products have been known to burn sanitation workers, set small fires in garbage trucks and seep out of the Fresh Kills landfill into surface water.


Review/Theater; Serial Killer With an Eye on His Image
In prison for life, a serial killer begins to collaborate on a book with a husband-and-wife team of journalists.
The writers are revolted by the stories he tells them about his vicious killings and by the dispassion with which he speaks of his own brutality.
Soon he infiltrates their nightmares.
Like the Anthony Hopkins character in "The Silence of the Lambs," he may have a similar effect on theatergoers seeing Lee Blessing's "Down the Road" at the Atlantic Theater.
As portrayed by Eric Stoltz, the character is chillingly in control, manipulating his biographers to his purpose and strictly limiting what he will reveal.
He readily tells them how he committed his crimes but is closely guarded about his reasons.
He makes a point of saying that he is a serial killer not a serial murderer, because murderers have motives and his acts were without provocation.


Alva C. Cooper, 83, Job Counseling Expert
Dr.
Alva C. Cooper, a pioneer in college career counseling and placement and an advocate for minorities and women, died on Friday in New Millford, N.J.
She was 83.
Her nephew, John H. Taylor Jr., said she had a long illness.


Bishops Step Into Furor Over Translation of Mass
A little-known Roman Catholic commission has stirred so much furor with its proposals to retranslate parts of the Mass that the National Conference of Catholic Bishops has set aside part of its semiannual meeting here to discuss the commission and how the bishops work with it.
The International Commission on English in the Liturgy, established in the 1960's after the Second Vatican Council opened the way to celebrating Mass in local languages instead of Latin, is completing the task of redoing the hurried translations of that time.
Lately it has angered many conservative Catholics with proposals like these:


CHRONICLE
For 14 years, PAT SALVAGGIONE has watched the world go by from the 58th Street entrance of Bergdorf Goodman, helping customers with packages and finding them taxis.
For 30 years before that, he did the same cheerful doorman's duty at Bonwit Teller.
He refused repeated entreaties from Bergdorf's until Bonwit Teller closed its Fifth Avenue store in 1979.
This afternoon, Bergdorf's colleagues and clients plan to gather and raise a glass of Champagne to send him into retirement.


A Commercial Run For Gurney's 'Later Life'
"Later Life," the A. R. Gurney play currently at Playwrights Horizons, will begin a commercial run Off Broadway in August.


Bridge
The world's youngest bridge club is probably that at Thomas Jefferson Middle School in Teaneck, N.J., where the average age is 12.
A program initiated and guided by Mary Lou Nostas, a faculty member, has generated great enthusiasm in its two-year history, and her group of future stars, arrayed in black bridge-club T-shirts, is now looking hopefully for a comparable school team to challenge to a match.
Schools in the New York area that would like to set up a similar program can get advice by calling one of the following: New York City: Debbie Zuckerberg, (212) 486-9477.
Long Island: Judy Kulic, (516) 361-9490.
Westchester: Ron Korda, (212) 664-4326.
New Jersey-Rockland: Paul Silver, (914) 356-5875.


2 Named at Times Co. Group
The New York Times Company has appointed James C. Weeks president and chief operating officer of its Regional Newspaper Group.
The announcement was made yesterday by Lance R. Primis, president and chief operating officer of the company.


Cash Woes Cast A Long Shadow Over California
In years past during budget-making season, Tom Orloff, the chief assistant district attorney here, would amble across the street to the Alameda County administration building and plead, wheedle and threaten until he got enough money for his department to survive.
But this year, Mr.
Orloff said, "even if we fight and scratch and claw on the county level, we'll still get killed" because of Gov.
Pete Wilson's plan to balance the state's $52 billion budget by commandeering $2.6 billion in local property taxes.


No Headline
"I have been supportive of my wife since the beginning of time and she has been supportive of me. It's not sacrifice; it's family." -- MARTIN D. GINSBURG, whose wife, Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg, has been nominated to the Supreme Court.  [ A1:2. ]


Mideast Peace: Close but Stuck
Israel and Syria agree in principle on swapping Golan Heights land for peace, though they don't yet agree on how much land and what kind of peace.
Israeli and Jordanian negotiators are even closer to agreement and talks between Israel and Lebanon are making modest progress.
Even on the Israel-Palestinian front there are constructive new proposals, with Israel now offering to transfer some local government powers immediately, even before concluding a formal autonomy agreement.


ESPN to Carry America's Cup
ESPN acquired the domestic and worldwide TV rights to the 1995 America's Cup yesterday, the fourth time it will carry the regatta.
Coverage will include the Defender Series Finals in April and the America's Cup Match in May.
Two United States syndicates -- one led by Dennis Conner, the other by John Marshall -- have announced plans to enter the Defender Series.


57 Pupils in Queens Sickened by Heat
Fifty-seven elementary students fell ill with heat exhaustion yesterday during a graduation rehearsal in a Queens intermediate school auditorium, the police said.
The students, fifth graders from Public School 19 in Corona, were taken to six hospitals, where they were treated for stomachaches, dizziness and nausea and released.
The youngsters had walked half a mile from their school to the auditorium at Leonardo da Vinci Intermediate School 61 in Corona for the rehearsal, said John Falco, deputy superintendent for District 24, Queens.
After 40 minutes, Mr.
Falco said some of the students grew faint.
The high temperature yesterday in New York City was 84 degrees.


National Service Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Gloria Steinem's Not-So-Secret Garden
GLORIA STEINEM, the feminist leader and a founder of Ms. magazine, is the first to admit, with wry humor, that she is no nature lover.
But there she was on a recent Saturday morning, a coffee mug in one hand and her cat, Magritte, in the other, in the garden, her first.
It is set behind the East Side brownstone where she has lived since the late 1960's.
"Generally, the out of doors and green expanses depress me," she said, though that does not apply to spaces with a horizon, like oceans and deserts.
For many years she occupied only the parlor floor of the brownstone, and looked out over the derelict garden from her back window.
In 1989, she bought the ground-floor apartment for office space and created a duplex by adding a spiral staircase in a two-story solarium at the back, just off the garden.


Gentlemen, Start Your Golf Carts
It was only a shakedown, the final day of practice for the 1993 United States Open, but more than 20,000 fans funneled into the Baltusrol Golf Club today to create metropolitan New York-style traffic jams, supermarket-type checkout throngs and packed galleries.
And this is before a meaningful shot has been hit, before daily crowds of 30,000 overrun this old-money club, which dates to the Victorian era.


A Farewell to Fernandez


LGS Group reports earnings for Year to March 31


Countrywide Credit Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


A Rising Tide
With two acquisitions this year, the Kirby Corporation, a marine transportation company, has increased its load capacity greatly.
Its stock has risen further since the company said last week that it would pay down $50 million of debt.
That's a plus for investors who may have feared dilution of holdings if the debt was converted to common shares.


It Was Jordan's Party And He Owned the Ball
He wanted the ball, and he didn't care what anyone thought, didn't care about the questions that would be asked.
Was Michael Jordan affirming all the speculation that he was back to being a one-man team?
Would his Chicago Bulls' teammates go cold?
Would they look at him later with icy stares?
Those were questions Jordan wasn't going to think about, not in the second quarter, anyway, when he took the Bulls' first 10 shots and scored 16 straight Chicago points on his way to a 55-point exhibition that ought to be in video stores by September.
Jordan wanted the ball, and he didn't care who was on him, who was in his way.
He wanted to say something to the Phoenix Suns, to the basketball world, and maybe to himself.


WHERE TO FIND IT
SOME people credit the film "The Color of Money." Others cite the flaccid economy.
"Playing pool is cheap entertainment," said Ron Blatt, the president of Blatt Billiards in New York, which sells, moves and repairs new and antique pool tables.
Whatever the reasons, pool is enjoying a renaissance of sorts, both at pool halls and in homes.
To insure a good game, a pool table must be properly maintained.
Cloth coverings can wear out after five or six years.
Rubber bumpers dry out and harden.
And the rails that frame the table often get scratched and nicked, particularly from the cues.


Medical Technology Systems Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Bausch &amp; Lomb Selects Margeotes
Bausch &amp; Lomb said yesterday that it had awarded the account of its newly acquired skin-care products, Curel and Soft Sense, to Margeotes Fertitta &amp; Weiss in New York.
Billings were estimated at $10 million to $12 million.
Margeotes was awarded the account after a review that also included two other New York shops, Altschiller Reitzfeld and Scali, McCabe, Sloves.
When the brands were owned by S. C. Johnson &amp; Son, which sold them earlier this month to Bausch &amp; Lomb, they had been handled by Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago.


Prospect Park to Have Even Less Safety Under New Zoo Plan
To the Editor:
The recent spate of tragic crimes in Brooklyn's beautiful Prospect Park, including the shooting death of Allyn Winslow while fending off efforts to steal his bicycle, raises an urgent question:


Franco the Raging Met
John Franco's right hand looked like a baseball, stitches tracing their way across knuckles.
His right hand, though, doesn't have to throw a baseball.
Thus there was more a sense of humor than regret in the clubhouse today concerning Franco's latest outburst.
The left-handed closer for the Mets split his knuckles after hitting an undisclosed object in frustration Tuesday night, but he was declared available to pitch by Manager Dallas Green.


American Greetings (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Oh Is the Teen Spirit at the Open
His shirt was two sizes too big, flopping over the top of his pants, which were a few inches too long.
And his slender club bag was definitely not the big, bulky leather job the touring pros' caddies usually strain under.
But Ted Oh, a 16-year-old Californian whom few people had heard of until this week, even in California, became the instant darling of the 93d United States Open with his first tee shot today at the Baltusrol Golf Club.


Battle Over Japanese Politics May Force Election
The long-running fight over cleaning up Japan's scandal-plagued electoral system has broken out into open political warfare, increasing the likelihood that Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa will be forced to dissolve the Parliament and call an early election.
Some senior ruling party members said the outcome of this furious struggle was still in doubt, but today most Japanese news reports were predicting that an announcement from Mr.
Miyazawa dissolving the Parliament would be made this afternoon.


Market Place; Refusal by Reader's Digest to explain a warning hurt its stock.
WITH stock prices at lofty levels, the market has developed something of a delicate stomach for news: it is not digested easily, and if it is slightly sour or unclear, there is sure to be a violent rejection of a company's shares.
Investors in the Reader's Digest Association have learned that lesson.
An unclear warning from the publishing giant in February about the performance of its American book and home entertainment division drove down its stock price as investors' imaginations ran wild.
The company's management also refused for months to clear up the uncertainty.


Bear, Stearns Dismisses Ex-Prudential Broker
Bear, Stearns &amp; Company has forced out a Dallas stockbroker after learning that managers at his former employer, Prudential Securities, believed the broker repeatedly violated securities laws over a period of years, brokerage industry executives said yesterday.
The executives said that after an internal investigation Bear, Stearns officials concluded that they had been misled about the broker, J. Frederic Storaska, by lawyers for Prudential.
Bear, Stearns hired Mr.
Storaska last fall.


Yankees' Owner Revives Talk of Moving His Team
George Steinbrenner's on-again, off-again love affair with the Bronx may be off again, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said yesterday.
The owner of the New York Yankees, who has threatened several times over the last decade to abandon the team's home in the Bronx, is unhappy again and is talking about exploring other potential sites for his baseball team, the Governor and his top economic adviser said.


Fore! The Mother of All Traffic Jams
After all the years of planning to stage the United States Open at the Baltusrol Golf Club here this year, 30,000 parking passes were issued for 15,000 parking spots.
Today's chaos resulted.
It was worse than imagined, or even imaginable, beginning at the one-lane exit of Route 24 West, where four lanes of cars, buses, limos and taxis had to head for one narrow off ramp.
Then came an even more tortuous trek down not-quite-Broad Street to Overlook, and left to reach Baltusrol three miles away.


METRO DIGEST
EMPIRE ADMITS MISLEADING LEGISLATURE
Officials of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, who acknowledged on Wednesday that they had provided state regulators with false financial data, say that they also misled state legislators last year by using the data to secure a major rescue plan for the company.
A1.
IMMIGRANTS' SUCCESS STORY
After following their dreams to the United States, Yolanda Vasquez and her husband are finally, like many thousands of other immigrants who make their way against great odds, on the verge of success.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY


Martin Greene Is Dead; Labor Official Was 82
Martin Greene, a retired lawyer, state labor official and professor, died on Tuesday at his daughter's home in Belchertown, Mass.
He was 82 and lived in Manhattan until he moved to Belchertown a few months ago.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


Epitaph for a Living Quayle: Hometown Museum's 'Stuff'
Clarisa, an artist with a mass of raven black hair and only one name -- "just like Cher" -- drove all the way from Milwaukee with her 3-D laminated brass portrait of Dan Quayle.
She hoped to contribute the work, which depicts Mr.
Quayle climbing the stairway of politics, with a cross in the background, to The Dan Quayle Center and Museum, which opened in the former Vice President's hometown today.
She had, after all, sent one of her brassy portraits, with "Liz" emblazoned on it, to Elizabeth Taylor for the star's 60th birthday and received a thank-you note in return. 'Cream of the Cream'
But Thomas Mehl, the curator of the first Vice Presidential museum to honor a living person, refused to help Clarisa carry it inside, apparently not considering it quite right for his exhibit, "Huntington to Washington -- the Dan Quayle Trail."


Bishops Struggle Over Sex Abuse By Parish Priests
Confronting a problem that has increasingly undermined confidence in their leadership, the nation's Roman Catholic bishops today took their first steps toward creating a nationwide policy for investigating and preventing the sexual abuse of minors by priests.
At a semiannual meeting, the National Conference of Catholic Bishops announced the creation of a special committee of seven bishops to draw up a plan for rooting out past and potential offenders, for providing care to victims and for preventing further misconduct.


PRICE CO. (NMS)
Price Company, providing further proof of increasing competition in the warehouse club industry, said yesterday that its earnings fell 40 percent for the third quarter.
It was the second consecutive quarterly decline in earnings for the operator of 93 Price Clubs in the United States and Canada.
On Wednesday, Price, based in San Diego, announced plans to merge with the Costco Wholesale Corporation; the combination would create a 195-store chain to challenge the market leader, Sam's Club, a unit of Wal-Mart Stores.


Governor Florio Prunes a Fig Leaf
Gov.
Jim Florio's ban on blind trusts for New Jersey's public-office holders is undeniably political.
It is nonetheless a useful acknowledgment that some blind trusts are not really blind.
But the Governor went too far in throwing out all such trusts.
Properly used, they can be valuable.
Mr.
Florio's executive order followed the embarrassing disclosure that his chief of staff, Joseph Salema, owned 50 percent of a small securities firm that has built up a disproportionate share of New Jersey bond business.
Federal investigators have yet to charge anyone with wrongdoing.
But the governor is up for re-election, and hardly needs a scandal in his outer office.
So his chief aide is gone, and Mr.
Florio is hastily tightening ship.


Crazy Eddie Trial Interrupted for Funeral


An International Parade on Ellis Island


CHRONICLE
Love blooms in Washington: TONY RODHAM, 38, the younger of Hillary Rodham Clinton's two brothers, and NICOLE BOXER, 25, the daughter of Senator Barbara Boxer, Democrat of California, have become engaged and will be married next spring.
The engagement was announced yesterday by the Boxer family in Marin County, Calif., and by Dorothy Rodham, Mr.
Rodham's mother, in Little Rock, Ark.
Mr.
Rodham's father, Hugh Rodham, died in April.


At Long Last, Mattingly and Boggs Deliver
When the Yankees linked Wade Boggs and Don Mattingly in the batting order this season, they were ordered to attack pitchers every game, make the opposing manager cringe, make George Steinbrenner smile and keep the Yankees humming toward important baseball games in September.
It seemed appetizing.
Boggs and then Mattingly.
Six batting titles between them.
Enough hitting knowledge to fill a textbook.
Enough pivotal hits to produce a documentary.
The Yankees waited for them to click as a duo.
And waited and waited.


'A Rosenberg Cantata'
Leonard Lehrman is to conduct the Metropolitan Philharmonic Chorus tomorrow in a revised version of his work "We Are Innocent: A Rosenberg Cantata," in commemoration of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg on the 40th anniversary of their execution.
The performance, with the soloists Helene Williams, soprano, and Ronald Edwards, tenor, starts at 8 P.M. at the Unitarian Church on Plandome Road in Plandome, L.I.
The concert is being presented by the Prof.
Edgar H. Lehrman Memorial Foundation and the National Committee to Reopen the Rosenberg Case.
Admission is by donation.
Information: (516) 626-0238.


On Stage, and Off
ALBERT HIRSCHFELD knows just how he'll celebrate his 90th birthday on Monday.
After a long day at the drawing board (he works seven days a week), he and his wife, Dolly, will be first-nighters, as is their custom.
That evening just happens to be the opening of the revival of "Camelot" on Broadway, "and I'm going to pretend that the cast party is for me," he says.
In a way, each first night is a party for this man, who has attended virtually every Broadway opening since the late 1920's.
There will, of course, be formal nonagenarian observances for this conjuror of line and perspective whose caricatures have been appearing in the drama pages of The New York Times for 66 years.
Today, tomorrow and Sunday, Mr.
Hirschfeld will be dropping in at a three-day birthday celebration in his honor, an open-house retrospective of his work at the Margo Feiden Galleries (699 Madison Avenue, at 62d Street, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.).


Corrections
A chart yesterday showing the distribution of ethnic groups in Nigeria misstated the percentage for those who are members of other than the Hausa, Yoruba, Ibo or Fulani.
They are 33 percent of the population.


Turgeon Is a Gentleman and a Scorer
Pierre Turgeon of the Islanders, married earlier this month, now has another lady in his life.
She is Lady Byng, the trophy given each year by the National Hockey League to "the player adjudged to have exhibited the best type of sportsmanship and gentlemanly conduct combined with a high standard of playing ability."


When Court Decisions Vanish From the Record
The lawsuit drags on for years.
Finally, the court reaches a decision.
Then suddenly, a few months later, the ruling all but vanishes, precluded from ever being used as a precedent in future cases.
What happened?
Chances are, the losing party and the winner have struck a deal: in exchange for an extra sum or some other consideration, the winner agrees to ask the judge or an appeals court to issue an order "vacating" the decision, as if it had never existed.


Corrections
An article yesterday about President Clinton's relations with the press referred incorrectly to the communications school at the University of Pennsylvania.
It is the Annenberg School for Communication.


Brazil Prolongs Haiti's Agony
U.S.
Navy and Coast Guard vessels ring its coasts.
It has barely six weeks' oil supply on hand.
The worldwide oil embargo voted by the U.N.
Security Council on Wednesday should have marked the beginning of the end for Haiti's military regime.
But at the last minute Brazil got squeamish.
The Council flinched from authorizing those vessels to enforce the embargo.
The likely results: more unnecessary weeks of suffering for the Haitian people, and a weakening of Brazil's own claim to a permanent Security Council seat.


Reitmans (Canada) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Adobe Systems Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Public School Reading Scores Show Modest Rise
New York City's public school students showed a modest improvement this year on the annual reading test, but some of the poorest and lowest performing districts in the Bronx and Brooklyn suffered considerable declines, the Chancellor's office reported yesterday.
And though the scores were up slightly from 1992, they lagged below the record reading levels of the year before that, both for the city as a whole, and in each individual community school district.


Keep on the Grass, Furiously
Furiously, the speed horse who's been in a slump, may have put his career on new footing yesterday when he raced on grass for the first time and won by seven lengths at Belmont Park.
The 4-year-old son of Danzig followed in the path of his stablemate Lure, who energized his career last summer when he switched from dirt to turf and won five of his next six races.
Their trainer, Shug McGaughey, tried the same switch for Furiously, who responded by streaking past five rivals in the homestretch to win a $46,000 handicap.
At the wire, he had seven lengths on Say Dance, who in turn had two lengths on Permit.


Newcomers Find Success Despite the Barriers
After following their dreams to the United States, Yolanda Vasquez and her husband found themselves in a dark, three-room tenement in North Bergen with a mattress on the floor, wondering what had possessed them to leave Panama.
They had no working papers, no job connections and few prospects -- at a time when immigration laws were about to become stricter and halfway decent jobs hard to come by, even for Americans.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a new peace plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina referred incorrectly in some editions to the country, besides Serbia, that is seen by the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government as most likely to annex parts of Bosnian territory.
It is Croatia.


Pop/Jazz; Evolution and Festivals And Finding the Fittest
The JVC Jazz Festival, which opens tonight at Carnegie Hall, has traditionally been the reef that attracts all the fish.
Sometimes the reef has been made of coral, other times junk.
But it's always been a behemoth, bringing in tourists from all over the world.
Though it has long lost the function of mirroring trends, it's still an immensely important event, partly because it stimulates other festivals.
For the last five years, the Knitting Factory in the East Village has run its downtown version of the JVC Jazz Festival, called What Is Jazz?
This year's JVC Jazz Festival, as always, features some of the best improvisers in the jazz tradition, including Joe Henderson, Wynton Marsalis, Gerry Mulligan, Betty Carter, Elvin Jones, Freddie Hubbard, Benny Golson, Gary Bartz and many more.
And it's heavy on singers, including Lena Horne, Cassandra Wilson, Anita O'Day, Ms.
Carter and Mel Torme.
But gone are the late-afternoon solo piano concerts, and to find any evidence of the jazz renaissance of the last decade, one has to search the fine print for sidemen and opening acts.


Simple Categories Just Don't Explain the World; Attached to Big Guns
To the Editor:
Samuel Huntington's June 6 Op-Ed article seems to me fictional and xenophobic.
He uses religious labels to separate "civilizations," which are in a great state of flux and increasingly interdependent.
Having just returned from nine months as a visiting scholar at the Central Institute of Fine Arts in Beijing, I question what he means by "Confucian civilization." Is he referring to China and Korea?
Having visited an entirely deserted Confucian temple in Suzhou (all the Government money flows to tourist sites like the gardens), I can hardly be convinced that Confucianism in its institutional, religious sense is predominant in China; making money in Western capitalist fashion is more of a current value.
If any religion is making headway in China, it is Christianity, again contradicting Mr.
Huntington's thesis of separately evolving religious "civilizations," sealed off and pitted against each other.


Trade Gap Widened In April
Confounding forecasters, the nation's trade deficit widened again in April, to $10.49 billion, as the imbalance with Japan climbed to its highest level in five and a half years and its third highest on record.
The Commerce Department report is likely to increase trade friction between the two countries as President Clinton prepares for the Tokyo economic summit meeting of top industrialized nations in less than three weeks.


CLINTON AND CONGRESS: Base Closings; Aspin Asks Base-Closing Panel Not to Add to List
Defense Secretary Les Aspin today told a Presidential commission studying base closings that shutting down more than he recommended could hurt military readiness and overwhelm Pentagon efforts to help communities find new uses for closed sites.
Mr.
Aspin's cautionary tone was in striking contrast to his first appearance before the commission on March 15, when he acknowledged that his list was based on outdated assumptions of the military's future size, and all but invited the panel to close several more installations.


Computer Telephone Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Accounts
*
Helix Technologies Inc. and its CTI-Cryogencis division, Mansfield, Mass., to Encompass Communications, Boston, to handle its accounts, previously handled on a project basis by various agencies.
Billings were estimated at $1.2 million. *
BBC Enterprises, London, to BSB Dorland, London, to handle a worldwide marketing campaign for "The People's Century," a 26-part BBC television series.
Billings were not disclosed.


Reviews/Film; Nature: Good! Toxins: Bad! Very Bad!
Environmentalists should applaud "Once Upon a Forest," an animated film for children that preaches a respect for nature and portrays human beings as rampaging destroyers of the precarious ecological order.
In this likable fable about growing up, learning teamwork and developing courage, three small creatures who dwell in Dapplewood, an idyllic forest, go on a far-flung quest for healing herbs to save the life of a dying friend.
Dapplewood is a paradise, until a truck carrying poisoned gas crashes and leaks a deadly cloud that withers the foliage and drives away the wildlife.
The disaster strikes while Abigail (a wood mouse), Edgar (a mole) and Russell (a hedgehog) are on a walk with their mentor, Cornelius, a wise old badger, and his niece, Michelle.


A Serious Fratello Takes Cavaliers Job
MIKE FRATELLO , the former Atlanta Hawks coach who became a TV analyst on National Basketball Association broadcasts, was hired yesterday as coach of the Cleveland Cavaliers.
Fratello succeeds LENNY WILKENS , who resigned May 24 after the Chicago Bulls eliminated Cleveland from the N.B.A. playoffs in four games.


Love at 40: Tennis, Anyone?
IS it possible to date the start of an addiction?
To pinpoint the exact moment when a person goes from not hooked to hooked?
In my case, I like to think it was that bright June day in 1984 when my friend Alma lured me out onto a tennis court and I hit the first of what has since become millions upon millions of tennis balls.
But psychologically, the ground had probably been prepared earlier by a journalist I knew back then.
He had this theory that most of us operated, all our lives long, on skills we had acquired by the age of 22.
As the years wore on, he maintained, we might refine those skills, but few of us actually decided, one middle-aged morning, to take up hang-gliding, for example, or learn Greek.


Proler International Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Abroad at Home; Change Is Hard
Bill Clinton ran as the candidate of change.
So, in his way, did Ross Perot.
A large majority of Americans voted for them and for change.
But since Jan. 20 we have been relearning -- we and President Clinton -- how hard change is in the American system.
In the campaign Mr.
Clinton blamed "gridlock" in Washington, the tension between a Republican President and a Democratic Congress, for inaction on national problems.
By now he knows that the difficulty is far more profound.


Del Electronics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


You Can't Cut Costs With Living Wills
To the Editor:
In "Good Ethics, Good Health Economics" (Op-Ed, June 8), Joseph C. d'Oronzio assumes living wills would always be operative when patients are dying, stopping unnecessary medical care and thus controlling health care costs.
But living wills were developed so that patients' decisions about medical treatment would remain in effect even if they became incompetent and terminally ill.


Kash N' Karry Food Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Surgery for Medalist
KEVIN MAHANEY, the 1992 Olympic silver medalist in sailing who is organizing an America's Cup defense team for 1995, underwent surgery for cancer yesterday at the Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center in Hanover, N.H.


Woman Is Accused of Pushing Daughter Into Bronx Traffic
A Bronx woman twice pushed her 6-year-old daughter into traffic on the Grand Concourse on Wednesday evening, forcing drivers to slam on their brakes to avoid hitting the child, the police said yesterday, announcing her arrest.
Witnesses said that the daughter, Margaret Neiss, clung to her mother's leg but was pushed into traffic as they crossed the busy four-lane highway.


Gains Tax Turnabout
A capital gains tax increase?
Tax analysts are buzzing over a seemingly minor provision in the Senate Finance Committee's hastily cobbled budget proposal presented on Wednesday.
For wedged in among the big-ticket items -- ranging from the 4.3 cent gasoline tax to the Medicare reimbursement cuts -- is an effective increase in the maximum tax rate on capital gains to 30.8 percent from 28 percent for those who pay most of the capital gains.


Clinton Plans to Ask Congress to Approve Smaller, Cheaper Space Station
Saying that in even tight budgetary times the nation "cannot retreat from our obligations to invest in our future," President Clinton said today that he would ask Congress to support a smaller, less-expensive version of the space station.
Mr.
Clinton said a space station was crucial to the country's long-term technical leadership and a focal point for international cooperation in the post-cold war era.
"At a time when our long-term economic strength depends on our technological leadership and our ability to reduce the deficit, we must invest in technology but invest wisely, making the best possible use of every dollar," he said.
Mr.
Clinton and Vice President Al Gore strongly supported the concept of a space station in last year's Presidential campaign.
But that support was called into question last spring when the President, under pressure to reduce the Federal deficit and Government spending, ordered the space agency to redesign the orbiting laboratory to cut its costs significantly.
The Administration said it would propose spending $10.5 billion on the space station over the next five years, asking for $2.1 billion a year starting in the fiscal year 1994.
In order to construct a permanently staffed orbital laboratory, spending could reach $16.5 billion by the year 2001, it said.
Compared with spending estimates for the original Space Station Freedom, which would have taken $14.4 billion in the next five years and $25.6 billion to complete, the new proposal could save up to $9 billion in construction costs and $18 billion in operating costs over the projected 10-year life of the station, the White House estimated.
Senior Administration officials said Mr.
Clinton was pleased with the proposals for cutting costs, and would make the space station a "high priority" in future budgets.
"You can and should assume that the President will support this, and that he will get involved personally," said a White House official who spoke on condition that he not be identified.
In addition to redesigning the station and streamlining the program's management, Mr.
Clinton called for reducing bureaucracy and personnel at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to improve efficiency.
Noting that Mr.
Gore's National Performance Review team would work with the agency on proposed management changes, Mr.
Clinton said, "We are going to redesign NASA as we redesign the space station." Cutbacks in Personnel
NASA has spent almost $9 billion on the space station project over the last decade and continues to spend about $150 million a month on the program.
An independent panel that reviewed the latest NASA redesign effort said most of the savings of the new design would come from major changes in the management and organization of the project, including a 30 percent reduction in the 17,000 NASA and contractor personnel working on the program.
Mr.
Clinton reviewed three options for a scaled-down station and chose a combination of the two that most resembled the existing design of the space station Freedom.
That design calls for pressurized modules and solar power units attached to a girder-like truss or backbone.
Mr.
Clinton's plan incorporates most of the elements of what was called Option A, a simplified version of Freedom with scaled-down modules and less complex electrical and data systems, but includes elements of the more expensive Option B.
The President rejected the least expensive alternative, Option C, which called for orbiting the core of a station, a pressurized cylinder with solar panels attached, launched in a single space flight.
Option C, criticized as less advanced technically than the other two, would not easily have accommodated modules being developed by international partners to the project.
The White House said the Administration would spend the next 90 days working with Congress, NASA and the project's international partners in Japan, Canada and Europe to work out the details of a new, simplified design of the station.
A major goal of the effort, it said, would be to expand international participation in the project, which some observers took to mean a greater role for Russia.
"I will also seek to enhance and expand the opportunities for international participation in the space station project so that the space station can serve as a model of nations coming together in peaceful cooperation," Mr.
Clinton said.
Dr.
John M. Logsdon, director of the Space Policy Institute at George Washington University in Washington, said the President's action could make the station a truly international project.
"I read the President's statement as leaving the door wide open for enhanced Russian participation," he said.
Major supporters in Congress said the President's decision to stay with many aspects of the design now in development would help the project retain political support, particularly among Congress members with space station work in their districts.
Clinton Backs Supercollider
On another technological matter, Mr.
Clinton today reaffirmed his support for the Energy Department's Superconducting Supercollider in a letter to Congress, a week before the House is to debate how it would finance the project.
"These are tough economic times, yet our Administration supports this project as part of its broad investment package in science and technology," he wrote in a letter to the chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, William H. Natcher, Democrat of Kentucky.
Mr.
Clinton sent the letter to Congress to counter speculation that the Administration planned to trim the $8.25 billion particle-accelerator project under construction in Texas, a White House official, speaking on condition of anonymity, told The Associated Press.


Daylight for Dark Angel
Arthur Ashe's dark angel stepped into the light yesterday.
JOHN McENROE, whose trademark on-court outbursts had provided Ashe a vicarious outlet for his own repressed feelings, announced that he had taken his friend's place as chairman and chief angel of Ashe's favorite children's charity.
"Arthur and I had a closer relationship than people realized," McEnroe said as he accepted responsibility for the Safe Passage Foundation, the Newark-based project Ashe had established in 1990 to use tennis instruction and personal counseling to keep inner-city children in school.


COURTS IN NIGERIA DIFFER ON ELECTION
The outcome of Nigeria's presidential elections was thrown into further confusion today when two separate federal courts -- in conflict with a third -- ordered the military Government to release the results of voting on Saturday.
On Wednesday, the National Electoral Commission suspended the publication of final election results after the federal High Court of Abuja ruled that they should not be made public until allegations of corruption and vote-tampering were heard.
The Abuja court's decision came in response to a lawsuit by the Association for a Better Nigeria, a private lobbying group that wants the Government of Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida to stay on for at least four more years.


Maurice Turner, 57, Former Police Chief In Nation's Capital
Maurice T. Turner Jr., who joined a largely segregated District of Columbia police department as a black officer in 1957 and rose to become its chief 24 years later, died Wednesday at Washington Hospital Center.
A Washington resident, he was 57.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said a hospital spokeswoman, Dena Michaelson.


Review/Art; Paul Klee as a Master Of Line Over Color
The exhibition of 77 paintings, drawings and prints by Paul Klee at the Guggenheim Museum SoHo has a magical presence.
Though minute in relation to Klee's complete output of more than 9,000 works, it has a particular point of view and a specific provenance.
For this and other reasons, it is irresistible but slanted (or the other way around).
The same could, of course, be said of every other Klee exhibition.
His work speaks to us on a one-to-one, confidential basis.
This is heightened by the fact that very often his pictures are so small that only one person at a time can stand in front of them.
Our Klee is the only Klee, we think, and we don't like to have anyone else mess with him.


Biocraft Laboratories Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


For Children
'Family Fun Run'
Central Park  97th Street and East Drive  (212) 860-4455  Recommended ages: 2 and up  Sunday
If you're a father who's always on the run, an organized race may be the chance to seize a fast-track moment with your family this weekend.
At this family run, children as young as 2 can compete, starting in an energetic 50-yard dash.


Margaret Bryant, 92, Authority on Grammar
Margaret M. Bryant, an expert on grammar, linguistics, proverbs and folklore, died on Monday at a retirement center in Clemson, S.C.
She was 92.
Dr.
Bryant was a retired English professor and author.
She was a past president of the International Linguistic Association, American Society of Geolinguistics, the American Name Society and New York City chapter of the American Association of University Women.
She was also a former chairwoman of the Present Day English Section of the Modern Language Association.


Stocks Up as 'Triple Witching' Approaches
Stocks were mostly higher yesterday in uninspired trading as the market awaited a "triple witching" hour today.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 10.24 points, to 3,521.89.
The number of shares traded on the New York Stock Exchange dropped to 239.8 million, from 267.5 million on Wednesday.


A Stronger Voice of America
It may be a shotgun marriage, but the fusion of America's two international broadcasting services seems a good outcome.
President Clinton has endorsed a proposal that would consolidate the Voice of America with its independently operated rivals in Munich, Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty.
The merger would eliminate overlap, save money and strengthen the Voice.
Most important, the Voice of America would gain greater independence from political meddling.
The Voice has never had the independence of the Munich stations.
But now it would be protected by a new heat shield: a seven-member, bipartisan Board of Governors for Broadcasting that would be named by the President and confirmed by the Senate.


Racing Report Is In, And Jockeying Begins
Sweeping changes in operating, taxing and betting on horse racing in New York State were proposed to Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo yesterday when his special commission released its report on how to revive an industry that it said was "in decline in New York State and throughout the nation."
The report sprang no surprises after nine months of hearings and two months of briefings.
But it did concede that "the reform process will be long, difficult and at times frustrating," especially since its main provisions would have to be approved by the Legislature.
And the Governor took the occasion to renew his attack on the New York Racing Association for "having blown the whole racing industry."


Productivity for Quarter Off, First Drop in 2 Years
After two years of impressive gains, the productivity of American workers plunged in the first quarter, the Labor Department reported yesterday.
The new numbers suggest that perhaps the workplace is not becoming as efficient as many experts have suggested.
Productivity -- essentially, the amount produced by workers in a given period -- fell at an annual rate of 1.6 percent in the quarter, the Labor Department said.
While some economists insisted that the setback was only a temporary interruption for a work force becoming steadily more efficient, others predicted that productivity might be falling back to the weak rate of growth that hampered the nation in the 70's and 80's.


At the Bar; When Judge Breyer did not get a High Court seat, it left him free to build a courthouse.
It is not quite accurate to say that Judge Stephen G. Breyer of Boston never made it to the United States Supreme Court.
Early last year, long before the Clinton Administration dangled a High Court seat before him, long before he journeyed to Washington and ate crab cakes with President Clinton, Judge Breyer spent several hours at the Court.
Judge Breyer, the Chief Judge of the United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit, in Boston, went to the Supreme Court not to inspect a future place of work, but to help plan one.
And accompanying him was not some senator or spouse or handler but an architect, whose job it was to design a new courthouse for the people of New England.


Sports of The Times; At 630 Yards, 17th Remains Unreachable
IT'S not only the longest hole in United States Open history; it's also uphill.
Here in the meadows below Watchung Mountain, about 20 miles west of the World Trade Center, the 630-yard 17th hole at Baltusrol is shaped like the map of New Jersey.
It's as if the tee were down at the bottom of the Garden State Parkway near the Cape May beaches.
As if those six cross bunkers out there about 400 yards were the Raritan toll booths.
As if the green were up in Mahwah near the New York border.


Diner's Journal
Today's restaurant column is Bryan Miller's last for The New York Times.
At his request, he is moving to a reporting assignment in the Style department.
The first column by Ruth Reichl, who was named restaurant critic for The Times last week, will appear in Weekend on Sept. 3.
In the interim, Weekend will publish reviews by other food writers on the staff.
Leaving a job like this after nine years and 3,700 meals reminds me, in a benign way, of those old movies where a long-stretch prison inmate is finally paroled.
You see him gather his meager belongings, say goodbye to his buddies and shuffle into the harsh sunlight, carrying a paper bag and an expression of bewilderment.
Like the ex-con, I am elated to have the chains of forced feeding removed, yet at the same time, I am apprehensive about leaving a familiar and reassuring environment for a new assignment.


Casey's General Stores (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Talking Headache: Barkley Is Tired of Magic's Spiel
Charles Barkley says he isn't interested in what Magic Johnson has to say.
"Sometimes," Barkley said, "Magic talks just to hear himself talk."
One of the things Johnson said Wednesday night as analyst on NBC's telecast of Game 4 of the National Basketball Association finals was that Barkley can't be friends with Michael Jordan and play hard against him.


Hartco Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


77-Trombone Requiem
In honor of Father's Day, Wendy Mae Chambers's "Mass for Mass Trombones: A Requiem for 77 Trombones" is to be performed tomorrow at 9 P. M. at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue at 112th Street, Morningside Heights.
The nine-movement work, dedicated to the composer's father, is constructed from the 13th-century Mass for the Dead.
The audience will be surrounded by 11 choirs of seven trombones each, conducted by David Gilbert.
Thomas Hutchinson is to perform a solo from the pulpit.
Tickets are $10.
Information: (212) 662-2133.


Tecnol Medical Products Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Corrections
The listing of lottery results yesterday omitted a number in some copies for New York Pick 10.
The complete Pick 10 numbers appear today, on page B2.


CHRONICLE
In France, the paparazzi are wending their way to St.-Paul-de-Vence in Provence, where BERNARD-HENRI LEVY, the philosopher with a movie-star following, and ARIELLE DOMBASLE, an actress, are to be married tomorrow.
The ceremony will be conducted in the town hall and will be followed by a dinner in La Colombe d'Or, a hotel.
Interest is building to a peak: yesterday's issue of Le Figaro contained a drawing by Karl Lagerfeld of the couple waltzing.
In it, Miss Dombasle, in her Chanel wedding dress, points to Mr.
Levy, who is wearing his usual white shirt worn open, and says, "Your decolletage is deeper than mine."


CLINTON AND CONGRESS: Medicare; Cutting Health Dollars to Heal Deficit
The two houses of Congress are preparing for a fight over how deeply to cut the growth of Medicare, a fight that has major implications for the nation's elderly, for doctors and hospitals, and for the success of President Clinton's plan to overhaul the nation's health-care system.
Democrats on the Senate Finance Committee said today that they were seeking much deeper cuts in the growth of Medicare, the Federal health-insurance program for the elderly and disabled, than President Clinton proposed or the House of Representatives endorsed.
The extra savings would reduce the need for the Senate to vote to raise taxes as much as the House did.


Commercial Metals Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


GTech Holdings Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


PRESIDENT SOFTENS OPPOSITION BY U.S. TO DIVIDED BOSNIA
President Clinton signaled tonight that the United States might accept a partition of Bosnia that would allow the Serbs to keep land they seized by force, provided that Bosnian Muslims and Croats agreed to such a plan.
Mr.
Clinton, speaking in the East Room of the White House at his first evening news conference, said he still preferred a "multi-ethnic state" in Bosnia.
But he said for the first time that "if the parties themselves agree, genuinely and honestly agree, the United States would have to look very seriously" at the three-way partition plan proposed by the Presidents of Serbia and Croatia.  [ Excerpts from the news conference, page A19. ] Only Practical Solution
Until tonight, the Clinton Administration said it would never endorse such an alteration of internationally recognized borders by force.
But American officials now acknowledge that such partition is probably the only practical solution, given that neither Washington nor its European allies are ready to use force to hold Bosnia together and that the Bosnian Muslims do not have the power to do so alone.


First Cash Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Senate Gives (and Takes) $1.2 Billion for Pentagon
The Senate voted 95 to 0 today to give the Pentagon $1.2 billion it had not requested for military programs but to cut other programs by the same amount.
The Senate Appropriations Committee had originally voted to add the spending, which would have increased the Federal budget deficit.
But Senators retreated because of the political climate, which seems to demand deficit cutting.


Enviroq Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to March 27


No Headline
"I want to make sure that all of us bishops understand the depth and seriousness, the pain and the agony of this problem, and why it strikes at the very heart of the church's trust level and credibility." -- BISHOP JOHN F. KINNEY, the head of a new committee of Roman Catholic bishops considering the sexual abuse of minors by priests.  [ A1:1. ]


Off-Duty Corrections Officer Slain in Brooklyn
An off-duty corrections officer was shot and fatally wounded last night in East New York, Brooklyn, after he became involved in an argument between a male friend and a woman, the police said.
The shooting occurred amid a confused scene of fighting and yelling outside the Jowel Food Center on Sutter Avenue, and the precise sequence of events was not immediately clear.


Executive Changes
COMPUTER CURRICULUM CORP., New York, a publishing operation of Paramount Communications Inc., appointed Charles R. Carlson executive vice president for sales and marketing.
DELL COMPUTER CORP., Austin, Tex., named Eric Harslem senior vice president for product development.


The Art Market
Grosvenor House Fair
London is buzzing this week with antiques dealers, museum curators, collectors and socialites from every major art capital in the world.
The Grosvenor House Antiques Fair is the main attraction.
For the social set, the 59-year-old show, which opened on June 9, falls neatly between the Derby and Ascot, and lovers of art and antiques flew in from all over the world for the gala on June 10.
It is sandwiched between two new shows: the British Antique Dealers Association's fair, which took place in London just six weeks ago, and what dealers refer to as the "Harrods Fair," the International Art and Antique Show, which opens on Nov. 11 on the department store's third floor.
Competition is always daunting, even for so well-established a show as Grosvenor House.
So was the prospect of another bleak season, but the mood among dealers has been surprisingly upbeat.
Quite a change from the close of last year's fair, when 18 dealers (nearly 20 percent of those participating) dropped out, saying they just hadn't made enough money.
Major names like Didier Aaron, Colnaghi, Carlton Hobbs and Richard Feigen were missing from this year's roster.


Officer Is Arrested In Queens Drug Sting
A New York City police officer who the authorities say offered his protection to drug couriers has been indicted on charges of bribery and related offenses, the Queens District Attorney's office announced yesterday.
The officer, Andre McDougal of the 101st Precinct in Far Rockaway, was arrested on May 26 during a sting operation in which he escorted an undercover officer who claimed to be transporting $100,000 in drug money, the authorities said.


Trak Auto Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Owen, in Shift, Backs New Bosnia Plan
In an abrupt reversal, the chief European negotiator in the Bosnian war advised the besieged Muslim-dominated Government in Sarajevo today to recognize that it could not win back much of the land lost to Serbs and Croats and to "look very seriously" at a plan to carve up the country into three distinct enclaves.
Appearing unusually tired at a news conference after another series of talks, Lord Owen, the European negotiator, acknowledged that the long effort to settle the war had failed "in the sense of keeping Bosnia and Herzegovina together in the way I think would have been the fairest and the best."


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Federal National Mortgage Association is offering through Merrill Lynch $250 million of medium-term notes due in 1998 at 100 to yield 5.33 percent.
The issue is callable in two years.
*
Merrill Lynch &amp; Co. is offering through Merrill Lynch $250 million of 4.75 percent notes due in 1996 at 99.509 to yield 4.928 percent.
The noncallable notes are rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service, A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and AA- by Duff and Phelps.


CLINTON AND CONGRESS: Campaign Finance; Senate Passes Measure to Curb Aid From PAC's
The Senate today passed campaign finance legislation that would create voluntary spending limits and reduce the amounts that political action committees can give candidates.
The Senate bill actually proposes to ban PAC contributions absolutely, but it adds that if that is found to be unconstitutional, as many senators believe, the contributions must be reduced to $1,000.


Vertex Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Elizabeth Chapin, Arts Panel Member And Volunteer, 68
Elizabeth Steinway Chapin, a member of the New York State Council on the Arts and a volunteer for many other cultural organizations, died yesterday at Roosevelt Hospital in Manhattan.
She was 68 and lived on the Upper East Side of Manhattan.
The cause was bone cancer, said her husband, Schuyler G. Chapin, who is dean emeritus of Columbia University's School of the Arts and a former general manager of the Metropolitan Opera.


Politics Spells an End to a Tribute to Boren
A $150 million Central Intelligence Agency scholarship named after Senator David L. Boren of Oklahoma was created as a tribute to his service as chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee.
But today it became a casualty of bitterness directed at its founder, a Democrat making his name with blunt criticism of President Clinton.
Operating behind closed doors, the House Intelligence Committee voted unanimously to scrap the program, which had been approved in secret two years ago during Senator Boren's tenure, which ended in January.


Search for a Chancellor Focuses on 10 Prospects
With less than two weeks remaining in Joseph A. Fernandez's tenure as New York City's Schools Chancellor, the committee named to find his replacement has focused its scrutiny on 10 candidates, school officials said yesterday.
As the search moves into its final stages -- with Board of Education members saying they hope to name the new Chancellor by June 30 -- the racial politics of the unfolding mayoral race are expected to play an increasingly prominent role.


Cabletron Systems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


TV Weekend; Dostoyevsky by Way of Jeremy Irons
Jeremy Irons was in town this week, being celebrated for his work not in film, as outstanding as it is, but in television.
The Museum of Television and Radio decided, quite rightly, to focus on Mr.
Irons's performances going back to the 1970's in "Love for Lydia" and continuing through, among other productions, "Brideshead Revisited" (1980-81) and "Tales From Hollywood" (1992).
Not so coincidentally, Mr.
Irons can be seen doing an especially intense turn on Bravo tomorrow night, at 7 and at 1:30 A.M., in the American premiere of the BBC production of "The Dream" (1990).
Adapted by Murray Watts from "The Dream of a Ridiculous Man," Dostoyevsky's last short story, "The Dream" is a monologue.
The Man -- admittedly, I'm always suspicious of characters called the Anything, but here it works -- sits in a mansionlike setting that could be either a home or an insane asylum.
And he talks, directly to the camera.
Staying remarkably close to the story, the Irons character begins by admitting that "I am a ridiculous man," something he has known since the moment he was born.
Then he tells us of the night, one November, when he decided to kill himself.


Helping Children Beat the Odds Against Them; Harriet Tubman School in Newark Thrives, but Only by Working Outside the System
When a panel of experts recently described the Harriet Tubman Elementary School as an "island of excellence," it was referring to education in a city where too many public schools get failing grades.
But the characterization was apt for another reason.
Physically and socially, Tubman is as isolated as any island, a 19th-century pile of red brick on South 10th Street, just north of what remains of the Springfield Avenue shopping district.
From any vantage point across weed-choked lots or from windows of the occasional row house, Tubman stands alone, a redoubt against a sea of urban problems -- and arguably one of the best-run elementary schools in the state.


Yeltsin Promises Ukraine Security Guarantees
Meeting with President Leonid M. Kravchuk of Ukraine at a country house outside Moscow, President Boris N. Yeltsin today confirmed Russia's willingness to give Ukraine security guarantees.
The guarantees would come as the Ukrainian Parliament considers ratification of the first strategic arms treaty, known as Start I, and a related vote on the country's non-nuclear status.


Magic Suit Continues
The woman who says MAGIC JOHNSON gave her the virus that causes AIDS won't let public disclosure of her name force her to abandon her $2 million lawsuit against the former Los Angeles Lakers star, her spokesman said.
United States District Judge RICHARD A. ENSLEN in Kalamazoo, Mich., retitled the lawsuit yesterday to include WAYMER MOORE's name.
The pseudonym Jane Doe had been used on court documents since the lawsuit was filed in October.
Enslen initially had ordered the woman's identity be withheld to protect her 5-year-old daughter.
But Enslen reversed his decision after Johnson's attorneys argued last month that keeping her name confidential was hindering their case as they tried to learn of her sexual history.


Norris Loses His Cool
Super welterweight champion TERRY NORRIS , usually calm amid the bravado of boxing news conferences, lost his cool yesterday in San Diego while responding to comments about the Saturday fight card he heads.


Electronics, Missiles &amp; Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Trump Jumps the Gun a Bit On Success of His Bonds
True to his promoter's instincts, Donald J. Trump announced yesterday the "tremendous success" of the sale of his $385 million in junk bonds, even though they have not been officially sold.
"They were all saying they wanted to buy Trump bonds," he said in a midafternoon call he initiated about the sale of $325 million in eight-year mortgage notes and $60 million in 10-year payment-in-kind notes. 'A Good Year'
The coupon rate on the mortgage bonds, he said with some obvious pride, was below 11 percent -- at 10.875 percent.
And the deal "was oversubscribed."


Corruption in Government-Bought Science Needed Exposure; Not Whistle-Blowers
To the Editor:
As chairman of the history department at the University of Massachusetts that employs Prof.
Stephen Oates, the target of accusations of plagiarism by Walter Stewart and Ned Feder, I object to the headline and tone of "Revenge on Two Whistle-Blowers" (editorial June 4).
You attribute the reassignment of Mr.
Stewart and Mr.
Feder more to revenge by those they have angered and embarrassed than to their own misconduct as Federal employees.


Review/Philharmonic; Memories of Bernstein, As Musician and Man
A mayoral proclamation honoring Leonard Bernstein and the New York Philharmonic was posted near the entry doors of Avery Fisher Hall on Wednesday night.
In the lobby, under a glass case, was Bernstein's desk, complete with pencil stubs, reading glasses, a checkbook and an open pack of Tums.
In another display was Bernstein's scribbled account of a dream along with his score of Mahler's Sixth Symphony (a bumper sticker across its opening pages proclaimed, "Mahler Grooves").
And inside the hall, Leonard Slatkin led an all-Bernstein program, part of a weeklong series of events the Philharmonic has organized titled "Remembering Lenny."


Labatt (John) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Mozart in New Jersey
The Opera Festival of New Jersey is to open its 10th season tomorrow at 8 P.M. with Mozart's "Magic Flute," in English, at the Allan P. Kirby Arts Center of the Lawrenceville School, Route 206 (Main Street) in Lawrenceville.
Jayne West, Richard Clement and Lawrence Craig head the cast in a production staged by Francis J. Culliman; Michael Pratt conducts.
The Opera Festival will present Bizet's "Carmen" later this month, and Peter Maxwell Davies's "Lighthouse" next month.
Tickets are $28 and $44.
Information: (609) 936-1500.


Review/Theater; Episodes From Life In a Modern Matriarchy
"So much of life depends on when you stop the story," a young woman says in "The Brooklyn Trojan Women," by Carole Braverman.
If the playwright shared that conviction, her play would surely be a different affair.
This partly autobiographical piece about the family of an 80-year-old former actress presents several stories: the old woman's memories of love and tragedy in a Jewish village in Poland, the idealistic pursuit of justice in Nicaragua by one of her granddaughters, and the competition between two other granddaughters for a married man one of them has picked up on the Belt Parkway in Brooklyn.
These stories do not really mesh, emotionally or conceptually.
They simply occur in a series of episodes that inevitably remind one of the plotting of daytime soap operas.


Budget Bill: Make It Better
President Clinton's budget plan got roughed up by Democrats on the Senate Finance Committee.
But the bill that is emerging would still cut the deficit by about $500 billion over five years, primarily with lower defense spending and higher taxes on families with taxable income over $100,000.
The committee bill, like the President's plan, would be a step toward fiscal prudence.
Nevertheless, the bill would come at a steep price to poor workers and makes health-care reform needlessly more difficult.
Senate Democrats cut $45 billion from the energy tax passed by the House.
More than $35 billion of the gaping hole was filled by whacking Medicare, food stamps and tax credits for low-paid workers -- cuts that House-Senate conferees should fully restore.


Untangling a Massacre in South Africa
At midday the accused men amble from the courtroom to the lawn, lift their faces to the sun, smoke their cigarettes, unwrap their lunches, exchange jokes in Zulu.
The picnic scene is so casual that it is hard to connect these 32 men with a slaughter that, just one year ago, halted South Africa's transition to democracy and tarnished President F. W. de Klerk's international image with allegations of state-abetted murder.


Bertelsmann Unit Denies It Backed Anti-Theft Device
Denying a report that appeared in The New York Times on Monday, the American audio manufacturing subsidiary of Bertelsmann A.G., the German media giant, said it had not endorsed a theft prevention technology for music products developed by the Knogo Corporation.
Michael G. Harris, president and chief executive of Sonopress Inc., said yesterday from the company's headquarters in Weaverville, N.C., that his company would apply whatever anti-theft device to its compact disks that its customers requested.
"We manufacture whatever they want us to make," he said.


People
*
Avi Dan was named to the new position of executive vice president and managing director of the consumer division at Lally, McFarland &amp; Pantello Inc., New York.
He was previously a senior vice president at Young &amp; Rubicam New York.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
DETROIT TIGERS -- Activated Rob Deer, outfielder, from the 15-day disabled list.
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Activated Mike Witt, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Placed Jim Abbott, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list.


Culp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 3


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about Congressional opposition to the Clinton Administration's plan to resume nuclear testing referred incorrectly to a deadline affecting the treaty to halt the spread of nuclear weapons.
Its signers must decide in 1995 whether to renew the treaty indefinitely or for a fixed period, although technically it does not expire.


Marquette Electronics Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Cruel to Substitutes
To the Editor:
Comparing President Clinton to a substitute teacher in "Settle Down -- and Toughen Up" (editorial, June 8) was brilliant.
I vividly remember poor old Mrs.
Bones trying to control my fourth-grade class.
She looked about 90 years old and as if she weighed in at about 80 pounds.
The class was totally in control the minute she walked in the door.


Gotti Lawyer Argues To Overturn Verdict
Listening to legal arguments on whether John Gotti's murder-racketeering conviction should be overturned, a panel of judges yesterday peppered a prosecutor with questions about why Bruce Cutler had been barred from acting as a defense lawyer in the Gotti trial.
The three-judge panel, which seemed more troubled by the disqualification of Mr.
Cutler, Mr.
Gotti's longtime lawyer, than by any other issue in Mr.
Gotti's appeal, reserved its decision after hearing the arguments.
Judge Amalya L. Kearse presided over the panel in a packed Manhattan courtroom of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.


President, in Prime Time, Is Spurned by 2 Networks
After weeks of awkward stumbles and generally bad news, President Clinton hit a run of good luck this week that was timed so propitiously that his advisers decided that the President was ready for prime time.
But two of the three broadcast networks decided otherwise.


Art in Review
Altoon Sultan
Marlborough Gallery  40 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through July 9
The highly finished gouaches in this small exhibition of drawings and prints show Altoon Sultan's realist art at its best.
Ms.
Sultan's abiding interest is domestic architecture set in landscape, and since she divides her time between Southern California and rural Vermont, with a few more exotic stops along the way, the terrain she paints has considerable variety.


Assembly Tax-Cut Plan Fans Political Flames in Trenton
It will be at least weeks before the tax-cut proposal that the Assembly Speaker introduced today comes to a vote, but the political impact of his move was immediate.
It set off a heated exchange between Speaker Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian and Senate President Donald T. DiFrancesco, while sending both Gov.
Jim Florio and his Republican rival, Christine Todd Whitman, scrambling for safe political ground.


INSIDE
Democrats Begin Pushing Budget Toward Full Senate
Ignoring Republican attacks about raising taxes, the 11 Democrats on the Senate Finance Committee began muscling the first big chunk of President Clinton's budget package toward a vote by the full Senate.
Page A20.
Surge in the Trade Deficit
The trade deficit widened again in April, to $10.49 billion, as the imbalance with Japan hit its highest level in five and a half years.
Page D1.
Political Struggle in Japan
Japan's Prime Minister faces pressure to call an election because of political warfare over cleaning up the nation's electoral system.
Page A11.
Vanishing Court Records
The Supreme Court will hear a case testing the right of litgants to agree that all records of a lawsuit should be permanently erased.
Law, page D17.


Winnebago Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Belize Holdings Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to April 30


Public School Reading Scores Show Modest Rise
New York City's public school students showed a modest improvement this year on the annual reading test, but some of the poorest and lowest performing districts in the Bronx and Brooklyn suffered considerable declines, the Chancellor's office reported yesterday.
And though the scores were up slightly from 1992, they lagged below the record reading levels of the year before that, both for the city as a whole, and in each individual community school district.


Restaurants
The term California cuisine may be as outdated as leisure suits, but not because of intrinsic flaws in that cooking.
On the contrary, the reason the phrase has faded is that so much of this style has been embraced by American cooks of all stripes.
Wood grilling, minimal saucing, wholesome ingredients, a profusion of vegetables and greens: all of these are now found in American dining rooms from coast to coast.
Three years ago Michael McCarty, sort of a reverse Balboa, trekked East toting his flavored woods and baby lettuces and discovered an eager market for them.
Mr.
McCarty had earned a reputation in the nascent days of California cooking with his restaurant, Michael's, in Santa Monica.
He still runs it today, splitting his time between New York and California.


Coleman Aids Charity
New Jersey Nets forward DERRICK COLEMAN told about 100 people at the GQ/Starlight Foundation Annual Sports Celebrity auction at the Paramount last night that in remembering the late Drazen Petrovic he has learned to live life one day at a time.
That's one of the reasons he's helping the charity this year.
Coleman was one of several sports celebrities at the auction.
A jersey and football autographed by Giants quarterback PHIL SIMMS sold for $1,200.


Doxey Wilkerson Is Dead at 88; Educator and Advocate for Rights
Dr.
Doxey A. Wilkerson, an education expert who was a leader in union, civil rights and civic causes, died yesterday at a hospital in his hometown, Norwalk, Conn.
He was 88.
Dr.
Wilkerson, who specialized in early childhood development, served as chairman of Yeshiva University's Education Department of Curriculum and Instruction from 1963-73.


Detroit &amp; Canada Tunnel reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


H.S. Payson Rowe, 93, Ex-Investment Banker
H.
S.
Payson Rowe of Cambridge, Mass., an investment banker, died at his home on Sunday.
He was 93.
Mr.
Rowe had been in failing health since he broke his hip on his birthday in March, said his daughter Barbara de Marneff.


Politics Spells an End to a Tribute to Boren
A $150 million Central Intelligence Agency scholarship named after Senator David L. Boren of Oklahoma was created as a tribute to his service as chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee.
But today it became a casualty of bitterness directed at its founder, a Democrat making his name with blunt criticism of President Clinton.
Operating behind closed doors, the House Intelligence Committee voted unanimously to scrap the program, which had been approved in secret two years ago during Senator Boren's tenure, which ended in January.


The JVC Lineup: What's Free and What's Not
The JVC Jazz Festival begins tonight and runs through June 26 in Manhattan and New Jersey.
Only some programs require tickets, and information is available on all of them at (212) 787-2020.
Here are the concert sites and the schedule.
WHERE AVERY FISHER HALL, Lincoln Center.
Tickets: (212) 721-6500.
BEACON THEATER, 2124 Broadway, at 74th Street.
Tickets: (212) 307-7171.
BRYANT PARK, 40th Street and Avenue of the Americas.
Free.
CARNEGIE HALL, 154 West 57th Street.
Tickets: (212) 247-7800.
DAMROSCH PARK, Lincoln Center.
Free.
MERKIN CONCERT HALL, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan.
Tickets: (212) 362-8719.
TOWN HALL, 123 West 43d Street, Manhattan.
Tickets: (212) 307-7171.
WATERLOO VILLAGE, Route 206, Exit 25 off 80 West, Stanhope, N.J.
Tickets: (212) 787-2020.
WORLD FINANCIAL CENTER, Winter Garden, West Street south of Vesey Street.
Free.
WHEN Today  "SOUNDS OF LIFE WITH BETTY CARTER AND GERRY MULLIGAN," with Cyrus Chestnut, Christopher Thomas, Clarence Penn and the Gerry Mulligan Quartet.
Carnegie Hall. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50 to $35.
Tomorrow  "AN EVENING WITH THE QUEEN AND KING," with Celia Cruz, Sergio George, Tito Puente and his Latin Jazz Ensemble, Tito Puente's Concert Orchestra, Jon Faddis and Giovanni Hidalgo.
Carnegie Hall. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50 to 42.50.
"THE JAZZ SINGERS," with Anita O'Day, Cassandra Wilson, Nancy Marano and Eddie Monteiro.
Town Hall. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 and $29.50.
"PIANO AND JAZZ SPECTACULAR PICNIC," with Dick Hyman, Sir Roland Hanna, Ralph Sutton, John Bunch, Derek Smith, Johnny Varro, Bob Wilber, Kenny Davern, Ed Polcer, Bobby Rosengarden, George Masso, Jack Lesberg, Randy Sandke, Joe Ascione, Carrie Smith, Lew Green and the Salty Dogs, Carol Leigh and the Federal Jazz Commission.
Waterloo Village. 1 P.M.
Tickets: $25; $20 in advance; $6 for children age 12 to 17; $39 for two-day ticket in advance.
Sunday  "SUNDAY IN THE PARK," with Illinois Jacquet and his Big Band, Art Taylor and Taylor's Wailers.
Damrosch Park. 2 P.M.
Free.
"A TRIBUTE TO BILLY STRAYHORN," with Lena Horne, Bobby Short and the Duke Ellington Orchestra.
Avery Fisher Hall. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50 to $45.
"JAZZ PICNIC," with the Waterloo All-Stars featuring Flip Phillips, Randy Sandke, George Masso, Ralph Sutton, Jack Lesberg.
"Soprano Summit," featuring Bob Wilber, Kenny Davern, Derek Smith, Bucky Pizzarelli and the Dick Meldonian-Sonny Igoe Big Band.
Waterloo Village.
Noon.
Tickets: $27; $22 in advance; $6 for children age 12 to 17.
Monday  PIECES OF A DREAM.
Bryant Park. 5:30 P.M.
Free.
"AFTER 45 YEARS: GEORGE WEIN AND THE NEWPORT ALL-STARS," with Illinois Jacquet, Clark Terry, Flip Phillips, Warren Vache, Al Grey, Eddie Jones, Oliver Jackson, Howard Alden, Gerry Mulligan, Wynton Marsalis, Doc Cheatham and Jon Faddis.
Town Hall. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $27.50 and $32.50.
Tuesday  "WYNTON AND JON AND THE JVC JAZZ FESTIVAL BIG BAND," with Jon Faddis, Wynton Marsalis and the Josh Redman Quartet.
Avery Fisher Hall. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50 to $38.
"CANDID RECORDS CELEBRATES THE MUSIC OF CHARLIE PARKER AND THELONIOUS MONK." "Aspects of Monk," featuring Clark Terry, David (Fathead) Newman, Gary Bartz, Hilton Ruiz, Larry Gales, Ben Riley and Jaki Byard.
"Bird Lives!" featuring Red Rodney, Charles McPherson, Jesse Davis, Greg Abate, Barry Harris, Bob Cranshaw, Mickey Roker and Walter Bishop Jr.
Town Hall. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20 and $25.
Wednesday  VIVIENNE McKONE.
Bryant Park. 5:30 P.M.
Free.
"SUNDOWN WITH JIMMY SCOTT." World Financial Center, Winter Garden. 7:30 P.M.
Free.
MEL TORME AND CLEO LAINE, with John Dankworth and the Dankworth Quartet.
Carnegie Hall. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50 to $40.
"THE INCREDIBLE SCHOOL OF BLAKEY: A TRIBUTE TO ART BLAKEY FROM HIS KIDS," with Terence Blanchard, Donald Byrd, Curtis Fuller, Benny Golson, Donald Harrison, Freddie Hubbard, Dennis Irwin, Elvin Jones, Wynton Marsalis, Jackie McLean, Mulgrew Miller, Lewis Nash, Billy Pierce, Lonnie Plaxico, Bobby Watson and James Williams.
Avery Fisher Hall. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50 to $35.
"IN CONCERT WITH CHARLES LLOYD." Merkin Concert Hall. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Thursday  "STANDARDS: KEITH JARRETT, GARY PEACOCK, JACK DEJOHNETTE." Carnegie Hall. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50 to $37.50.
"THE JAZZ CONNECTION: THE JEWISH AND AFRICAN-AMERICAN RELATIONSHIP," with Cab Calloway, Ben Sidran, Randy Sandke, Walt Levinsky, Craig Handy, Steve Wilson, Roger Rosenberg, Ted Rosenthal and the Klezmatics.
Avery Fisher Hall. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50 to $40.
"GRP ALL-STARS," with David Benoit, the Rippingtons, Russ Freeman and Patti Austin.
Beacon Theater. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $35.
June 25  "A LULLABY FOR BIRDLAND," with George Shearing, the Count Basie Orchestra, John Lewis, Gerry Mulligan, Red Rodney, Roy Haynes, Phil Woods, Barry Harris, Lee Konitz, Buster Williams, Ben Riley, Gary Bartz, Jon Faddis and Paul West.
Carnegie Hall. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50 to $40.
"GROVER AND MICHEL," with Grover Washington Jr., Bill Jolly, Curt Dowd, Richard Lee Steacker, Gerald Veasley, Wilbey Fletcher, Pable Batiste, Michel Camilo, Dave Weckl and Anthony Jackson.
Avery Fisher Hall. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50 to $38.
"THE JAZZ EXPLOSION SUPERBAND PLUS RUSSELL MALONE," with Larry Carlton, Stanley Clarke, Billy Cobham, Najee and Russell Malone.
Beacon Theater. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $35.
June 26  "A JAZZMOBILE BENEFIT," with Nnenna Freelon, Ryan Kisor, Jesse Davis, David Sanchez, Christian McBride, Mike Le Donne and Bobby Watson with Horizon and His Tailor-Made Band.
Carnegie Hall. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50 to $30.
"THE MUSICAL WORLD OF GILBERTO GIL," with Gal Costa and the Elaine Elias Trio.
Avery Fisher Hall. 8 P.M.
Tickets: $17.50 to $38.


Corruption in Government-Bought Science Needed Exposure
To the Editor:
"Revenge on Two Whistle-Blowers" (editorial, June 4) objects to the use by Walter Stewart, my fraud-busting colleague, of a hunger strike to protest muzzling by our employer, the National Institutes of Health.
Without the hunger strike, would you have written an editorial?
Scientific fraud wastes money and leads to the punishing of whistle-blowers.
More important, fraud and the way it is covered up are signs of bad ethics, which cost more in other ways.
The problem is dirty politics, incubating in American science since World War II, when the Government started paying for most research.


Simple Categories Just Don't Explain the World
To the Editor:
"The Coming Clash of Civilizations or, The West Against the Rest" (Op-Ed, June 6) by Samuel P. Huntington, director of Harvard's Olin Institute for Strategic Studies, is fraught with dangerous assertions.
While the article illustrates the declining importance of the nation-state, it offers a hollow paradigm of a new world order rife with competing civilizations.
To categorize the world into Western, Confucian, Japanese, Islamic, Hindu, Slavic-Orthodox, Latin American and "possibly African" civilizations is arbitrary and ahistorical at best, racist at worst.
Mr.
Huntington's depiction of civilizations as "the highest cultural grouping of people and the broadest level of cultural identity" follows the logic that leads to the justification of "ethnic cleansing," for he implicitly asserts that authentic, pure civilizations exist.


Review/Film: Last Action Hero; A Hero Within and Without
YOU'VE read the T-shirt, now you can see the movie.
That's if you're dying to find out what a two-hour "Saturday Night Live" sketch might look like given, reportedly, a $60 million budget, some of Hollywood's best special-effects people and an Arnold Schwarzenegger who wants desperately to please.
"Last Action Hero" was written by four writers and directed by John McTiernan, but the auteur of it all is Mr.
Schwarzenegger.
It's his aggressively self-assured personality that shapes it.
He may not have thought it up, designed the sets or photographed it, but he certainly approved of everything that went into it.


Giuliani Backs Rights On Abortion
Rudolph W. Giuliani, whose 1989 campaign for mayor at times became bogged down in questions about his commitment to abortion rights, sought yesterday to remove the issue from his 1993 campaign by emphatically endorsing a woman's right to choose abortion without limitations.
Mr.
Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate, made his statement at a breakfast meeting organized by his wife, Donna Hanover Giuliani, who as a television news anchor was always Donna Hanover but like another political wife is now asking for an appellation evolution.


NIPPON TELEGRAPH AND TELEPHONE LOOKS AT JOINT EFFORTS
Nippon Telegraph and Telephone, Japan's main telephone company, is discussing possible cooperation in multimedia technology and communications with Apple Computer Inc. and the American Telephone and Telegraph Company, a spokesman said yesterday.
"Many things are being studied," the spokesman, Kenya Nakatsuka, said, including a possible investment in General Magic, a Silicon Valley company that is developing technology for personal communicators, which are hand-held devices that transmit messages by phone or radio wave.
Apple and A.T.&amp; T. are also interested in N.T.T.'s help in assuring that Japan has communications networks that can be used by personal communicators and for transmission of video signals.


TV Stations Get Ready For Cable Payment Fight
Lines were drawn in the complex battle between cable operators and television station groups yesterday, the deadline for station owners to notify cable operators whether they would seek payment for retransmitting their signals.
But because there was no way to tally how many stations had demanded payment, or how their negotiations would proceed, the ultimate outcome remained uncertain.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "1993 BIENNIAL EXHIBITION," Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
Works by more than 80 contemporary artists, including installations, drawings, photography and video.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today, tomorrow and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly; free for children under 12.
Information: (212) 570-3676.
"BROOKLYN TROJAN WOMEN," Women's Project and Productions at the 45th Street Theater, 354 West 45th Street, Clinton.
A drama by Carole Braverman about a Jewish grandmother, a survivor of pogroms, and her three adult granddaughters.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 873-3767.
"A YEAR WITH CHILDREN," Guggenheim Museum SoHo, 575 Broadway, at Prince Street.
Works by students in the New York metropolitan area.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 10 P.M.; Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 423-3500.
"TWENTY JAHRE EINSAMKEIT," Marian Goodman Gallery, 24 West 57th Street, Manhattan.
Sculpture by Anselm Keifer.
Through tomorrow.
Free.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 977-7160.
Closing Next Weekend  "DOWN THE ROAD," Atlantic Theater, 336 West 20th Street, Chelsea.
A drama by Lee Blessing about criminals who become tabloid celebrities.
Through June 27.
Performances: Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Sunday at 8 P.M.; Saturday at 7 and 10 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 645-1242.
"THE NIGHT LARRY KRAMER KISSED ME," Perry Street Theater, 31 Perry Street, West Village.
A one-man show by David Drake about contemporary American gay culture.
Through June 27.
Performances: Wednesday and Thursday at 8:30 P.M.; Friday and Saturday at 7 and 10 P.M.; Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $30 and $32.50.
Information: (212) 564-8038.
"WRONG TURN AT LUNGFISH," Promenade Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street.
A comedy-drama by Garry Marshall and Lowell Ganz about a cranky college professor and a young streetwise couple.
Through June 27.
Hours: Tuesday, Thursday and Friday at 8 P.M.; Wednesday at 2 and 8 P.M.; Saturday at 3 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $35 to $39.50.
Information: (212) 580-1313.
ROBERT FRANK, Houk Friedman Gallery, 851 Madison Avenue, at 70th Street.
Photographs from 1948 to 1960.
Through June 26.
Hours: Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 628-5300.
"THE UNPUBLISHED GRAPHICS," Jan Krugier Gallery, 41 East 57th Street, Manhattan.
Works by Picasso.
Through next Friday.
Hours: Weekdays, 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Closed weekends.
Free.
Information: (212) 755-7288.


Research Group's Tie to Drugmaker Is Questioned
The director of the National Institutes of Health said today that the agency would issue guidelines to help prevent future agreements like the one in which The Scripps Research Institute agreed to give a Swiss drug company all its discoveries for up to 20 years.
In her last appearance before Congress as director of the institutes, Dr.
Bernadine P. Healy told the House small-business subcommittee on regulation the results of her agency's survey of 380 agreements between universities and companies.


Cason Outraces Stars and Doctors
Andre Cason received a diagnosis of a ruptured Achilles' tendon, a career-ending injury, less than a year ago.
His trusted coach, Loren Seagrave, was suspended indefinitely by USA Track &amp; Field in January.
But in the mercurial sport of track and field, nothing is forever.
The diagnosis was incorrect.
Seagrave was still allowed to be a consultant.
And tonight, the diminutive Cason defeated a star-studded field to capture the men's 100-meter dash in the USA/ Mobil championships here at Hayward Field.


U.N. TEAM ENTERS A MUSLIM ENCLAVE
United Nations military monitors in Gorazde, in eastern Bosnia, reported tonight that the Muslim city has been heavily damaged in a three-week Serbian offensive.
After waiting three weeks for permission from commanders of the Serbian nationalist forces to enter the Gorazde enclave, which the United Nations has declared a "safe area," eight military observers finally arrived late Wednesday.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALPINE GROUP INC., New York, an electronics and telecommunications holding company, has agreed to acquire Superior Teletec Inc., a diversified telecommunications company, in a merger valued at about $67 million.


Crown Books reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


The Spoken Word
"TELEVISION: A DIFFERENT WORLD," Long Island University, Flatbush and DeKalb Avenues, Flatbush, Brooklyn.
Debbie Allen, the producer and director of "A Different World," discusses her work, part of the Spike Lee 40 Acres Film Institute lecture series.
Saturday at 11 A.M.
Admission: $25; $15 for college students; $10 for high school students.
Information: (718) 858-9620.
RADIO DISCUSSION, WNYC-AM (820).
A series of recorded interviews and discussions sponsored by the New York Public Library and WNYC continues with "The Powerful and the Powerless," with the author J. Anthony Lukas.
Sunday at 4 P.M.
EXPLORING THE BROOKLYN MUSEUM, Brooklyn Museum, 200 Eastern Parkway, at Prospect Park.
"Techniques and Styles in Pre-Columbian Art," by Armando Chisari, tomorrow at 2 P.M.
Admission: $4; $2 for students; $1.50 for the elderly.
Information: (718) 638-5000.
TALKS AT THE WHITNEY, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"The 1993 Biennial Exhibition," by Leslie Heiner, tomorrow and Sunday at 2 and 3:30 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $6; $4 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3676.
ART AT THE MET, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street.
Free with museum admission: $6; $3 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 535-7710.


Harvey Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Three Tied At 4 Under After Day 1 Of Open
With its only defense the inherent difficulty of its classic design, Baltusrol bent to the breaking point today as Joey Sindelar, Scott Hoch and Craig Parry all shot four-under-par 66's to share the first-round lead of the 93d United States Open.
On a windless, warm day that did nothing to thicken the relatively sparse rough bordering the fairways and greens, none of the leaders spoke of flawless ball-striking or brilliant putting.
That fact supported the notion that the championship 72-hole scoring record will be broken for the third successive United States Open held at Baltusrol.


Two Careers Close To Coming Full Circle
One has lasted 11 seasons; the other has toiled for 10.
They were born role players, Trent Tucker the spot-up shooter, Darrell Walker the dogged defender.
They came to the Knicks a year apart, first-round draft picks at the boot camp of a drill sergeant named Hubie Brown.
If they could have merged their skills somehow, become one player, the coach might have had something nice to say.
Tucker was too passive to suit him.
Walker was too wild.
Sometimes it was as if their mere existence got under his skin.


Cimco Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Technology Fund Is a First for China
China took another step down the capitalist road yesterday with the creation of its first international venture capital fund, the Shanghai Pacific Technology Venture Fund.
The $20 million fund plans to invest in 30 to 40 technology companies in Shanghai, a city of 12 million people.
The start-up companies -- some already formed, others still to be created -- will be in selected high-technology fields like computer software, telecommunications, cable television and pharmaceuticals.
The fund will make its first investments later this year.


Super Rite Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


For Father's Day, Jim Pierce Is Given a Ban
Citing conduct unbecoming by a parent of one of its players, the Women's Tennis Council today banned Jim Pierce, father of 14th-ranked Mary Pierce, from Wimbledon and all remaining events on the 1993 Kraft Tour.
The decision, which Pierce is expected to appeal, is unprecedented in the sport but was not unexpected.
Pierce's continual verbal interference during his daughter's matches, along with his highly publicized fistfight with two Dutch spectators at the French Open last year, had eventually led to his being placed on probation in January.
And it had left him subject to a new W.T.C. rule that punishes such conduct with a suspension, a fine, or both.


Every Once in a While, the World Needs a Little Sprucing Up


CHRONICLE
"What is a garden for?"
NIGEL NICOLSON, the British writer, politician and publisher and the son of Vita Sackville-West and Harold Nicolson, will muse upon that question tomorrow at the Parrish Art Museum in Southampton, L.I.
But he would not give even a hint about his lecture in advance.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.93
3.04
3.71
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
3.02
3.60
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.14
3.13
3.69
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.55
5.54
6.76
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.81
6.81
7.79
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.75
7.75
8.72
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.82
5.83
6.54
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Review/City Ballet; Balanchine's 'Union Jack' Revisited
"Union Jack" is not a perfect ballet but it is a perfectly ingenious one.
Unlike everyone else, George Balanchine chose to celebrate the 1976 Bicentennial of American independence from Britain by celebrating British tradition.
"Union Jack," a ballet unlike any other, was the joyful if provocative result.
It returned, in its multi-hued tartan glory, to the New York City Ballet on Wednesday night for the first time since 1987.
With seven kilted regiments marching through Balanchine's stylized military tattoo, an affectionate music-hall duet and the revue-style hilarity of its final navy dances, the entire spectacle ended with the expected sensational bang.
The recorded cannon shots boomed through the strains of "Rule Britannia" and the dancers onstage, dressed as tars, presumably spelled out "God Save the Queen" with their semaphore flags.


Art in Review
'Howardena Pindell'  'Abstraction as Metaphor 1972-1992'
Kenkeleba House  214-216 East Second Street  Lower East Side  Through June 23  'Howardena Pindell' 'Social and Political Work 1980-1993'
Alternative Museum  594 Broadway, at Houston Street  SoHo  Through Wednesday
In her prolific career, Howardena Pindell has moved from work that relies on formal nuances to a passionate involvement with questions of identity and politics.
These two shows trace the evolution of Ms.
Pindell's art over the last 20 years, with Kenkeleba House offering a retrospective of her earlier paintings and collages, while the Alternative Museum features later works on political and social themes.


Applied Materials Plans Venture with Komatsu
American companies have been largely left out of the Japan-dominated business of manufacturing flat panel displays for use in notebook computers and television sets.
But some American companies are becoming suppliers of the equipment Japanese companies are using to make such screens.
The biggest example of that came today when Applied Materials Inc. of Santa Clara, Calif., and Komatsu Ltd., a Japanese manufacturer of construction machinery, announced that they planned to form a joint venture to manufacture and sell equipment used to produce liquid crystal displays.


President Approves Space Station Plan
Citing the role of a space station in the nation's long-term technological leadership, President Clinton gave his support to the project but called for a smaller, cheaper version of the design currently in development.


American Woodmark reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Troops Storm Somali Chief's House but He's Gone; U.N. Attack in Mogadishu Follows Hours of Bombing by U.S.
After hours of American bombardment that shook the city, United Nations troops stormed the headquarters of Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid early this morning, but the Somali clan leader and his top aides were not there.
The center of Mogadishu was transformed into a battlefield as aircraft led the assault and peacekeepers swept through the city.
United Nations troops cordoned off General Aidid's compound, but then became caught up in firefights with Somali gunmen.


Transworld Home Healthcare Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Facelifters Home Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


The Second City Is Getting Ready For a Third Title
Magic Johnson played cards with Michael Jordan on Tuesday.
Johnson saw the look in Jordan's eyes.
He heard the determination in Jordan's voice.
He saw the disgust on Jordan's face when he read articles that suggested he had been bothered by Kevin Johnson's defense on Sunday.
That's when Johnson knew Jordan would play with fury on Wednesday night.


Passed Over, I.B.M. Official to Leave
I.B.M.'s treasurer, Robert Ripp, announced yesterday that he planned to leave the big computer company later this year.
His departure will further change the mix of the International Business Machines Corporation's top corporate management under Louis V. Gerstner Jr., the new chief executive, as company veterans exit and outsiders are brought in.


F.B.I. Backs Plan to Remove Connally Bullet Fragments
The F.B.I. today endorsed the idea of removing bullet fragments from John B. Connally, the former Texas Governor who died Tuesday, in the hope of laying to rest the controversy over the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.
Mr.
Connally, who was buried today at a state cemetery near Austin, Tex., was wounded in the back, wrist and thigh while riding with Kennedy in a Dallas motorcade when the President was killed on Nov. 22, 1963.


Excerpts From Clinton's News Conference at the White House
Following are excerpts from President Clinton's news conference tonight at the White House, as recorded by The New York Times: OPENING STATEMENT
Ladies and gentlemen, first I want to speak with you about a situation that all of us have followed very closely in the last week.
And that is the United Nations action in Somalia.
General Powell reported to me this afternoon that this operation is over and that it was a success.
The United Nations, acting with the United States and other nations, has crippled the forces in Mogadishu of warlord Aidid and remains on guard against further provocation.
Aidid's forces were responsible for the worst attack on U.N. peacekeepers in three decades.
We could not let it go unpunished.
Our objectives were clear.
The U.N. sought to preserve the credibility of peacekeeping in Somalia and around the world to get the food moving again and to restore security.


CLINTON AND CONGRESS: The Budget; Democrats Pushing Plan Toward a Vote
Shrugging off Republican accusations that they were raising taxes and cutting services for millions of Americans, the 11 Democrats on the Senate Finance Committee today started muscling the first big chunk of President Clinton's budget toward a Senate vote and enactment into law.
Tonight, Mr.
Clinton focused on shielding his budget from further attacks within his own party.
At a televised news conference, he said he was "drawing the line" on more concessions to conservatives in Congress who, he said, would lower the deficit by cutting deeply into Federal benefit programs rather than taking the money from the well-off.


Meter by Meter, a Rhythm Is Restored
If Ana Fidelia Quirot, Cuba's 800-meter Olympic bronze medalist, never wins another race, the national hero who had been known for her speed will still receive at least as much recognition for her heart.
Ana Fidelia, as she is universally known in her homeland in that ultimate index of sports stardom -- first-name recognition -- suffered first- and second-degree burns over 38 percent of her body in a fire at her home in Havana last January.


American Science &amp; Engineering Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Lowrance Electronics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The trade deficit widened again in April, to $10.49 billion, as the imbalance with Japan climbed to its highest level in five and a half years.
The report, which ran counter to experts' forecasts, is likely to increase friction between the two countries.  [ Page D1. ]
Democrats on the Senate Finance Committee started muscling a big chunk of President Clinton's budget package toward a vote by the full Senate.
At a news conference, the President focused on shielding his budget from attacks by Democrats.  [ A20. ]  Congress is preparing for a fight over how deeply to cut the growth of Medicare.  [ A21. ]  The Senate passed campaign finance legislation.  [ A21. ]


Image Campaigns For Child Care
Two agencies are introducing image campaigns for national child-care companies.
"DZ . . . where kids want to be!" serves as the tagline for the Discovery Zone, a chain of franchised indoor fun and fitness centers for children.
One 30-second spot, created by Griffin Bacal Inc. of New York, is aimed at children: at a colorful Discovery Zone center, children are shown playing, tumbling and climbing while an upbeat song is played.
In another 30-second spot, aimed at parents, supervised fun is strongly emphasized.


Dance of Unity Is Brooklyn's Rite of Spring


Oppenheimer Capital L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


INSURER BUYS STAKE IN INVESTIGATIONS BUSINESS
American International Group Inc., a New York-based insurance conglomerate, said yesterday that it had acquired a minority stake in Kroll Associates, a privately held international investigation and consulting firm.
Terms were not disclosed.
Since 1991, Kroll has provided consulting services to clients purchasing A.I.G. insurance policies covering kidnapping, ransom, extortion and product-tampering risks.


CSP Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Review/Art; Glass Sculptors Whose Work Transcends Craft
The cold war between contemporary art and crafts is still on.
The Pattern and Decorative movement of the 1970's tried to effect a truce, but negotiations faltered in the 80's.
A furniture-as-art vogue came and went overnight, and craft objects showed up in the work of consumerist artists like Jeff Koons and Haim Steinbach chiefly for their irony value.
The present trend toward multiculturalism might reconcile the two categories, and exhibitions like "Africa Explores" at the Center (now Museum) for African Art a few years ago demonstrated how it could be done.
But crossover figures in New York City galleries are still rare.
All of which gives "Glass Installations," at the American Craft Museum, more than usual interest.
The six participating artists have created large-scale, site-specific installations from glass, a medium long identified with discrete functional forms and highly specialized techniques.
In doing so, they obscure -- with varying degrees of success -- the line between traditional craft and the kind of politically and psychologically motivated installation art popular today.
While none of the work in the show is earthshakingly radical -- in fact, some of it feels vaguely familiar and expressively tepid -- it represents a step in an interesting direction, and a good one for the American Craft Museum to be taking at this time.


Sihanouk Is Reunited With Son, Who Vows Secession Bid Is Over
Only days after he announced a secessionist movement in Cambodia's eastern provinces, the wayward son of Prince Norodom Sihanouk was reunited today with his father and promised that his secessionist campaign was over.
"This audience marks the official end of the 'secessionist' movement in certain provinces of Cambodia," the royal palace said in a statement after the meeting between Prince Sihanouk, Cambodia's head of state, and the son, Prince Norodom Chakrapong.


The High Court's Low Profile
The Supreme Court Justices may be feeling lonely, because they are becoming increasingly irrelevant to the nation's central political debates.
They will have to get used to their lower political profile.
A glance at the docket shows that the Court is not likely to issue any blockbuster decisions before the term ends later this month.
The nomination of Ruth Bader Ginsburg has provoked controversy only over the selection process.
Her confirmation hearing will not -- and should not -- be an inquisition.


Information International Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Year to April 30


Lori Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Dec 31


On My Mind; Do Gods Get Angry?
Do you ever get angry at them?
I had wondered about that, before I had a chance to put the question -- whether the man whom millions love as a god allowed himself anger at those who slaughter his people and their nationhood.
He did, said the Dalai Lama, in his earlier years of exile.
But he found that his anger weakened him, drained him, in his struggles against the Chinese Communists who had invaded, taken over and brutalized Tibet.
So no, he did not get angry anymore.


How to Shoot Baseball: Use Camera, Not Mouth
IT'S the heart of June and the clubhouses are remarkably free of scandal.
John Franco has tantrums.
As a Met, he should.
Steinbrenner threatens to move the Yanks out of the Bronx.
He always has.
What else is new?
You might ask the gentleman with his face behind a Nikon, crouched just off the field between home plate and first base at every game in Yankee or Shea Stadium.


Rhode Island Governor Settles Paternity Suit
Gov.
Bruce Sundlun of Rhode Island and a 17-year-old Michigan girl announced yesterday that they had agreed to a settlement of a paternity suit that she had filed against him.
Smiling broadly and holding hands at a Statehouse news conference, Mr.
Sundlun and the girl, Kara Kathleen Hewes, said the Governor had agreed to treat her as his daughter and pay her tuition to the University of Michigan beginning this fall.


CLINTON AND CONGRESS: Intelligence; BUDGET CUT LIKELY FOR INTELLIGENCE
Defying stern warnings from the Clinton Administration, Democrats in Congress are preparing to cut more than $1 billion from a White House intelligence budget request.
The cuts would leave the nation's intelligence agencies with only about as much money for next year as they were given by Congress this year.
President Clinton had asked for an increase that would have outpaced inflation, contending that the national security requirements in the post-cold war era justified the steeper rise.





For Best Revenue, Tax Cigarettes $1.26
To the Editor:
According to Jeffrey E. Harris, a $2 increase in the Federal excise tax on cigarettes from 24 cents a pack to $2.24 a pack would increase tax revenue from $5 billion to $33 billion (Op-Ed, June 4).
Professor Harris underestimates the reduction in smoking rates that would accompany the excise tax hike and thus substantially overestimates the additional tax revenue that would be generated.


Nomination Expected for Labor Post
President Clinton plans to nominate Katherine G. Abraham, a labor economist at the University of Maryland, as the new commissioner of the Labor Department's Bureau of Labor Statistics, Administration officials and colleagues of Professor Abraham said yesterday.
If nominated and confirmed by Congress, Professor Abraham, 38, who has spent most of her career in academia, will head the agency that produces several of the most important statistics for measuring the economic health of the nation and for gauging the success of any Administration.
These include the monthly unemployment rate and the inflation rate, as measured by the Consumer Price Index.


Westerbeke Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Sweep Nets 2 Scofflaws At the Wheel
Two drivers whose licenses the police said had each been suspended more than 200 times were arrested this week, the latest of more than 1,500 motorists taken into custody under a two-month-old crackdown.
The two were stopped for minor traffic violations: one made a turn without signaling, the other took an illegal shortcut through a service station parking lot.
But when the officers who pulled them over ran computer checks on their licenses, they discovered that the two had been stopped time and again but had never appeared in court.


U.S. Returns a New Group of Haitians Intercepted at Sea


Disk Venture For Japan TV
Consumer electronics companies in Japan are planning to band together to supply software on laser disks for use with the nation's struggling high-definition television system, industry officials said today.
HDTV is available in Japan, but it has not caught on much because television sets are expensive, costing almost $10,000, and only eight hours of programming are available each day on a single channel.
The development of a digital HDTV system in the United States has also cast a cloud over the future of Japan's system, which is based on older analog technology.


UniComp Inc. (NSC) reports earnings for Year to Feb 28


CAPX reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  U.S.
MAY ACCEPT DIVIDED BOSNIA  President Clinton signaled that the U.S. might accept a partition of Bosnia that would allow the Serbs to keep land they seized, provided that Bosnian Muslims and Croats agreed to such a plan.
A1  BALKAN MEDIATOR CITES FAILURE  The chief mediator for the Balkans conceded his approach had failed and urged the Muslims to negotiate with the Serbs and Croats over a three-way division.
A8  U.N. monitors reach a Bosnia town and find devastation.
A9  SOMALI FACTION CHIEF FLEES  U.S. gunships carried out a major assault on the headquarters of a Somali faction leader accused of killing U.N. troops, but when troops stormed his headquarters, they found he wasn't there.
A1  President Clinton said the action in Somali was a success.
A14  A CRITICAL TRIAL IN SOUTH AFRICA  In South Africa, prosecution lawyers are trying to find the truth about the massacre in a black township that tarnished the president's international image with allegations of state-aided murder.
A3  ANOTHER RULING ON NIGERIAN VOTE  Nigeria's presidential elections were thrown into further confusion when two courts ordered the Government to release the results.
The publication had been suspended after allegations of vote-tampering.
A3  POLITICAL WARFARE IN JAPAN  A rebellion in Japan by governing party members over the suspension of plans to clean up the system led to political warfare, increasing speculation that the Prime Minister may be forced to call an election.
A11  RUSSIA AND UKRAINE SEEK ACCORD  President Yeltsin confirmed Russia's willingness to give Ukraine security guarantees as the Ukrainian Parliament considers ratification of the arms control treaty.
A15  Prince Sihanouk's son says his secessionist campaign is over.
A10  Britain appeals to a serial killer to turn himself in.
A6  Woodbury Journal: A radio tradition flowers in England.
A4  National A16-24  BISHOPS ADDRESS SEXUAL ABUSE  The nation's Roman Catholic bishops took their first steps toward creating a nationwide policy for investigating and preventing the sexual abuse of minors by priests.
A1  SPY AGENCIES FACE LIKELY CUTS  Congressional Democrats are preparing to cut more than $1 billion from the White House's intelligence budget request, leaving the budget at this year's level.
A1  BUDGET HEADS FOR FULL SENATE  Democrats on the Senate Finance Committee began moving a large chunk of President Clinton's budget package to a vote by the full Senate and enactment into law.
A20  SENATORS SEEK CUTS IN MEDICARE  Democratic Senators are seeking much deeper cuts in Medicare than President Clinton requested or than the House approved.
A21  FINANCE BILL PASSES SENATE  The Senate passed campaign finance legislation creating voluntary spending limits and reducing the amount political action committees can give candidates.
A21  The Defense Secretary said shutting more bases would be harmful.
A21  NETWORKS REFUSE TO COOPERATE  The White House scheduled the President's first prime-time news conference to coincide with a week of victories.
But two networks decided not to cover the event live.
A19  CLINTON WILL PUSH SPACE STATION  President Clinton said he would ask Congress to invest in the future by supporting a smaller, less expensive version of the space station.
A24  NOW, DAN QUAYLE FOR THE AGES  Huntington, Ind., gave its native son his place in history as it opened The Dan Quayle Center and Museum, the first such monument to a Vice President who is still living.
A1  PEPSI CLAIMS CALLED HOAXES  About a dozen complaints of finding needles and other objects in cans of Pepsi-Cola have turned out to be hoaxes, officials said, and seven people have been arrested.
A16  CONNALLY AUTOPSY SOUGHT  The Federal Bureau of Investigation endorsed the idea of removing bullet fragments from John Connally in the hope of finding new evidence in the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.
A16  Law Page D17  When a judge's decision disappears.
At the Bar  Metro Digest B1  BLUE CROSS MISLED ALBANY  Officials of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield said they misled state legislators last year, using false financial data to help secure a major rescue plan.
A1  SUCCESS FOR SOME IMMIGRANTS  After years of struggle, thousands of immigrants find themselves on the verge of financial success in the United States, and they may soon become legal residents.
A1  Business Digest D1  Weekend C1-28  A midlife love affair with tennis.
C1  Books against the tide of extremism.
C1  For Children C17  Theater: On Stage, and Off C2  Film: "Last Action Hero." C1  Music: Memories of Bernstein.
C3  The jazz festivals.
C4  Restaurants C22  Art: A Paul Klee show.
C3  The Art Market C18  Revival of painting.
C28  Television: TV Weekend C24  Sports B6-13  Baseball: Yanks beat Twins.
B7  Basketball: Jordan and his driving force.
B7  Golf: Three share lead in Open.
B7  Horse Racing: Governor's commission releases report.
B13  Obituaries D16  Dr.
Doxey A. Wilkerson, an educator.
Editorials/Op-Ed A26-27  Editorials  Budget bill: make it better.
Brazil prolongs Haiti's agony.
A stronger Voice of America.
Governor Florio prunes a fig leaf.
Letters  A. M. Rosenthal: Do gods get angry?
Anthony Lewis: Change is hard.
Robert Giuffra: The high court's low profile.
Merrill Markoe: Girl Scout cookie monsters.
Chronicle B4  Crossword C25


HOAXES ARE FOUND IN THE PEPSI CASE
About a dozen complaints of needles and other objects in cans of Pepsi-Cola have turned out to be hoaxes, law-enforcement officials around the country said yesterday, and seven people have been arrested, including one in New York.
Dr.
David A. Kessler, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, reiterated his belief that people were making false claims and that "the notion that there has been a nationwide tampering of Diet Pepsi is unfounded."


Clinton, Praising 'Success,' Says Goal Was Not to Capture Aidid
One day after United Nations forces attacked the headquarters of a Somali clan leader, President Clinton said tonight that the military action was over and declared it a success.
"The United Nations, acting with the United States and other nations, crippled the forces in Mogadishu" of the faction leader, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, Mr.
Clinton said.
"His forces were responsible for the worst attack on United Nations peacekeepers in three decades. We could not let it go unpunished."


Owners Approve Playoff Format
Major league club owners yesterday endorsed an expanded playoff format for 1994, but in a rare development for them, they listened to the players union and omitted the details for the plan that doubles participation in post-season play.
In another development related to the union and coming negotiations for a new collective bargaining agreement, the owners moved toward resolving the issue of enhanced revenue sharing, a proposal that their chief labor executive, Richard Ravitch, has been aggressively urging them to accept.


Shift in Fortunes?
The Flagstar Companies, a restaurant holding company that has changed its name from TW Holdings, may be headed for a turnaround.
The company, which owns the Denny's chain, enacted a one-for-five reverse stock split yesterday.
Gruntal &amp; Company says Flagstar, which received new capital in November, lags behind restaurant rivals.


Review/Film; Blood, Fire And Death, Slow-w-wly
English subtitles do not go well with a foreign-language action film.
If you spend time reading the titles, then you can't really appreciate the action.
But if you stare raptly at the action, then you often don't know the reasons behind what's going on.
This was one of my problems watching "Hard-Boiled," the 1992 Hong Kong melodrama opening today at the Cinema Village with a Mandarin Chinese soundtrack.
"Hard-Boiled" is the work of John Woo, who, in his mid-40's, is being celebrated by a number of critics here and abroad as the new master of the action-film genre.
His first Hollywood movie, Jean-Claude Van Damme's "Hard Target," is due for release later this year.


2 Are Arrested In the Theft Of Tax Checks
An employee of the New York City Finance Department was arrested on charges of stealing checks worth $698,000, investigators said yesterday.
The employee, Damon Sidberry, 25, stole 77 checks, officials at the city's Department of Investigation and the Federal Bureau of Investigation said.


Serial Killer Is Stalking London Homosexuals
A serial killer here is stalking homosexuals, and the police appealed to him today to give himself up.
Since March 8 the killer is believed to have killed five men after picking them up in bars and nightclubs.
All of the victims were found in their homes, naked and strangled or asphyxiated.


EMPIRE BLUE CROSS GAVE FALSE REPORT TO '92 LEGISLATURE
Officials of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, who acknowledged on Wednesday that they had provided state regulators with false financial data, said yesterday that they also misled state legislators last year by using the data to help secure a major rescue plan for the company.
The figures exaggerated Empire's financial losses on its policies with high-risk customers, generally its oldest and sickest, a group the insurer had argued posed a special burden.
Those figures were used in legislative testimony, and reinforced in a major lobbying campaign, to help persuade lawmakers to enact a series of changes in insurance laws sought by Empire, said the officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.


Critic's Notebook; Books That Make a Case for Shades of Gray
HUMAN beings have always had a fondness for black and white distinctions, for easy ways of categorizing experience, values and taste, as though life were just one great big athletic showdown.
People are foxes (who know many things) or hedgehogs (who know one big thing); Apollonians (advocates of order and classical discipline) or Dionysians (revelers in the romantic and the extreme).
Writers are palefaces (genteel surveyors of sensibility, like Henry James) or redskins (raucous explorers of the outer limits, like Melville).
One is "in" or "out"; in Nancy Mitford's words, "U" or "Non-U." Or, as Ken Kesey once put it, you're either on the bus or off the bus.
Recently, however, such amusing distinctions have given way to more serious efforts to pigeonhole the world, efforts that underscore our tendency to see everything in terms of either-or, all-or-nothing, left-or-right.
Teen-agers used to ask each other, "Are you a fan of the Stones or the Beatles?" John or Paul?
Those innocuous questions, used to categorize one as a human being, have been replaced by similarly reductive -- but considerably more loaded -- litmus tests: Are you "pro life" or "pro choice"?
Are you for unemployed loggers or endangered spotted owls?
Do you believe Anita Hill or Clarence Thomas?
Is Bosnia another Holocaust or another Vietnam?


Slump Continues for Big Airlines
American Airlines' parent company said yesterday that its second- quarter earnings would disappoint investors and industry analysts.
Stocks of several big carriers skidded in response to the announcement from the nation's largest carrier.
The announcement, whose general tone was echoed yesterday in interviews with several other carriers, dashed any hopes of a quick upturn in the long-sputtering industry.
Leisure travelers, are waiting for a drastic fare war similar to last year's, industry executives and analysts said.


Public School Reading Scores Show Modest Rise
New York City's public school students showed a modest improvement this year on the annual reading test, but some of the poorest and lowest performing districts in the Bronx and Brooklyn suffered considerable declines, the Chancellor's office reported yesterday.
And though the scores were up slightly from 1992, they lagged below the record reading levels of the year before that, both for the city as a whole, and in each individual community school district.


25 Players Conspire To Remain 24 1/2 Back
The vision of a viable future for the Mets arrived in the fifth inning here at Three Rivers Stadium tonight.
The crowd that had come together at the mound dispersed, the latest pitcher headed for the showers, the infielders to their positions.
There, alone with the baseball, stood Dallas Green.
The Mets' manager bent, picked up the resin bag and climbed the hill again.
Was the manager going to pitch?
Could it hurt?
A search of the record books was undertaken.
Green, a pitcher in parts of seven seasons in the majors, last worked on the mound in 1967.
He was undefeated that season.
Hey, so what that he was also without a victory and had an earned run average of 9.00.
The Mets aren't looking for triumphs anymore.
To be merely entertaining would be enough.


Woodbury Journal; Q. What's Grist for the Gardener? A. BBC Show
The first question came from Sheila Spencer, a local woman: Could the panel suggest something besides a small shrub she might try growing over an old cesspit on her lawn?
It had just swallowed her viburnum tinus.
On the stage of the Woodbury village hall, hunched behind a long table covered in green baize and draped in thick cables, the four touring panelists from the British Broadcasting Corporation's "Gardeners' Question Time," one of Britain's longest running radio programs, leaned into their microphones and mulled the alternatives.


TCBY Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


At Elizabeth High School; A 'Benevolent Despot' Still Speaks His Mind
"I was the black kid of my generation," said the man called Coach.
"Rahway was a Waspy place and I'm half Italian, half Albanian. I had to prove myself, work hard as an athlete, get good marks. And I still wouldn't have gotten to college without World War II and the G.I. bill."
Francis J. Cicarell, whose sudden-death substitution as executive principal of Elizabeth High School will probably end very soon, was feeling good.
It was the "cream puff" time of a satisfying year, although only the county champion track and field team and the unbeaten girls' volleyball team, No. 1 in the state, had made any athletic mark.


Wisconsin School Wins Case On Random Locker Searches
Going significantly beyond the 1985 Supreme Court ruling on search and seizure in public school buildings, Wisconsin's highest court has ruled that school officials can search student lockers even if they have no reason to believe that any particular locker holds evidence of a crime.
Lawyers on both sides say the ruling will give the United States Supreme Court an opportunity to address a Fourth Amendment issue it left open eight years ago.
In that case, New Jersey v.
T.L.O. (the student in the case was identified by those initials), the Justices said students were protected by the Fourth Amendment's ban on unreasonable search and seizure, but to a lesser degree because of the need for discipline.


Rowe Furniture reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Fujitsu Joins Siemens In Alliance
Fujitsu Ltd., Japan's largest computer company, and Siemens A.G. of Germany said today that they would cooperate on development of a new generation of mainframe computers that should be far less expensive than existing machines.
Fujitsu has supplied mainframes, which are large centralized computers, for sale by Siemens in Europe for many years, but the announcement today represented a broadening of the alliance.
Instead of a supplier-buyer relationship, the two companies would undertake joint development.


Review/Art; Shades of a Rebirth for Painting
After a year dominated by everything but painting -- sculpture, installation art, late-Conceptual political art and so on -- the 1992-93 art season is winding down with a flurry of group painting exhibitions, almost all of them in SoHo.
It would be stretching things to say that the medium is making a comeback, although it's about time: like the Democrats, painting has been out of office for so long that, in theory, it ought to be able to do some good.
But it does seem that painting has a higher priority among young entry-level artists than it has had in recent seasons.
With several galleries mounting painting shows concentrating on younger painters, re-election could be just around the corner.
Although these shows hardly represent the full range of painting being done at the moment, even by the younger generation, they do provide some interesting signals about the medium's direction.
Cartoons, usually mixed with abstract elements, are especially hot, as are high-key fluorescent colors, which give some of these shows an undeniable visual bounce.
Variations on the all-over composition, whose roots go back to Jackson Pollock's abstract drip paintings, continue to proliferate, often made of tiny semi-legible images.


Fisher Business Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Five Hispanic Assemblymen Endorse Badillo
Five of the seven Hispanic Democrats in the State Assembly bucked their party today and endorsed Herman Badillo for New York City Comptroller.
Mr.
Badillo is running on a fusion ticket with Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate who is challenging Mayor David N. Dinkins, the Democratic incumbent.


A Young &amp; Rubicam unit's dealings with the Postal Service, a big client, come under investigation.
THE husband and wife who headed a division of Young &amp; Rubicam New York have left, the parent company said yesterday, as Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. and the Federal Government investigate the division's dealings with the United States Postal Service, a major client.
Y.&amp; R. said that Matsuo Yasumura, chairman and executive design director at CYB Yasumura Design of New York, retired on Monday, while his wife, Joy Greene, president and chief operating officer, had resigned.
CYB Yasumura specializes in corporate identity and design projects for Y.&amp; R. New York clients like the Postal Service and Johnson &amp; Johnson.


Art in Review
'Alfonso Ossorio' 'Works From the 1960's'
Zabriskie Gallery  724 Fifth Avenue, at 57th Street  Through June 26
In all the media he explored -- and there were several -- Alfonso Ossorio (1916-1990) tended to the ornamental and excessive, and never more so than in the jam-packed sculptural assemblages he made in the 1960's and 70's.
There is something almost appalling about these "conflations," as he called them, emerging aggressively from the wall, antlers and phallic forms protruding, seashells, glass eyes, metal tools, dice and bits of driftwood stewing together like flotsam washed in by a tide.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Jordanian aid to Iraq in the Persian Gulf war referred incompletely to the aid the United States has withheld from Jordan.
Because of Jordan's support for Iraq after its invasion of Kuwait, the United States is withholding $50 million in economic and military aid from fiscal 1992 and $26 million from fiscal 1993.
Also because of an editing error, the article misstated the year of the Persian Gulf war in some editions.
It was 1991, not 1992.


Art in Review
Teun Hocks
P.P.O.W. Gallery  532 Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through July 2
Like an existential nebbish, Teun Hocks, in his hilarious photographic tableaux, battles a world that corresponds too closely to both his sweetest dreams and his nightmares.
Four photographs here present Mr.
Hocks as a bare-chested sailor, complete with captain's hat and corncob pipe; in each, a different tattoo festoons his chest, offering updated and unmacho versions of a sailor's fantasies: a campfire, a pair of slippers, a Mercedes-Benz and a cozy cottage.


U.S. Officials Meet With FIFA
The formation of a professional soccer league in the United States and security measures for the 1994 World Cup were the main topics discussed today by officials from FIFA, the sport's world governing body, and the World Cup's American organizers.
The news conference was held a year to the day before the World Cup's opening ceremonies in Chicago.
The officials said that all the sites, except for Stanford Stadium in Palo Alto, Calif., are on schedule to meet FIFA's standards for cup sites.


Court Says Government May Pay For Interpreter in Religious School
The Supreme Court ruled today that the Constitution permits using government money to pay for a sign-language interpreter to accompany a deaf child to a parochial school.
The 5-to-4 decision marked the first time in decades of constitutional debate over aid to parochial schools that the Court has allowed a public employee to be part of a religious school's instructional program.


Happy Hour On Hold In Chicago
"Take some of that wood down, take the plywood off the windows," shouted Charles Barkley to the mass of reporters as he entered the locker room after the game.
"There ain't gonna be no riots tonight."
A broad smile creased his face.
Chicago, it was now expected, would be quiet tonight.
There would be no citywide celebration, unruly or otherwise.


Hearing Set on July 20 On Nominee for Court
The Senate Judiciary Committee today set July 20 for the start of confirmation hearings on the nomination of Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg to the Supreme Court.
The announcement by the committee chairman, Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, means that Judge Ginsburg could be sworn in as an Associate Justice by the first week of August.
That would allow her to begin familiarizing herself with the Supreme Court's voluminous caseload in advance of the fall term, which begins Oct. 4.


Mr. Clinton: Don't Bury Bosnia
Seeing that no outside power means to deny it total military victory, Serbia now drops all pretense.
Yes, its real goal is to destroy and dismember Bosnia, not merely to protect the interests of Bosnian Serbs.
Yes, it fully intends to keep most of the territory it has forcibly seized and to turn it into an ethnically cleansed Serbian state.
And yes, it is happy to parcel out most of the rest to its sometime enemy, sometime ally Croatia.
As for the Bosnian Government, the Serbs and Croats generously offer it full title to two tiny pockets of leftover mostly-Muslim territory, provided it signs on to the partition plan right away.


Smoke in the Prison Cell
Prison inmates may have a constitutional right not to be confined with chain-smoking cellmates, the Supreme Court ruled.
Page 8.


Suns Shake and Roll; Bulls Rattle
The scary part for the Bulls tonight was that they came out ready to win their third straight championship, ready to play, but had the play taken away from them by the Phoenix Suns.
They couldn't stop a rookie named Richard Dumas.
They never had more than a 1-point lead, and that happened just once.
They had no way to stop Charles Barkley from the low post and Kevin Johnson from penetrating the lane.
"They certainly rattled us," Michael Jordan said with a sigh after the Suns clouded the Bulls' three-peat plans with a 108-98 victory tonight at Chicago Stadium.
"We have two more opportunities to make this happen."


Firm Is Leaving the Trade Center
Deloitte &amp; Touche, an accounting firm that is one of the World Trade Center's largest tenants, has decided not to move back to the complex.
The firm, the only tenant that never returned to the center after the explosion on Feb. 26, had been considering relocating even before the bombing and said it was not leaving out of dissatisfaction with the Port Authority's response to the disaster.


Success on Ice: Islanders Raise Ticket Prices
The surprising success of the Islanders is being followed by an eye-opening increase in the price of their tickets.
Season-subscription holders will pay as much as $7 more a game, according to a letter recently sent by the team.
Prices for individual tickets sold for single games have not yet been announced.
Rates for season seats will increase as follows: tickets that cost $26.50 last season will go up to $32; $22 tickets will be raised, depending on location, to $26 or $29, and $16 tickets will increase to $20.


Company Briefs
MIRAMAR HOTEL AND INVESTMENT CO., Hong Kong, said that Henderson Investment had bought a 34.78 percent stake in the company.
SANTA ANITA COS., Arcadia, Calif., will convert its apartment and industrial properties into a new real estate investment trust to raise $60 million through an initial public offering of common shares.
The money will be used to eliminate debt and invest in real estate in California and Texas.


State Dept. Says President Has Chosen an Israel Envoy
President Clinton has decided to appoint Edward P. Djerejian, who is now Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs, as Ambassador to Israel, a State Department spokesman, Michael McCurry, said today.
Mr.
Djerejian, a career Foreign Service officer, who has been Ambassador to Syria, is expected to assume his new post at the end of the year.
He has also served in Jordan, Morocco, Lebanon and the Soviet Union.


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Doxey A. Wilkerson, an educator who lived in Norwalk, Conn., referred incorrectly to two organizations for which he worked.
They are the Jefferson School of Social Science and the American Jewish Congress, not the Jefferson School of Social Change and the National Jewish Congress.


Janzen Watches the Birdies Fall and Ties an Open Record
With a burst of birdies through the heart of Baltusrol's back nine, Lee Janzen shot his second consecutive 67 today to take a two-stroke lead in the 93d United States Open.
Propelled by a hot 3-2-3 run on the 11th, 12th and 13th holes, the 28-year-old Janzen finished with a 36-hole total of six-under-par 134, two strokes better than Tom Watson and Payne Stewart.


Parkway Chase and Shootout Follow Botched Holdup
An armed bank robbery this morning touched off a high-speed 35-minute car chase marked by repeated exchanges of gunfire on some of the busiest highways in Rockland County, N.Y., and Bergen County, N.J.
About 100 shots were fired by the fleeing suspects and the pursuing police over the 30 miles of the chase.
The pursuit began at Pearl River High School in Rockland about 9:15 A.M and ended about 9:50 with the capture of four suspects as they ran from a stolen getaway car into woods beside the Garden State Parkway in this Bergen County suburb, law-enforcement officials said.


Q &amp; A
Tax on Home Sale Q. How is the capital gains tax determined when I sell a home and buy another at a higher price?
GOLDIE SHAPIRO, Manhattan A. The capital gains tax on all or part of the profits from the sale of a principal residence may be deferred if you buy or build a new principal residence within two years before or after selling the old home.
In addition, taxpayers 55 or older are entitled to a one-time exclusion of a gain up to $125,000 from the sale of a home.


Nigeria Rights Group Cites Opposition's Gains
A Nigerian human rights group defied the military authorities today by publishing what it said were the final results of last Saturday's presidential election.
As expected, the results showed that Moshood Abiola, a wealthy publishing and shipping magnate and the candidate of the Social Democratic Party, had won 19 of the country's 30 states, with 11 going to Bashir Tofa, the standard-bearer of the National Republican Convention.


Sidney Kaplan, 80, Scholar on Culture Of Black Americans
Sidney Kaplan, a leading scholar of black culture and history in America and an analyst of how blacks are portrayed, died Tuesday at a hospital in his hometown, Northampton, Mass.
He was 80.
The cause was heart disease, his family said.


Bureaucratic Monster, a New Tax Form, Eats Italy
The cartoonists have depicted it as something between a maze and a monster -- a tangle from which there is no escape, a prehistoric carnivore devouring the country.
Psychologists have called it the fruit of a pathological obsession by crazed bureaucrats.
Hyperbole?
Maybe, especially when the object under comparison is just an annual tax return.


Bishops Pass Resolution Warning Against Abortion in Health Plan
The nation's Roman Catholic bishops passed a resolution today underscoring their previous warnings that abortion coverage could jeopardize passage of a national health-care plan.
"As longtime advocates of health-care reforms, we appeal to the leaders of the nation to avoid a divisive and polarizing dispute," the bishops said in a resolution passed late today at the semiannual meeting of the National Conference of Catholic Bishops.
"The common good is not advanced when advocates of so-called 'choice' compel taxpayers to fund what we and many others are convinced is the destruction of human life."


Hot Weather Slows Even the Best of Sports


Theater in Review
Presented by Jewish Repertory Theater, Ran Avni, artistic director; Edward M. Cohen, associate director; in association with the 92d Street Y.M.-Y.W.H.A. and Mary Ellen Ashley.
WITH: Robert Ari, Gabriel Barre, Donna Ellis, Tim Ewing, Gordon Greenberg, Grace Greig, Tom Gualtieri, Roslyn Kind, Genette Lane, Lauren Mitchell and Roy Alan Wilson.


Badillo's Late Entry Complicates Comptroller Race
The race for New York City comptroller seemed simple two months ago.
It was a two-way matchup between Alan G. Hevesi, a little-known Assemblyman from Queens who had some impressive endorsements, and Elizabeth Holtzman, the formidable and battle-scarred incumbent who had been struggling under the weight of a conflict-of-interest investigation.
But the late entry of Herman Badillo has added a volatile element to the race, although Ms.
Holtzman retains a heavy advantage in early polls and some political strategists say she is too far in front to be caught.


Tartabull Hears Real Bronx Cheers
The sound was sweet.
Danny Tartabull's bat crushed the baseball and it could have been a rocket launching.
The sight was stunning.
The ball rose rapidly and zoomed into the Yankee bullpen like a bullet.
The scene after the mammoth three-run homer produced a Tartabull smile and some overdue satisfaction.
It was his first homer at Yankee Stadium this season.
The relentless booing that had plagued Tartabull in the Bronx was transformed into applause for at least one evening because of a memorable 455-foot blast off rookie Eddie Guardado in the first inning, the longest homer at Yankee Stadium this season.
Tartabull's first homer in 72 at-bats in the Bronx and his first hit in 16 at-bats created an early cushion, and Jimmy Key and two relievers completed the rest of the equation by squelching the Twins and pacing the Yankees to a 5-0 victory last night.


A New Name for Winning: Losing
During the mid-1970's, Navy planners studied the prospect of fighting the Soviet Union in the Atlantic and Pacific theaters with a fleet they expected to be half the size of the one that operated during the Vietnam War.
Making the best of a bad situation, they devised the "swing strategy." It called for a rapid and successful operation in the Pacific and redeployment of part of the Pacific Fleet to save the day for embattled Atlantic units.
Few naval officers -- and even fewer naval analysts -- took the idea seriously.
There were too many unknowns.
Would the Soviet Union lose quickly enough in the Pacific?
What would be the level of American losses?
How would the war unfold in the Atlantic and in Europe?
Would the Pacific forces transit safely to the Atlantic?
Would they arrive in time or would the war on land have already been decided?
No one could answer these questions, though Pentagon operations analysts tried mightily to do so.


Help for the Elderly On Medical Claims
To the Editor:
"Sorting Out the Medical Claims Jumble" (Your Money pages, June 5) illustrates how many people need help to make their way through the maze of medical bills, claim forms and insurance policies.
Many of the elderly and their families or caretakers find it especially difficult to understand their medical insurance needs and medical claims.


Theater in Review
Prime Time Prophet  Players Theater 115 Macdougal Street Greenwich Village  Music and lyrics by Kevin Connors; book by Randy Buck; directed by Kevin Connors; set by Don Jensen; lighting by John Michael Deegan; costumes by David Robinson; musical direction and vocal arrangements by David Wolfson; production stage manager, James Schilling.
Presented by the Prophet Company Limited.
WITH: Janet Aldrich, David Brand, Beth Glover, Jonathan Hadley and Marcus Maurice.


High Court Decides 16 States Owe Federal Retirees for Illegal Taxes
A Supreme Court decision today made a four-year-old tax ruling by the Justices retroactive and raised the possibility that 16 states would have to pay huge tax refunds to retired Federal workers who did not get a tax break that the states gave their own retired employees.
The Court left it up to those states to come up with a remedy.
Depending on state law, alternatives to a lump-sum refund, like future tax credits, might be available.
But the 7-to-2 ruling was clearly a blow to states that had hoped to avoid any liability, including New York, which had prevailed on the question in a recent state court ruling.


CHRONICLE
What happens when you put ROSEANNE ARNOLD, ROGER CLINTON, RICHARD VIGUERIE and ALEXANDRA PENNEY in the same room?
"Comedic mayhem" was one way to describe it, said FRANK GANNON, whose idea it was to assemble this eclectic group: the comedian, the President's singing half brother, the direct-mail and fund-raising expert of the political right and the editor in chief of Self magazine.
They made up a panel for a new cable television talk show called "Politically Incorrect," billed as a "McLaughlin Group" with humor.
The weekly series, which goes on the air on July 25 on the Comedy Central cable network, is produced by HBO Downtown Productions.
"It was the most ill-assorted bunch, like a crazy quilt of people," said Ms.
Penney, whose new book, "How to Make Love to a Man (Safely)" was recently published by a Crown imprint.
"But a quilt is sewn together, and this was fission."


Harrah's Ends Riverboat Casino Plan
Citing potential saturation of the market in Biloxi, Miss., Promus Companies Inc. said yesterday that its Harrah's Casino Hotels subsidiary was abandoning plans for a riverboat casino in that Gulf Coast city.
At the same time, it announced it would invest in a $150 million joint venture for a riverboat casino and entertainment complex in the St.
Louis suburb of Maryland Heights, Mo.


Currencies and Diplomacy Get Jolt From Tokyo; Turmoil Amid Crucial Economic Talks
The stunning political upheaval in Japan could jeopardize important trade talks with the United States as well as next month's Group of Seven summit meeting in Tokyo, analysts and officials said today.
Political paralysis resulting from the turmoil could also delay additional measures to stimulate Japan's limp economy.
According to new figures released today, the Japanese economy is showing the first signs, albeit feeble ones, of recovering from its worst slump in two decades.


There's Lots of Blue Among the Greens
It has become a fact of sporting life: fear of terrorists and random acts of violence.
But the verdant, leisurely environment of a golf tournament is hardly the place to expect Super Bowl- or Olympic-type security.
Yet two S.W.A.T. teams and a helicopter are on standby alert for the United States Open at the Baltusrol Golf Club, according to a Springfield police detective.


Service for Algernon Black
A memorial service for Algernon D. Black, leader emeritus of the New York Society for Ethical Culture, will be held at 2 P.M. tomorrow in the society's Meeting House, 2 East 64th Street at the corner of Central Park West.
Mr.
Black died on May 9 at a nursing home in Rye, N.Y.
He was 92.


Religion Notes
Sing Sing Theologians
In this season of commencements, most graduates get their diplomas and walk out the door.
But the 14 men who received master's degrees from New York Theological Seminary this week still have more time to do.
They are all inmates at the Sing Sing Correctional Facility, serving time for armed robbery, murder, drug dealing and other felonies.
The new graduates brought to 147 the number of inmates who have finished the prison program since it was started 10 years ago at the penitentiary.
All their training takes place within the prison walls, taught by seminary professors who commute to the fortress-like prison overlooking the Hudson in Ossining, N.Y.


Clinton Shift on Bosnia Reflects Despair of Mediation
President Clinton's decision to accept the possibility of the ethnic partition of Bosnia reflects a consensus among his top advisers that the United States is incapable of mediating the 14-month war and unwilling to take military action to stop it.
Mr.
Clinton's comments during a news conference on Thursday night reflect the latest -- and most dramatic -- shift in his thinking on Bosnia and raise doubts about his Administration's commitments to recognized territorial borders.


The Many Advantages Of a Hybrid Company
NEW YORK and New Jersey are expected to enact legislation soon allowing privately owned businesses and partnerships to organize as limited liability companies, which combine the tax advantages of a partnership with the legal protection of incorporation.
California and a dozen other states are considering similar proposals, and 31 states already recognize limited liability companies -- so named because liability for such things as legal judgments against a company or bankruptcy are limited to the entity's assets like a corporation.
These businesses do not put their owners' personal assets at risk beyond their original investment.


Navy Defines Sexual Harassment With the Colors of Traffic Lights
Washington is famous for its ominous reds -- red tape, red ink, the red phone.
Now there is also the red zone, the Navy's effort to offer simple, "bumper sticker" instructions on curbing sexual harassment.
With a few succinct phrases, recently sent to all commanding officers in a quarterly information packet called the "Captain's Call Kit," the Department of the Navy tries to answer a question that has obsessed and confounded the nation since the Navy's Tailhook scandal and Capitol Hill's Anita Hill-Clarence Thomas hearings: "What Is Sexual Harassment?"


Emil Lence, 76, Dies; Was Boxing Promoter
Emil Lence, a one-time dress manufacturer who parlayed an unlikely investment in a skating rink into a career as a boxing promoter, died Wednesday at a nursing home in Delray Beach, Fla.
He was 76.
His family said the cause of death was complications from diabetes.


Divorced Women: Know Your Social Security Benefits
Older women who have been divorced for many years may not be taking full advantage of their Social Security benefits.
Divorced women generally can collect the spousal portion of their former husband's Social Security pension if the marriage lasted 10 years and the divorce is at least two years old.


U.N. Warns Iraq on Its Ban Of Cameras at Weapon Sites
The Security Council warned Iraq today of "serious consequences" if it continued to reject the installation of video cameras at weapons sites and to refuse the transfer of chemical weapons equipment to a destruction site.
The statement came after a meeting with the head of the commission charged with destroying Iraq's chemical weapons, Rolf Ekeus.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about the Middle East peace talks referred incorrectly in some editions to the spokeswoman for the Palestinian delegation.
She is Hanan Ashrawi.


Auerbach Undergoes Heart Surgery
Celtics President RED AUERBACH underwent open-heart surgery yesterday at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, said MARTIN BANDER, a medical center spokesman.


Sampras May Sit Out Wimbledon
PETE SAMPRAS, the world's top-ranked player, said yesterday that a shoulder injury makes him questionable for Wimbledon, which starts Monday.


Campaign Finance Reform: Alive
The Senate's campaign finance reform bill isn't nearly as strong as the package recommended by President Clinton and Senate Democratic leaders.
It leaves big holes that will need filling when the measure gets to conference with the House.
That it passed at all, however, is a victory worth savoring.
There was ferocious Republican opposition and stratospheric nervousness about campaign reform on both sides of the aisle.
Ignoring scandals and public disgust at corrupt and distracting campaign fund raising, Republicans have blocked meaningful change since 1974.
The Senate majority leader, George Mitchell, deserves credit for breaking this gridlock with a difficult victory that keeps reform alive.
Seven Republicans -- James Jeffords of Vermont, William Cohen of Maine, John Chafee of Rhode Island, Nancy Kassebaum of Kansas, Larry Pressler of South Dakota, Dave Durenberger of Minnesota and John McCain of Arizona -- provided the crucial votes needed to break the Republican filibuster.


INSIDE
Planned Parenthood Begins New York Abortion Training
Planned Parenthood of New York has begun training doctors to perform abortions after teaching hospitals have abandoned that role recently in response to social, legal and economic pressures.
Page 23.
Elusive Peace in Timber War
Both environmentalists and loggers are criticizing the Administration's possible solutions to their battle in the Pacific Northwest.
Page 47.
Humbling an Unruly General
An Air Force general who disparaged President Clinton was disciplined, very much in public.
Page 9.
Apple Chairman Alters Role
The chairman of Apple Computer will relinquish his role as chief executive to pursue new alliances.
Page 35.


Results Plus
TENNIS A Try for Her 164th Top-seeded Martina Navratilova won her semifinal match in the Eastbourne grass-court tournament in England yesterday and will try for her 164th career title against a player who has never been to a final before.
Navratilova, a 10-time champion at Eastbourne, was a 6-1, 6-3 winner over fellow American Patty Fendick.
The nine-time Wimbledon champion will play Miriam Oremans of the Netherlands for the Volkswagen Cup today.
Oremans upset defending champion Lori McNeil, 7-6 (9-7), 7-6 (7-3).
McNeil was playing her second match of the day, earlier defeating Nathalie Tauziat, 6-1, 7-5, in the quarterfinals of the rain-plagued tournament.
Oremans kept the pressure on the ninth-seeded McNeil by charging the net at every opportunity, including on her second serve.
It was a tactic that gave the 20-year-old Dutch player, who had ousted fourth-seeded Helena Sukova in the quarterfinals, the edge in the tie breakers. (AP) Stark Advances to Semifinals: Unseeded Jonathan Stark moved into the semifinals of the Halle Open in Germany by beating 18-year-old Hendrik Dreekmann, 6-4, 7-6 (7-5), yesterday and ending the German's string of upsets.
The next opponent for Stark will be top-seeded Andrei Medvedev, playing in only his second grass-court tournament.
He outlasted Jonas Svensson, 5-7, 6-3, 6-4, in a rain-delayed match completed yesterday.
Henri Leconte also gained the semifinals by fighting off two match points to slip by Richey Reneberg, 6-2, 3-6, 7-6 (10-8).
He will play second-seeded Petr Korda, who routed Karsten Braasch of Germany, 6-1, 6-2.
The 18-year-old Medvedev, seeking to adjust his game to grass before Wimbledon next week, has soared into the top-10 ranking after a clay-court season that he topped last month by reaching the semifinals of the French Open.
In his only previous grass-court tournament, he lost in the second round at Rosmalen, the Netherlands, two weeks ago. (AP) All-Australian Final in Manchester: Wally Masur and Jason Stoltenberg won their semifinal matches in the Direct Line Insurance Manchester Open and set up an all-Australian final for the grass-court tournament.
The fourth-seeded Masur dispatched second-seeded Henrik Holm of Sweden, 6-4, 6-7 (4-7), 7-6 (7-5), and Stoltenberg beat Stephane Simian of France, 6-7 (6-8), 6-2, 6-3.
The two Australians have met three times, and the 23-year-old Stoltenberg is still looking for his first victory over the veteran Masur. (AP) FOOTBALL Miners Hit Pay Dirt The first United States franchise to play in the Canadian Football League had a successful debut Thursday night as the Sacramento Gold Miners beat the Winnipeg Blue Bombers, 21-15, in an exhibition game in Winnipeg.
The Gold Miners, who were added to the league in February, fielded a team of just American players.
Pete Hamm caught two touchdown passes for Sacramento -- an 11-yarder from David Archer in the second quarter and a 13-yarder from Kerwin Bell in the third.
Winnipeg quarterback Matt Dunigan and Sacramento defensive end Randy Thorton were ejected 2 minutes 11 seconds into the game.
Dunigan lost his cool after a late hit, ripped the helmet off a Gold Miners' player and threw the headgear 50 yards down the field.
Another proposed United States expansion team -- the San Antonio Texans -- folded because of financial trouble. (AP)


'Triple Witching' Trades Push Dow 27.12 Lower
Stocks fell drastically in the last 20 minutes of trading yesterday, as activity related to the "triple witching" expiration of options and futures contracts took its toll.
The expiration of stock-index futures, stock-index options and options on individual stocks can produce striking turns in the direction of the stock market as traders buy and sell to adjust their portfolios; yesterday was no exception.


No Headline
"It's like income tax. If a loophole is there for the taking, then why not take it?" -- TOM PARSONS, publisher of Best Fares, on ways air travelers beat the published fares.  [ 1:6. ]


Young 1 From Record With 22d Loss in Row
Just what the Mets need -- more exposure.
Local television teams swarmed the clubhouse tonight.
A national cable outfit was there.
The numbers of reporters had grown exponentially.
It was not unlike some disaster scene.
Anthony Young was pitching, and win or lose, it was going to be a big story.
Young lost.
His streak of consecutive defeats is at 22.
The cameras and microphones aren't going anywhere any time soon.


Kosice Journal; West Disappoints a Slovak Steel Mill
Standing in the vast, Soviet-era steel mill that remains this city's economic heart, Zdeno Velky contemplated a bleak and frustrating future.
"If we can't export to Western Europe and find new markets elsewhere, it will have fatal consequences for our plant," said Mr.
Velky, a 25-year-old technician at the factory.





Anti-Defamation League Investigates Extremists of All Stripes
To the Editor:
Dennis King and Chip Berlet, in their polemic against the Anti-Defamation League, attack us for views we do not hold and published statements we have not written ("The A.D.L. Under Fire," Op-Ed, May 28).


Bridge
What the American Contract Bridge League calls a regional tournament, the smaller American Bridge Association calls a sectional.
One of these A.B.A. sectionals was played in St.
Louis during the Memorial Day weekend.
Dr.
Arnold Jones of Hilton Head, S.C., won the Swiss Team Championship teamed with Dorothy Sides of Cincinnati, Alvin Steward and Bobbye Caldwell, both of Chicago.
Jones is a former president of the association and may be due for another year of service.
On the diagramed deal he sat South and reached a six-heart contract that became a good bet once West had contributed a light overcall of one spade: the spade finesse was now a virtual certainty.
Since hearts was the designated trump suit, North's Roman Key-Card response to Blackwood showed the heart queen and two key cards, the spade ace and the heart king.


Theater in Review
Brave Smiles Another Lesbian Tragedy  New York Theater Workshop 769 East Fourth Street East Village Through Sunday Written by the Five Lesbian Brothers: Maureen Angelos, Babs Davy, Dominique Dibbell, Peg Healey and Lisa Kron; scripted by Ms.
Dibbell and Ms.
Healey; directed by Kate Stafford; set by Jamie Leo; costumes by Susan Young; lighting by Diana Arecco; sound by Ms.
Healey; company manager, Heidi Sama Blackwell; musical arrangements, Tom Judson and the Brave Smiles Orchestra.
Presented by New York Theater Workshop, James C. Nicola, artistic director; Nancy Kassak Diekmann, managing director.
WITH: Maureen Angelos, Babs Davy, Dominique Dibbell, Peg Healey and Lisa Kron.


Theme Schools Face Hurdles In Opening
As they race to open more than 30 small experimental public schools in the fall, New York City educators say they are grappling with an array of difficulties -- from hiring directors to finding buildings to signing up students.
Four of the 37 small new schools will not open in September as originally planned, school officials said yesterday.
All four will instead open in the fall of 1994.


CHRONICLE
Repentant and resplendent, ELTON JOHN took to the stage in Tel Aviv on Thursday night, two days after he made a hasty departure from Israel, canceling a concert because he had been kept waiting by passport officials and mobbed by a crowd at his hotel.
Wearing silver-studded white tails and black pants, Mr.
John, 46, performed before a wildly cheering crowd of 35,000 in Yarkon Park, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
He said: "I'd like to apologize. In the long run, we're here, and that's where we want to be. Thank you for your patience. Now let's get on with it."


Kevin Seagrave, 46, Insurance Executive
Kevin M. Seagrave, an insurance company senior account executive, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan at the age of 46.
He had a second home in East Hampton, L.I.
The cause was believed to be a heart attack, his family said.


Barking Up the Wrong Tree in the Senate
To the Editor:
"Cold Feet in the Senate," your June 6 editorial lamenting the Senate's continued refusal to enact campaign finance reform, reminds me of the exhortations of dog owners who urge their pets to stop barking.
"Fido, stop barking!" is the logical equivalent of "Fido, stop being a dog!" Your exhortations to incumbent members of Congress to enact campaign finance reform is like urging politicians not to be politicians.
Having ignored these futile appeals for at least a decade, Congress will predictably ignore them in the future.
In your benighted opposition to term limits, you present campaign finance reform as an alternative.
But term limitation is not at all an alternative.
It is indeed a precondition for campaign-finance reform.


Editorial Notebook; Supreme Court Strategy
When she questioned the way the Supreme Court decided that women have a constitutional right to choose abortion, Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg made some pro-choice groups nervous.
Their anxiety grew as President Clinton considered her, then chose her to replace retiring Justice Byron White.
Whether her doubts about Roe v.
Wade -- or some people's doubts about her -- are justified, she pointed up one of the most impressive powers the justices have: the power to choose and shape the issues they decide.
The Supreme Court is the highest law court in the land, but it need not decide every issue pressed upon it.
It can call for review of some cases, limit review to one or more issues in a case, hold or ship a case back to a lower court.
Judge Ginsburg suggested that in 1973 the Court could have used some of those powers to send the abortion issue on a different legal and political course.


Europeans Turn to Partition of Bosnia
Conceding that the United Nations-European Community peace plan for Bosnia is effectively dead, European diplomats turned today to a new proposal for a three-way partition of the country but emphasized that they did so reluctantly.
They admitted that the idea of carving the country into three parts, as Serbia and Croatia are proposing in negotiations in Geneva, had moved to the fore and, as one put it, "acquired a certain momentum."


Review/Television; Music as the Food of Hate: Rock for the Skinheads
The subject is riveting and downright frightening.
It's "hate rock," sometimes called "Oi!," a racism-and-violence virus in pop music that has become an international infection.
And who better to examine the phenomenon than MTV, pop music's global showcase?
This week -- showings are tonight at 10:30 and tomorrow night at 9:30 -- MTV does give it a good try.
But the upshot is an unsettling clash between form and content.
"Hate Rock: An MTV News Special Report," produced as part of a "Free Your Mind" series, goes to parts of Europe, Canada and the United States, along the way providing a sketchy history of skinheads.
Origins, we are told, go back to the punk scene in England of the 1970's.
In Germany, particularly after the 1989 collapse of Communism and the Berlin Wall, the neo-Nazi youth movement and music groups like Radikahl have become more prominent, especially as antagonism toward foreigners grows.
In Florida, we are shown interviews with beer-swilling members of groups like White Aryan Resistance.


Review/Dance; Beneath the Charm of a Work by Mozart
Robin Becker and Company and Ton Simons and Dancers shared a program on Wednesday night as part of the Altogether Different series at the Joyce Theater.
Ms.
Becker offered one large-scale work, Mr.
Simons three miniatures.
His "Divertimento K. 563," a world premiere, proved particularly imaginative.
Some choreographers wishing to stage a dance to the Mozart composition Mr.
Simons chose might have stressed its superficial charm.
Mr.
Simons, instead, responded to its underlying states of energy and serenity.


A Clinton Quip Is Just a Quip? Not So, Say New Zealanders
The spokesman for the New Zealand Embassy was diplomatic, the ambassador discreet.
But other New Zealanders here today were miffed about the way President Clinton brushed off a major issue in their homeland.
When asked at the news conference on Thursday night about resolving an eight-year impasse over the refusal of New Zealand to allow American nuclear warships to use its ports, Mr.
Clinton quipped: "I've given absolutely no thought to that question. And I'm afraid if I give an answer to it I'll be in more trouble tomorrow than I can figure out."


Business Digest
International
Political upheaval in Japan could jeopardize U.S. trade talks and next month's Group of Seven summit meeting in Tokyo.
It could also delay measures to stimulate Japan's economy, which is showing signs of recovery.  [ Page 35. ]  The dollar ended higher against the yen, raising hopes that the string of recent postwar lows had ended.
The dollar also rose against the mark.  [ 35. ]


Currencies and Diplomacy Get Jolt From Tokyo
In a move that could not be better timed for American tourists, the dollar rallied sharply yesterday against the German mark and other European currencies and, suddenly, against the Japanese yen.
In a hectic day of global trading, the dollar ended 2.3 percent higher against the yen after a political revolt in Japan apparently doomed the Government of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa and threatened to end four decades of rule by his Liberal Democratic Party.


Senator Specter Released After Brain Surgery


New York's Troubled Giant
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield is the largest of a network of 71 independent, nonprofit companies that provide health insurance to 68 million Americans in all 50 states.
The first of the plans was formed 60 years ago as a way for people to pay in advance for hospital care.
Blue Cross plans cover hospital costs, while Blue Shield plans pay doctors' bills.
In many areas, like New York, the plans are operated by one nonprofit corporation.


Suns Beat Bulls to Stay Alive


Aleksandr S. Davydov, 80, Dies; Was a Leading Chemical Physicist
Aleksandr Sergeivich Davydov, one of the world's leading chemical physicists, has died, the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences has announced.
He was 80.
The brief announcement on Thursday did not disclose the date or circumstances of Dr.
Davydov's death, but summarized the accomplishments of his long career.


In a Glut of Information, Some Items to Ignore
THE United States Supreme Court has issued credentials for this session to 34 reporters, virtually all who asked.
The Investment Company Institute, the mutual fund trade group, issued credentials for its convention this year to exactly 100 reporters, plus cameramen.
Let nobody complain that they lack information about investing.
Newspapers, radio, television and magazines are all expanding their coverage.
Readers and viewers might say they want even more, but some indigestion is evident.


Coup in Guatemala Nothing Like Peru's
To the Editor:
In "Guatemala: Democracy Recouped?" (editorial, June 3), you presuppose an automatic similarity between the political process in Guatemala and Peru without attempting at least a cursory evaluation of the specific conditions in each country.
The outcome of events in Guatemala has already proved that the parallelism drawn was clearly wrong.
President Alberto Fujimori of Peru has stated that the circumstances of the two countries are different, that the concrete situation of Peru does not lend itself to a facile comparison with any other country and that it should not serve as a model.
He also stated that the destiny of Guatemala was, as it ought to be, in the hands of the Guatemalan people.


Pacific Rim Investments for the Long Haul
The Van Eck Asia Dynasty fund is part of a flurry of new funds that are investing in the Pacific Rim countries to benefit from economic growth rates greater than those of the United States and other developed nations.
The fund invests mainly in Hong Kong, with smaller investments in Taiwan, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand.
While investments in emerging markets can be profitable, they are also risky.
Mutual fund investors can bet on the natural gas industry with Fidelity's Select Natural Gas Portfolio, which invests in companies that produce and distribute natural gas or that provide services or equipment to the industry.
The fund's narrower focus may make it more volatile than Fidelity's Select Energy Portfolio.
A 0.75 percent redemption fee applies to shares sold before 30 days; after that, the fee is 0.75 percent or $7.50, whichever is less.


Family Preservation and Its Victims
Take any floor of a typical low-income housing project.
In one apartment, there might be a single woman in her mid-20's with two kids, struggling on a meager welfare check to keep the kids dressed, clean and in school.
Down the hall is a family of six.
Despite months of looking, Mom works as a maid and Dad, unemployed, does a few odd jobs.
At the end of the hall, there is a woman with three kids.
She is a heavy crack cocaine user.
Her present boyfriend is also her drug supplier, and when he gets angry he hits the kids.
Sometimes they lock the kids in the apartment and go off for hours of partying.
The state decides to make life easier for one of these families.
Which one?
Under welfare laws in Illinois and other states, the mother doing drugs and allowing her boyfriend to belt the kids is the only one entitled to a free housekeeper up to five days a week.
She can also receive up to $2,000 for a security deposit and the first month's rent on a new apartment, as well as furniture and up to $500 in cash.


Many Mariel Cubans Remain in U.S. Detention
To the Editor:
I am a Cuban-American, who came to the United States seeking freedom in the 1980 Mariel boatlift.
I am incarcerated in the Federal Correctional Facility at Fairton, N.J.
I resided in New York City for almost 10 years.
During my stay in New York City I remained gainfully employed, although I fell into drug dependency.
Consequently, I sold small amounts of drugs, for which I was arrested and received a nine-month jail term in 1989.
My jail term terminated in April 1990.


Money Talks and Lobbyists Walk
It is 10:30 on a Tuesday night, and the lobbyists who wander in nomadic packs from one fund-raiser to the next have descended on the Scoreboard, an Albany watering hole that is part sports bar and part amusement park.
They already have made the rounds of six other legislative fund-raisers, all within walking distance of the Capitol, making for a busy but not exceptional night.
It is a ritual that is fast becoming a dominant feature of political culture in Albany, as in other state capitals, and one that underscores the heightened role played by lobbyists and political action committees.
Last Stop: Spring Fling
The last stop of the evening is the Spring Fling, an annual fund-raiser for the Democratic Assembly Campaign Committee, where, for $125, lobbyists can shoot pool, play video golf, curse the Mets and down a few beers with the legislators of their choice.


Excerpts From the Court's Decision on Health Risk to Inmates
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's decision today that prison inmates may have the right to be free of a smoke-filled environment that would endanger their health.
Justice Byron R. White wrote the majority opinion, Helling v.
McKinney, which was joined by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and Justices Harry A. Blackmun, John Paul Stevens, Sandra Day O'Connor, Anthony M. Kennedy and David H. Souter.
Justice Clarence Thomas's dissenting opinion was joined by Justice Antonin Scalia.
FROM THE DECISION  By Justice White
This case requires us to decide whether the health risk posed by involuntary exposure of a prison inmate to environmental tobacco smoke (E.T.S.) can form the basis of a claim for relief under the Eighth Amendment.


Tolbert's Victory Prevents a Devers Sweep
Hurdles, real and conceptual, were in the way.
All were cleared tonight, by national champions Lynda Tolbert and Jack Pierce at the USA/Mobil championships.
At a hot and humid Hayward Field, Tolbert overcame favorite Gail Devers, plus medical problems that included a torn hamstring, stress fractures in both her feet and chronic anemia.
She edged Devers in a photo finish, winning the women's 100-meter hurdles in 12.72 seconds to foil a historic attempt at a double by her more famous rival.


Leon Zawisza, Conductor, 79
Leon Zawisza, a conductor at Radio City Music Hall for 30 years until his retirement in 1979, died yesterday at his home in Harrington Park, N.J.
He was 79 years old.
The cause was lung and liver cancer, his family said.


Sculley Gives Up One Post At Apple
The chairman of Apple Computer Inc. said today that he would relinquish his role as chief executive to pursue alliances involving new computer-based technologies.
John Sculley, 54, who came to Apple 10 years ago from Pepsico, will retain the title of chairman and hand over the chief executive's job to Apple's president, Michael Spindler.


More by Bernstein
The New York Philharmonic Ensembles series ends its season tomorrow with an all-Bernstein program at 3 P.M. at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan.
The works to be performed are the Sonata for Clarinet and Piano, Arias and Barcaroles, Sonata for Violin and Piano and music from "West Side Story" arranged for brass quintet.
The program is part of "A Philharmonic Celebration: Remembering Lenny." Tickets are $12.
Information: (212) 362-8719.


A New Light on Empire's Finances
The subject, to the ears of many, was about as boring as a subject could be: insurance, and the more arcane aspects of insurance at that.
But the passion in the wood-paneled hearing room of the state Legislative Office Building in Albany was palpable.
Two top officials of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield were pleading their case for sweeping changes in the state insurance system.
The fate of the nation's largest nonprofit health insurer was at stake, they said.


Hitting a Few During Lunch


PLAN SET TO SECURE 747'S JET ENGINES
The Boeing Company has proposed modifications to all 747 jumbo jets to make engines less likely to fall off in flight.
Engine mounts on the four-engine 747's have come under scrutiny since they were implicated in the crashes of an El Al cargo jet in Amsterdam on Oct. 4 and of a China Airlines cargo plane in Taiwan on Dec. 21, 1991.
In both crashes, investigators said, the two engines on the right wing fell off.
But regulatory agencies have not determined the causes of the two crashes.


Bernard Rosenthal, 71, Psychology Professor
Dr.
Bernard Gordon Rosenthal, a psychologist, educator and author, died Wednesday at Midway Hospital in Los Angeles, having retired there from Chicago seven years ago.
He was 71.
The cause was complications from Parkinson's disease, his family said.


TRUCE FAILS TO END FIGHTING IN BOSNIA
Fighting continued across this war-torn country hours after the latest countrywide cease-fire was scheduled to have taken effect today, local radio reports and United Nations officials said.
The Bosnian Government's radio station said Serbian forces in eastern Bosnia had breached Muslim defenses around the encircled city of Gorazde, which has been the target of a three-week-old Serbian offensive.
But United Nations military monitors in the town made no mention of a breakthrough, and even if it is confirmed, there was no way to assess the severity of the setback for the Muslim defenders.


Corrections
A report in the Garden Q.&amp; A. column of The Home Section on Thursday about landscape fabrics misstated the dimensions of one product, Weedblock.
A 4-by-50-foot roll costs about $20, and a 6-by-50-foot roll about $30.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief report in some editions of Business Day yesterday about the appointment of Donald B. Reed as president and chief executive of the New England Telephone Corporation misstated Mr.
Reed's tenure.
He has worked at the company for 27 years.


Sports of The Times; John Daly Reaches The Unreachable Green
LEE TREVINO likes to joke that, when caught in a thunder-and-lightning storm, a golfer should hold a 1-iron aloft.
"Not even God," he says, "can hit a 1-iron."
But John Daly can.


Smith Is Free . . . Well, Sort of Free
Defensive end NEIL SMITH, the Kansas City Chiefs' designated franchise player, is free to negotiate with other National Football League teams, but the Chiefs have the right to match any offer.


President and King Hussein Meet as Iraq Issue Lingers
President Clinton and King Hussein of Jordan met for the first time today in a friendly session, but there remained signs that their two countries have not yet mended some differences left over from the Persian Gulf war.
The two leaders proclaimed a shared commitment to the Middle East peace talks, and both vowed to seek "tangible progress" this year.
Their meeting was nevertheless also notable for its absence of an American gesture of forgiveness: the release of tens of millions of dollars in aid withheld from Jordan as punishment for its wartime support for Iraq.


President Chooses an Expert To Halt Smuggling of Aliens
President Clinton moved today to put his stamp on immigration policy, appointing an expert to head the Immigration and Naturalization Service and announcing new initiatives intended to end the smuggling of illegal aliens.
Mr.
Clinton nominated Doris M. Meissner, who was a Deputy Associate Attorney General under President Jimmy Carter and an Acting Commissioner of Immigration under President Ronald Reagan, to head the agency.
The 51-year-old Ms.
Meissner has most recently been director of immigration policy at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace.


Spain Paying $350 Million for Baron's Art
After a year of complicated negotiations, the Spanish Government today announced an agreement to buy the prized art collection of the Swiss industrialist Baron Hans Heinrich Thyssen-Bornemisza for $350 million.
The collection of 775 paintings from the 13th to the 20th centuries is considered one of the world's greatest private art collections, perhaps surpassed only by that of Queen Elizabeth II.
Sotheby's has estimated its value at nearly $2 billion.


Strawberry Returns to the D.L.
DARRYL STRAWBERRY was returned to the disabled list by the Los Angeles Dodgers yesterday, extending his slow recovery from back surgery last September.
It is the second time this season that Strawberry has been placed on the 15-day disabled list.
The former slugger for the Mets began suffering serious back problems in May 1992, in his second season with the Dodgers.
He played just 43 games last season before undergoing surgery on Sept. 15 to repair a damaged disk in his lower back.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  NEW YORK YANKEES -- Signed Paul Gibson, pitcher, to a minor-league contract with Columbus of the International League.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5  JAPAN'S GOVERNMENT IS DISSOLVED
Rebel Japanese lawmakers in the ruling party joined the opposition to pass a vote of no confidence in the Government of Kiichi Miyazawa, who then dissolved Parliament and called for elections in July.  1  U.S.
ACCEPTS WEAKNESS IN BOSNIA
News analysis: President Clinton's decision to accept the possibility of the ethnic partition of Bosnia reflects a consensus among his advisers that the U.S. is incapable of mediating the war there and unwilling to take military action to stop it.  4
European diplomats turned their focus to the partition of Bosnia.  4
Fighting continued across Bosnia despite another cease-fire.  4  AZERBAIJAN GETS A NEW LEADER
One of the most notorious former officials of the K.G.B. assumed power in Azerbaijan when he announced on television that the former Soviet republic's President had fled to escape advancing rebels.  3  U.N.
EXPLAINS ARREST ORDER
U.N. officials in Somalia said that although they had ordered the arrest of a Somali general, the action was intended to keep him in hiding, and they said no special effort would be taken to capture him.  2  NIGERIAN GROUP CALLS A WINNER
A human rights group in Nigeria defied the military by publishing what it said were the final results of the presidential election, which showed that Moshood Abiola, a wealthy businessman, had won 19 of the country's 30 states.  2  CLINTON MEETS JORDAN'S KING
President Clinton and King Hussein of Jordan met for the first time in a friendly session in Washington, but there were signs that their nations had not yet mended differences left over from the Persian Gulf war.  3  ITALY GETS A NIGHTMARE TAX FORM
Italy, the land of tax evasion, is now also the land of Form 740/93 -- the newest, most complicated version of the annual tax return and the first to reflect the tighter fiscal controls introduced last year.  5  A SLOVAK STEEL TOWN IS DEJECTED
Few cities in Eastern Europe seem more disillusioned than one steel town in Slovakia as disenchantment grows about the level of Western support to Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic and Slovakia.  4  National 6-9, 47  NAVY'S 'RED LIGHT' BEHAVIOR
The Navy has issued guidelines for behavior toward members of opposite sex, using traffic light colors to indicate acceptable and unacceptable actions or speech.  1
A general who spoke against the President will retire and be fined.  9
A Navy official criticized a plan to cut two aircraft carriers.  9  STATE AID IN PAROCHIAL SCHOOL
The Supreme Court ruled that the Constitution permits using Government money to pay for a sign language interpreter to accompany a deaf child to parochial school, a first in church-state debate.  1  SMOKING AS UNUSUAL PUNISHMENT
Nonsmoking prison inmates may have a constitutional right not to be confined with a chain-smoking cellmate, the Supreme Court ruled.  8
Sixteen states will have to reimburse retired Federal workers.  9  CREATING CUSTOM AIR FARES
Airline passengers are using ingenious methods to take advantage of the airline industry's complex fare-pricing system and drive down their ticket costs.  1  IMMIGRATION CHIEF APPOINTED
President Clinton nominated an expert in immigration policy to head the Immigration and Naturalization Service and announced a plan to end the smuggling of aliens.  6  BUDGET CLEARS COMMITTEE
The Senate Finance Committee approved the main elements of President Clinton's budget plan, the last step before a Senate debate that is expected to be rancorous.  7  TOWARD A TIMBER SOLUTION
The Clinton Administration has prepared an array of suggested solutions to the battle over timber and endangered species in the Pacific Northwest.
Both sides are likely to be displeased.  47
Bishops said including abortion may hurt the health-care bill.  47  BOEING TO MODIFY 747's
The Boeing Company has proposed modifications to all 747 jumbo jets to make engines less likely to fall off during flight.  6  CONNALLYS SPURN EXHUMATION
The family of former Gov.
John Connally angrily refused requests to exhume his body to search for evidence in the assassination of President John Kennedy.  6  Religion notes: 14 inmates received theological degrees.  7  Metro Digest 23  NEW TEAM TO RUN EMPIRE
One month after a major shake-up of the leadership of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the company announced yesterday that the officials tapped to straighten out Empire had agreed to leave.
They will be replaced by a new management team that hasn't been chosen yet.  1  Business Digest 35  Arts/Entertainment 11-17, 47  SPAIN TO BUY BARON'S ART
The Spanish Government announced that it would buy the art collection of the Swiss industrialist Baron Hans Heinrich Thyssen-Bornemisza for $350 million.
The agreement followed a year of negotiations.  1  Symphony orchestras' future.  11  Music: Back to its roots.  11  Dance: Gina Gibney premiere.  11  Robin Becker company.  17  Television: About "hate rock." 47  Obituaries 10  Aleksandr S. Davydov, a leading chemical physicist.
Sidney Kaplan, a scholar of black culture and history in America.
Sports 27-32  Baseball: Yankees shut out Twins.  29  Young loses 22d straight game.  29  Basketball: Suns win Game 5.  27  Happy hour on hold in Chicago.  32  Columns: Araton on Knicks.  27  Anderson on U.S.
Open.  31  Golf: Janzen leads U.S.
Open by two strokes.  27  U.S.
Open notebook.  31  Slow, dreamy day for amateur.  31  Track and Field: National champions both win.  29  Editorials/Op-Ed 20-21  Editorials Mr.
Clinton: Don't bury Bosnia.
Campaign finance reform: alive.
Notebook: High Court strategy.
Letters  Russell Baker: Pure only of heart.
Dov S. Zakheim: A new name for winning: losing.
Patrick Murphy: Family preservation and its victims.
Clifford Adelman: Turn diplomas into report cards.
Chronicle 22  Bridge 16  Crossword 14


Social Worker Attacked at Homeless Center
A social worker at a homeless placement center in lower Manhattan was attacked yesterday, triggering a disturbance that led to the walkout of 20 municipal workers at the office, the police reported.
The disturbance occurred at the Emergency Assistance Center at 80 Catherine Street.
Last November, a judge, citing the city's practice of leaving the homeless to sleep in city offices, threatened to order four city officials to spend nights in the center, but the city appealed the order.


Look Homeward, Suns: Phoenix Denies Chicago
The city of Chicago was ready to celebrate, but the Phoenix Suns canceled tonight's party.
Avoiding elimination and forcing a return trip to Phoenix, the Suns soundly defeated the Chicago Bulls, 108-98, in Game 5 of the National Basketball Association finals at Chicago Stadium.
With the Bulls leading, 3-2, in the four-of-seven-game series, the battle moves to Phoenix for Game 6 on Sunday.
Game 7, if necessary, would be played Wednesday night in Phoenix.


Family Bars Exhuming of Connally
The family of former Gov.
John B. Connally today angrily rejected requests by F.B.I. officials and private researchers that his body be exhumed in a new search for evidence about the assassination of President John F. Kennedy 30 years ago.
Governor Connally was wounded while riding in a Dallas motorcade with Kennedy when the President was shot to death, and some researchers have suggested that bullet fragments that they say remain in Mr.
Connally's body could show once and for all whether a second gun, and presumably a second marksman, might have been involved in the assassination.


From the White House to a Police Station
During the four years he served as the Labor Department's director of immigration policy, Demetrios Papademetriou went to the White House more than a dozen times.
But when he arrived today he was arrested, handcuffed, fingerprinted and held for several hours.
Mr.
Papademetriou was following a time-honored insiders' tradition when he arrived this morning as part of a group of friends accompanying a new Presidential appointee -- in this case, Doris Meissner, who was about to accept the President's nomination to head the immigration service.


Car Auction Offers a Bargain, and Perhaps a Dream


Top Navy Officer Criticizes Plan to Cut Carriers
In another public disagreement between the military and the Clinton Administration, the Chief of Naval Operations today criticized Defense Secretary Les Aspin's emerging plan to reduce the number of aircraft carriers to 10 from 12.
The Navy's top-ranking officer, Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, told reporters that the reduction would hurt the country's ability to respond quickly to regional crises and to provide a hedge against conflicts in peacetime.
The Navy has 14 carriers in service; two are scheduled to be retired this year.


Leonard Dreams in Slow Motion
Justin Leonard had another dream-like round of golf at the United States Open today, but a nightmare threatened to intrude when the amateur and and his esteemed professional partners were warned by officials that they were playing too slowly.
A second warning could have resulted in a two-stroke penalty for Leonard, Tom Kite and Nick Faldo.
"I'm learning how to handle pressures like that," said Leonard, who is at even-par 140 and on a pace to produce one of the best Open scores by an amateur in the last 25 years.


Survival of Symphonies: Radical Changes Urged
One year ago, the American Symphony Orchestra League took its own pulse and did not like what it found.
Bad news about American orchestras, their finances, their audiences and their musical operations had been trickling in piecemeal for years.
The so-called Wolf report, a study commissioned by the league, documented what most had long suspected.
The Wolf report also inspired a task force of 150 people within and outside the music world.
They have been meeting over the last year, addressing issues like repertory, labor relations, community life, cultural diversity, education, volunteerism, fund raising and management.


Critic's Notebook; Early-Music Lovers Go Back to Their First Love
The defenders of mainstream music making are not alone in wondering whether the early music movement's encroachment into the Romantic repertory is for the best.
Some people in early music circles also have misgivings on the ground that this musical doctrine of Manifest Destiny is stealing attention and energy from the study and revival of real early music, the works of medieval, Renaissance and Baroque masters.
That concern is being addressed here this week at the seventh Boston Early Music Festival and Exhibition, which assembles every two years.
After exploring the late Classical era in recent years, the festival set aside the newfangled stuff and returned to the movement's roots.
This year's program is devoted mainly to music of the late 16th and early 17th centuries, when Renaissance styles gave way to Baroque innovations.
Its modernist edge is a concert of Colonial and 19th-century American hymns and ballads to be given by the Boston Camerata on Saturday evening.
But the festival's centerpiece is Monteverdi's "Orfeo" in a scholarly approximation of a period staging.


Diana in Philadelphia
To the Editor:
"In Statues of Women, Numbers Aren't the Story" by David Sidorsky (letter, June 5) states of the statue of Diana atop the old Madison Square Garden: "The original disappeared with the demolition of Stanford White's Garden at Madison Square."


SENATE PANEL VOTE BACKS BUDGET PLAN
On a straight party-line vote, the Senate Finance Committee approved the main elements of a five-year budget package today, the last step before a Senate debate next week that promises to be one of the sharpest partisan clashes in Congress in years.
Laying the ground for that debate, Democratic leaders rushed to a television studio in the Capitol this afternoon to accuse Republicans of blowing hot air about wanting to reduce Government spending more.
They observed that the Republicans failed to offer a single amendment in the Finance Committee that would have actually cut spending but did try unsuccessfully to lower taxes on the wealthy.


Japan's Government Falls; Party in Peril
In a revolt that could end nearly four decades of one-party rule in Japan, rebel legislators in the party of Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa joined forces with the opposition Friday night to pass a vote of no confidence in Mr.
Miyazawa's Government.
The Prime Minister then dissolved Parliament and called for elections next month.
The organizers of the rebellion, which turned on the question of how to reform Japan's scandal-plagued Government, appeared to be preparing to split off from the ruling Liberal Democratic Party.
Their moves raised the prospect of a fundamental reorganization of the political order that has ruled Japan since the Liberal Democratic Party was founded in 1955.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.85
3.02
3.66
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.02
3.64
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.16
3.14
3.75
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.57
5.55
6.83
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.80
6.81
7.83
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.75
7.75
8.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.82
5.82
6.54
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Observer; Pure Only Of Heart
Reasons I cannot be on the Supreme Court:
1. Once tore up a parking ticket, thus becoming a scofflaw.
2.
Regularly exceed the 55-mile-per-hour speed limit on Interstate 78, thus flagrantly exhibiting contempt for the law.


Litton Splits: Two Companies and Two Strategies
Litton Industries said Thursday that it would split into two companies, one that would focus on expanding its lucrative commercial businesses and the other on the declining weapons market.
Under a plan approved by Litton's board, Litton will spin off by the end of the year its profitable oilfield services and industrial automation operations, with revenues of $2.3 billion, into an independent company.
Litton Industries will continue as an aerospace and weapons company with revenues of $3.5 billion.


Progress Cited On Olympia
Cyrus R. Vance, the mediator in the dispute over the United States holdings of the Canadian real estate giant Olympia &amp; York Developments Ltd., reported to a Federal bankruptcy judge yesterday that he was making considerable progress on the problems that have recently threatened to put the company's American unit in Chapter 11 bankruptcy.
Mr. Vance said, however, that he needed more time to reach a final agreement.


Murder by AIDS Is Easy Answer
To the Editor:
"AIDS and a Dentist's Secrets" (The Week in Review, June 6) states that some are asking whether the cluster of cases of human immunodeficiency virus (the virus that causes AIDS) transmitted from a dentist in Florida to six patients should not be considered "murder."
I was medical counsel to Kimberly Bergalis and am medical counsel to Sherry Johnson, the sixth patient infected from Dr.
David J. Acer.
I have been as intimately involved with these cases as anyone, and believe that attempts to solve this mystery with a murder theory fly in the face of what is known about infectious diseases and blood-born viruses.
The medical facts are these:


Northern Telecom in China Deal
In a deal potentially worth billions of dollars over the next few years, Northern Telecom of Canada yesterday announced an agreement to modernize and, in many cases, build a telephone system for China.
The agreement calls for joint ventures that would cover cellular telephones, fiber-optic transmission systems, computer terminals and networks and switching systems for China's vast rural areas.


The Hidden Implications In the Marketing of Pride
PROBABLY you are tired of having possibly crazy people approach you in public places to urge that you worry about things you never heard of, but hang on, have you ever considered the divisive implications of the Ride With Pride regional license plate program of the New York State Motor Vehicles Department?
Under it, since March, motorists who pay $25 extra can acquire plates with any of 11 regional designs along with a designation of the owner's home county or borough.
They can, for instance, get one for New York City with a picture of the Brooklyn Bridge or one for Long Island with a picture of a lighthouse.


EMPIRE BLUE CROSS SAYS 2 TOP LEADERS ARE STEPPING DOWN
One month after a major shake-up of the top leadership of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the company announced yesterday that the officials tapped to straighten out Empire had agreed to step down.
They are to be replaced by a new, outside management team that has not yet been chosen, the company said.
The announcement came after a hastily called meeting of Empire's board and was in response to the urgings of the New York State Insurance Superintendent, Salvatore R. Curiale.
As the state's chief insurance regulator, Mr.
Curiale has been under growing pressure to address Empire's escalating financial and management problems and to explain why they were not addressed sooner.


Swapping Homes: An Inexpensive Way to Travel in Style
Profile: Last Summer, Arden C. Hander and Judy Heyman swapped their home in Glassboro, N.J., for a country house in france.
This Summer they are going to swap their house for one in England, and next year they plan to vacation on Denmark
Mr.
Hander and Mrs.
Heyman, both 58, looked into home swapping as an inexpensive yet comfortable way to travel.
Through a home-swapping company, they made contact with the Salier family last year.
"We would have never been able to spend a month or more in Normandy without such an arrangement," Mr.
Hander said. adding that he and Ms.
Hayman enjoyed living "like the natives."
Now they are looking forward to meeting the Mace family in Kidderminster, England, and spending five weeks exploring the area.


In Peace Plan for Northwest Timber Dispute, Options May Anger Both Sides
In a crucial test of a promise to square environmental goals with economic ones, the Clinton Administration has prepared an array of suggested solutions to end a fractious battle over timber and endangered species in the Pacific Northwest, including one that would slash the amount of cutting on Federal lands in the region by half or more, an Administration official said yesterday.
According to officials in the Administration and staff members in Congress, the options also include a proposal for legislation to bypass or waive some provisions of three important environmental laws, including the National Environmental Policy Act, to hasten the pace for putting the President's timber plan into effect.


GE Capital Is Buying Digital's Leasing Unit
The Digital Equipment Corporation, continuing efforts to pare costs, said today that it had agreed to sell its leasing business in the United States to the GE Capital Corporation, the financial services subsidiary of the General Electric Company.
The agreement calls for GE Capital to take over servicing Digital's leasing customers, providing financial and sales support, billing, collections and administrative support.


Sports of The Times; Forget It. Suns Beat Knicks in 7.
AS Michael Jordan and the Bulls took the floor last night, one victory away from their prized three-peat, one had to wonder what was going through the mind of the man who owns the copyright for the pithy slogan.
Was Pat Riley contemplating the possible bonanza resulting from his business acumen or sadly imagining what might have been had his Knicks stopped the Bulls' championship run at two?
Was Patrick Ewing tuned in as his buddy Jordan attempted to accomplish what Magic Johnson could not, or could he not bring himself to watch?


Airlines' Passengers Waging Guerrilla War to Trim Fares
Call it the do-it-yourself fare war.
Trying to duplicate the low fares that were readily available last summer, growing ranks of passengers are using every means in the air fare book, and a few that are not, to take advantage of the airline industry's complex pricing system and drive down their ticket costs.
The methods may not be new, but the consumers' fervor is, airline executives and travel agents say.


General Ousted for Derisive Remarks About President
In the political equivalent of a public execution, the Air Force Chief of Staff took the unusual step today of holding a news conference to announce that a two-star Air Force general who had made disparaging remarks about President Clinton would be fined and forced to retire.
Gen.
Merrill A. McPeak, the Air Force chief, said that Maj.
Gen.
Harold N. Campbell, who called President Clinton a "dope smoking," "skirt chasing," "draft dodging" commander in chief, would be fined $7,000 and would retire on July 1.
An official letter of reprimand will also be placed in the file of the 53-year-old general.


Review/Dance; Making Gravity Disappear
Gina Gibney's "Incidence of Light," a world premiere, got the evening off to a promising but dauntingly portentous start on Thursday night in the Altogether Different festival at the Joyce Theater.
Dancers formed and re-formed into couples, dressed in shades of yellow-gold and bathed in golden light, with each pairing framed by blackouts.
The dancers moved before an architectural set consisting of three monolithic shapes that looked as if they had strayed from a Futurist painting.
The mood was a little sad.
There was less a sense of encounters than of partings and of loss.
Then the stage opened up and grew lighter.
The set elements had disappeared, one by one, during the blackouts.
And Ms.
Gibney's superb dancers, constrained before, whirled through the open space as if traction and gravity did not exist.
But there was a sense of purposelessness to it all.
Nothing looked motivated.
Ms.
Gibney is good at creating carefully plotted and intelligently worked dance.
She knows how to unspool high-energy movement so it looks emotionally inevitable.
But the latter gift failed her here.


Aikman Reportedly to Have Surgery
Dallas Cowboys quarterback TROY AIKMAN will have surgery today in Los Angeles for a herniated disk, according to a broadcast report.


Two Patriots Are Stabbed
Running back LEONARD RUSSELL of the New England Patriots was in guarded but stable condition after he and teammate TIM EDWARDS were stabbed early yesterday after an argument with two other men outside a club in Boston, the police said.
Russell was in Massachusetts General Hospital's intensive-care unit after suffering a stab wound under the armpit that went into his chest.
"It missed the heart, but he did bleed fairly seriously," said hospital spokesman MARTIN BANDER.


Ex-K.G.B. Aide Grabs Helm in Baku
One of the most notorious former officials of the K.G.B. formally assumed power in Azerbaijan today when he went on television to announce that the country's President had fled the capital to escape advancing rebels.
The new leader, Heydar Aliyev, said he "could not forgive" the President, Abulfez Elchibey, for abandoning his office in Azerbaijan's hour of need.
He also faulted the Elchibey Government in the current crisis for attempting to disarm military units that refused to obey the central command.


METRO DIGEST
TOP BLUE CROSS OFFICIALS QUIT  The two top officials of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield have agreed to step down so that they can be replaced by new management with no connection to the problems that have roiled the company in recent months.
At a hastily called meeting, Empire's board bowed to pressure from the New York State Insurance Superintendent, Salvatore R. Curiale, and voted to search quickly for replacements for Harold E. Vogt, the company's chairman, and Donald L. Morchower, the acting chief executive.
They have been in the jobs for only one month.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY MORE ANGLES IN CAMPAIGN  The race for New York City comptroller seemed simple two months ago.
It was a two-way matchup between Alan G. Hevesi, a little-known Assemblyman from Queens who had some impressive endorsements, and Elizabeth Holtzman, the formidable and battle-scarred incumbent who had been struggling under the weight of a conflict-of-interest investigation.
But the late entry of Herman Badillo has added a volatile element to the race.
Page 25.
TIMES SQUARE STATION TO BE RENOVATED  After years of planning to rebuild the Times Square subway stop as part of a huge redevelopment project in the area, the Transit Authority has instead decided that it should not wait any longer to begin fixing the station itself.
The authority has unveiled a design for a $130 million reconstruction of the station, which is the city's busiest.
Page 25.
FIRM WON'T RETURN TO TRADE CENTER  Deloitte &amp; Touche, an accounting firm that is one of the World Trade Center's largest tenants, has decided not to move back to the complex.
The firm, the only tenant that never physically returned to the center after the explosion on Feb. 26, had been strongly considering relocating even before the bombing and said it was not leaving out of dissatisfaction with the Port Authority's response to the disaster.
Page 25.
REGION  WILD CHASE AFTER ROBBERY  An armed bank robbery touched off a high-speed, 35-minute car chase marked by repeated exchanges of gunfire on some of the busiest highways in Rockland County, N.Y., and Bergen County, N.J.
About 100 shots were fired by the fleeing suspects and the pursuing police over the 30 miles of the chase.
The pursuit began at Pearl River High School about 9:15 A.M and ended about 11 A.M. with the capture of four suspects as they ran from a stolen getaway car into woods beside the Garden State Parkway in the Bergen County suburb of Washington Township, officials said.
Page 26.
CIVIL-RIGHTS CHARGES DROPPED  Federal prosecutors in Camden, N.J., dropped civil rights charges against two men three days before their retrial in the beating of an Asian Indian physician.
Judge Joseph E. Irenas of Federal District Court said that prosecutors did their duty in trying to prove that the attack was racially motivated.
The second trial for Mark Evangelista, a 23-year-old Hudson County police officer who lives in Jersey City, and Martin Riccardi, 26, of North Plainfield, was scheduled to start on Monday.
A third defendant was acquitted on May 28.
The three were accused of beating Dr.
Kaushal Sharan in the Heights section of Jersey City in September 1987.
Page 26.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 25


Helen Hayes Is Remembered as Star and Woman
Just a few of the friends and admirers of Helen Hayes -- a crowd of some 1,500, in fact -- gathered yesterday in a darkened Broadway theater to say farewell to the diminutive actress whose big-hearted portrayals of regal women helped make her one of the century's best-loved stars.
"What a wonderful sight, a full house -- my mother would have loved it," said James MacArthur, Miss Hayes's son, as he took the stage of the Shubert Theater yesterday afternoon.
Mr.
MacArthur served as host of a 90-minute tribute that featured encomiums, stories, readings, songs, jokes and vivid remembrances of Miss Hayes, who died of heart failure at age 92 last March.


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday with an economic analysis article about proposed changes in the capital-gains tax misstated the number of returns declaring capital gains in 1991.
It was 8,054,000.


Planned Parenthood of New York Begins Abortion Training
Planned Parenthood of New York began training doctors yesterday to perform abortions, a role that teaching hospitals have abandoned in recent years in response to social, legal and economic pressures.
Over the last decade the number of medical residency programs that require abortion training in the United States has dropped by half, and that drop is one reason most of the nation's counties do not have a single doctor who will perform the procedure.


U.N. Denies It Is Seeking Somali Clan Leader's Arrest
Senior United Nations military officials said today that although they had put out an arrest warrant for a Somali clan leader, the warrant was intended mostly to keep him in hiding and away from his supporters.
They said that unless United Nations troops accidentally came across the clan leader, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, they would mount no special operation to capture him.


Corrections
A sports chart yesterday, giving a hole-by-hole stroke analysis for the first-round leaders in the United States Open golf tournament, misstated the par totals for the first nine and last nine holes.
They are 34 and 36, not 35 and 35.


Settlement Talks Reported For Prudential Securities
Prudential Securities Inc. is negotiating to pay as much as $100 million in a settlement with Federal and state securities regulators investigating the firm's practices in selling limited partnerships during the 1980's, people with knowledge of the talks said yesterday.
Also, a criminal inquiry into both the limited partnership sales and the activities of the firm's north Dallas branch has been started by the United States Attorney in Manhattan, people with knowledge of the investigation said.


Court Offers Inmates a Way To Escape Prison Smokers
Prison inmates who can show that exposure to cigarette smoke is a threat to their health may have a constitutional right not to be confined with a chain-smoking cellmate, the Supreme Court ruled today.
While the Court stopped short of declaring a constitutional right to a smoke-free prison, the 7-to-2 decision offered a notably generous interpretation of the Eighth Amendment's prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment.


Editors' Notes
An article on page 25 of The Times Magazine today assesses the relative influence of members of the Clinton Administration and others in the President's inner circle.
In discussing Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt, it says Mr.
Babbitt is a leading contender for the Supreme Court.
On Monday, after the magazine had gone to press, President Clinton nominated Ruth Bader Ginsburg for the opening on the Court.


Cloud 5 Carries Suns Home To Game 6
By the time the Phoenix Suns' charter was airborne late Friday night, with O'Hare Airport in Chicago in its rear-view mirror, a lively thunderstorm had erupted.
Charles Barkley, who had a prime window seat because he sits wherever he darn well pleases, pinned his forehead against the glass, peered down at the lit-up city one last time and said loud enough for the pilot to hear: "Wish I was a carpenter tonight. Because there's a lot of wood to tear down out there."
Lightning certainly struck twice last week.
The Suns had previously dropped consecutive games to the Bulls in Phoenix, prompting the Chicago police to board up half of downtown in anticipation of a championship riot.
The Suns took note, and their esoteric battle cry became "Save the City!" Coach Paul Westphal even etched the slogan on the Phoenix locker-room chalkboard.


IS HUMANITY SUICIDAL?
All of the earliest indigenous peoples of the world treated the earth as a living, breathing organism that created and sustained life.
They did not "rape" the earth as modern civilizations do, but gave back in equal measure to their taking, and were true "shepherds" of the earth.
This is because most if not all early peoples practiced animism -- the belief that everything has a soul: people, animals, plants, rocks, trees, water, etc.
Inherent in this "premodern" belief is love and respect for the earth and all of its life and beauty.


Who's Got Clout
Three months into his Presidency, Clinton was still deriding as a "political smoke screen" reports that "somebody's up and somebody's down." But soon afterward, he had to backtrack: "We think that there needs to be a little tighter coordination here," he admitted, and announced that his chief of staff, Thomas (Mack) McLarty, was being given a second deputy, freeing Clinton's best friend from kindergarten days to give unspecified policy advice.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Signed Gary Gaetti, third baseman.
Recalled Bill Sampen, pitcher, from Omaha of the American Association.
Optioned Craig Wilson, infielder, to Omaha.
Designated Harvey Pulliam, outfielder, for assignment.
National League  CHICAGO CUBS -- Placed Mike Harkey, pitcher, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to June 13.
Recalled Tommy Shields, infielder, from Iowa of the American Association.
COLORADO ROCKIES -- Recalled Eric Wedge, catcher, from Colorado Springs of the Pacific Coast League and then placed him on the 15-day disabled list.
MONTREAL EXPOS -- Sent Jimmy Jones, pitcher, to Ottawa of the International League for a 30-day injury-rehabilitation assignment.
Hockey National Hockey League  MONTREAL CANADIENS -- Sent Donald Dufresne, defenseman, to the Tampa Bay Lightning to complete a trade for Rob Ramage.
SAN JOSE SHARKS -- Traded Peter Ahola, defenseman, to the Tampa Bay Lightning for Dave Capuano, center.
Football Canadian Football League  OTTAWA ROUGH RIDERS -- Released Ian Patterson, cornerback, and Kensley Palmer, fullback.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 20, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
48
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
2
73
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
18
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
5
DARKEST HOUR, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The concluding volume in a series about the Cutlers, a plantation-owning family.
5 *
62
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
6
4
THE MAGIC OF YOU, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A 19th-century British minx sets her cap for an American sea captain.
7
8
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Pocket, $5.99.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
8
7
SHADOWFIRES, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A woman is stalked by her supposedly deceased husband.
9
25
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The investigation of a woman's death involves the American-Japanese rivalry.
10
1
CASTLES, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) To save herself from danger, a princess agrees to marry a knight in 19th-century England.
11 *
4
THE CAT WHO WASN'T THERE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) Jim Qwilleran contends with crimes in Scotland.
12
2
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
13
2
TURTLE MOON, by Alice Hoffman. (Berkley, $5.99.) Two damaged adults and a troubled child strive valiantly to achieve happiness.
14
9
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Kinsey Millhone investigates a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
15
5
FATHERLAND, by Robert Harris. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A thriller set in the Third Reich 20 years after Hitler wins World War II.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
8
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
2
7
NOT FOR SALE AT ANY PRICE, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $5.95.) America's problems.
3 *
5
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President.
4
502
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
5
88
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
6
18
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
7
109
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
8
6
WHERE THE BLUEBIRD SINGS TO THE LEMONADE SPRINGS, by Wallace Stegner. (Penguin, $11.) Essays on the American West.
9
33
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.50.) A war against women.
10
19
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
11 *
23
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on self-esteem.
12
18
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) Social life and sexual fantasies.
13 *
1
A WORLD LIT ONLY BY FIRE, by William Manchester. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) An account of the Renaissance and the Reformation.
14 *
133
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
15 *
15
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) Navy memoirs.
16 *
22
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) Factors affecting the environment.
16 *
15
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Examples of waste.
18 *
5
WRITTEN BY HERSELF,
edited by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $15.) Writings by women.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-to, and Miscellaneous
1
97
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) A collection of some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
11
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK: Volume 2, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) More tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
122
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
4
139
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 5, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Time for the Dinner Bell on the Housatonic River
What the green drake is to mayflies, the alder is to caddis, which is to say, this is a big bug, folks.
So big, in fact, that you almost expect to see bib-clad trout with forks and knives like underwater patrons at some sort of rib joint.
The Housatonic River in northwest Connecticut is now serving one of the biggest and best menus of these tasty morsels for trout -- and the alder fly hatch will be available for anglers to imitate, and with any luck, take trout on for several weeks to come.
Anglers here wait anxiously for the alder because it is the source of some dramatic dry-fly action, which stirs large trout that normally keep low profiles.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 20, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
48
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
2
73
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
18
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
5
DARKEST HOUR, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The concluding volume in a series about the Cutlers, a plantation-owning family.
5 *
62
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
6
4
THE MAGIC OF YOU, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A 19th-century British minx sets her cap for an American sea captain.
7
8
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Pocket, $5.99.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
8
7
SHADOWFIRES, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A woman is stalked by her supposedly deceased husband.
9
25
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The investigation of a woman's death involves the American-Japanese rivalry.
10
1
CASTLES, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) To save herself from danger, a princess agrees to marry a knight in 19th-century England.
11 *
4
THE CAT WHO WASN'T THERE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) Jim Qwilleran contends with crimes in Scotland.
12
2
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
13
2
TURTLE MOON, by Alice Hoffman. (Berkley, $5.99.) Two damaged adults and a troubled child strive valiantly to achieve happiness.
14
9
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Kinsey Millhone investigates a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
15
5
FATHERLAND, by Robert Harris. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A thriller set in the Third Reich 20 years after Hitler wins World War II.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
8
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
2
7
NOT FOR SALE AT ANY PRICE, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $5.95.) America's problems.
3 *
5
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President.
4
502
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
5
88
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
6
18
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
7
109
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
8
6
WHERE THE BLUEBIRD SINGS TO THE LEMONADE SPRINGS, by Wallace Stegner. (Penguin, $11.) Essays on the American West.
9
33
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.50.) A war against women.
10
19
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
11 *
23
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on self-esteem.
12
18
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) Social life and sexual fantasies.
13 *
1
A WORLD LIT ONLY BY FIRE, by William Manchester. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) An account of the Renaissance and the Reformation.
14 *
133
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
15 *
15
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) Navy memoirs.
16 *
22
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) Factors affecting the environment.
16 *
15
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Examples of waste.
18 *
5
WRITTEN BY HERSELF,
edited by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $15.) Writings by women.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-to, and Miscellaneous
1
97
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) A collection of some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
11
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK: Volume 2, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) More tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
122
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
4
139
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 5, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Co-op Loans
To the Editor:
Your article on June 6 entitled "A Mortgage Hurdle Blocks Some Co-op Sales" discusses the reluctance of banks to make co-op apartment loans when a significant proportion -- typically more than 50 percent -- of the apartments in the building are still owned by the sponsor.


O'Rourke at Work: A Look At How Things Are Done
ANDREW P. O'ROURKE gathered his cabinet in the conference room next to his office one day recently to discuss Peekskill and the surrounding area.
Arriving a half-hour late from a call-in show at radio station WVOX in New Rochelle, Mr.
O'Rourke began questioning the commissioners, essentially asking each one, "What's new?"
The aim was not to establish policy or even review it; the County Executive holds weekly so-called issues meetings with eight close aides for that.
No, the commissioners were there to prepare the County Executive for a Town Hall meeting he had scheduled for the following evening.


Another India
A RIVER SUTRA By Gita Mehta. 291 pp. New York: Nan A. Talese/Doubleday. $20.


Who's Got Clout
Three months into his Presidency, Clinton was still deriding as a "political smoke screen" reports that "somebody's up and somebody's down." But soon afterward, he had to backtrack: "We think that there needs to be a little tighter coordination here," he admitted, and announced that his chief of staff, Thomas (Mack) McLarty, was being given a second deputy, freeing Clinton's best friend from kindergarten days to give unspecified policy advice.


How the Laws Work In Regulating Rent Market
The rent-regulated housing market in New York City and some suburban counties includes more than a million apartments and is divided into two categories, rent controlled and stabilized.
Rent-controlled apartments are those built before 1947 that have been continuously occupied by the current tenant, or a legal successor, since 1971.
The tenants have no leases, but instead have a statutory right to occupy the apartment for as long as they want.


A Last Laugh
To the Editor:
Leonore Gershwin, Ira's widow, was a snarling Cerberus when it came to the use of George Gershwin's music.
In 1986, the director Paul Bartel and I prepared a 30-minute episode for the "Amazing Stories" fantasy series on television.
Titled "Gershwin's Trunk," our story had George, channeled through a medium, coming back to deliver new songs.


Susan Gates and Michael Pottinger Jr.
Susan Roberts Gates, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Moore Gates Jr. of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to Michael Howard Pottinger Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Pottinger of Louisville, Ky.
The Rev.
Wallace M. Alston Jr., a Presbyterian minister, officiated in the garden at the Hun School.
The Rev.
William Allard, a Roman Catholic priest and an uncle of the bridegroom, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Pottinger, 29, is a counselor at the Tillicum Middle School in Bellevue, Wash.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University and received a master's degree in counseling from the University of Vermont.
Her father is a principal with Gates, Wilmerding, Carper &amp; Rawlings, an investment counseling firm, in Princeton.


At the Village Well
To the Editor: Your recent articles about dealing with laundry while traveling, ("Hanging Out With the Wash," April 25) and studying the Welsh language, ("Gymru and Cymru and All That," May 2) brought back a very happy memory for me.
In 1976, four of us vacationed in northern Wales.
The guidebooks had warned us that the Welsh language was practically extinct and that few, if any, tourists ever heard it spoken.
After I melted a pair of knee socks in an unsuccessful attempt to dry them at the electric fire in our hotel, I learned that a neighboring town had a laundermat and decided that, vacation or no, laundry had to be done.


Nicklaus Is Still Golden, Even in the Twilight of His Career
Jack Nicklaus's third United States Open here at the Baltusrol Golf Club is turning out to be a grim encore.
The Nicklaus numbers today were 39-37-76, and his three-round total of 218 is eight above par.
But Nicklaus, who won the Open championship here in 1967 and 1980, remains grand with his considerable gallery.
His presence on the 13th was typical, a smart smattering of applause as the Bear approached the green, having hit from the rough into a bunker.


SUNY Chief Retires Proudly
A PINK ballet slipper sits on a bookshelf in Dr.
Sheldon N. Grebstein's office on the campus of the State University of New York here.
The slipper, signed by members of the dance division faculty, was presented to Dr.
Grebstein in honor of his retirement next month after 12 years as the president of SUNY Purchase.
The juxtaposition of the pointed shoe and books on American literature, Dr.
Grebstein's academic specialty, is emblematic of the institution that he has guided through declining state support and rising enrollment since 1981.
He leaves, he said, regretting that he could not create the "marvelous synergy" he envisioned between the School for the Arts and the College of Letters and Science, two of the campus's main divisions. (The third is the division of continuing education.) That dream was thwarted, he said, by the continual budget cuts that have plagued SUNY Purchase during most of his tenure.


Don't Let the Pesticide Polluters Fool You
To the Editor:
As an environmentalist and a chemist, I applaud Michael Fumento's effort in "Mother Nature's Pesticide Factories" (Op-Ed, June 9) to defuse the public's exaggerated fear of chemicals.
However, his basic argument, that pesticides made by humans pose a lesser risk than those produced by nature is disingenuous.
"Nature's pesticide factories" -- the fruits and vegetables consumed by humans and other animals -- do not discharge thousands of tons of hazardous chemical waste annually.
According to the Environmental Protection Agency, the United States chemical industry released 1.55 billion pounds of toxic chemicals into the environment in 1991, a figure that almost certainly is an underestimate, but still far exceeds those reported for other industrial categories.


Relaxing the Guard at Buckingham Palace
London this Summer has not been short of hot tickets.
But the real sizzler is a ticket for any one of the days in August and September on which part of the interior of Buckingham Palace will for the first time be open to a paying public.
This event, which begins on Aug. 7 and runs for eight weeks, has already taken rank in the history of tourism as a major first.
Within hours of the announcement, Buckingham Palace became the No. 1 attraction in Britain for visitors from abroad.
Tickets have the magical properties of fairy gold.
To have a pair in one's pocket this summer will turn frog into prince and frump into Circe.
Not to get to go will be a catastrophe best hidden from the folks back at home.


The U.N. Draws a Line for Peacekeeping in Somalia


Immigration Puzzle
To the Editor:
For many who live and work productively in this country there is irony in your June 10 front-page report on a Chinese gang leader, suspected of alien smuggling, who twice entered this country illegally, who may have deposited hundreds of other illegals here and now has our immigration system tied up in a protracted request for asylum.
I came to this country, legally, as a physician on a student visa in 1964.
I was required to report my whereabouts to the Immigration and Naturalization Service each year, and when my time was up, I was emphatically told to leave, which I did.
In time I returned, again legally, as a permanent resident.


M. F. Stewart, James Lawless 4th
Marguerite Frances Stewart, a legal assistant at Debevoise &amp; Plimpton, and James Lawless 4th, an associate at Battle Fowler, both New York law firms, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
James A. Trimble performed the ceremony in the Christ Chapel at the Episcopal Academy in Merion, Pa.


Would-Be Auto Thief Is Slain at a Brooklyn Service Station
A 30-year-old would-be car thief died on the pavement of a Brooklyn gasoline station yesterday after picking the wrong target, the police said.
The man, Steve Ellis, 31, of 140 Barbey Street in Brooklyn, was pronounced dead shortly after his intended victim, Jerome Mance, thwarted the attempt to steal the car, which was occupied by Mr.
Mance's wife and three children, said a police spokesman, Officer Scott Bloch.


The Cotton Brief
YOU like to think of yourself as a member in good standing of the biosphere.
You recycle, now that it's the law.
You try to buy organic grapes and try not to buy plastic bags.
You even give money to the National Resources Defense Council, though you're a little behind on your Amicus Journals.
But you and Sting see eye to eye on the rain forest, and that's important.
You believe in compost as a concept, and even though you voted for Al Gore, you nodded when former Environmental President George Bush said in 1992 that buying cotton instead of synthetics would "restore America's moral fiber."
No, you're not the arch-druid, but between your naked self and the world it's strictly natural fibers, right down to your briefs.
You're green.


Madeline Cuomo, Brian O'Donoghue
EVEN as high school sweethearts, Madeline Cuomo and Brian O'Donoghue were more interested in public service than in partying.
They met at the St.
Francis Preparatory School in Bayside, Queens, and spent many Saturday nights working together in places that were not exactly popular teen-age hangouts, like a nursing home and a shelter for homeless youths.
Ms.
Cuomo, a daughter of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and his wife, Matilda, is now 28 and a lawyer specializing in matrimonial law as an associate at the firm of Shea &amp; Gould in Manhattan.
Mr.
O'Donoghue, 30, just finished his first year of law school at Fordham University and worked until recently as a fire fighter in Manhattan and as a lifeguard at Jones Beach on Long Island.


Peace, Love And Chompers
THE roster of superwaifs, vegetarian grunge actors and musicians in Birkenstocks and beads continues to grow like late-summer squash in the garden of some California commune.
That's why the New York Shakespeare Festival's black-tie fund-raising event under a tent at Tavern on the Green on Wednesday, which celebrated the 25th anniversary of the tribal love musical "Hair," carried more cultural weight than it would have two years ago.
It was nice, a relief even, that some of the performers singing about the Age of Aquarius, peace, love, harmony and understanding -- they included Kevin Kline, Ben Vereen and Betty Buckley -- were actually old enough to have lived through the hippie era.
And if the event was yet another revival in a season of revivalism, at least it was inspired by a breakthrough moment of political and spiritual intention in musical-theater history.


Corrections
An article on May 30 about Paris misstated the purpose of the Deportation Memorial on the Ile de la Cite.
It is dedicated to the 200,000 French men and women -- not only Jews -- who were deported to German concentration camps in World War II.
Nearby, on the Right Bank of the Seine, at 17 Rue Geoffroy-l'Asnier, is a memorial to the Unknown Jewish Martyr, dedicated to victims of the Nazis.


Avoiding Traffic Jams in the Computer Age
IT is 11 o'clock in the morning and an executive in White Plains is flying to Los Angeles at 2 P.M.
Pressing a button on a computer in his office, the screen displays traffic information along the route to the airport and he sees a trouble spot on the far side of the Triborough Bridge and plans to leave the office early.
Such customized traffic-information programs are being marketed to companies by Westchester Commuter Central, a traffic-communications center in Elmsford and a joint venture between Westchester County and Metro Traffic Control, a Houston-based traffic reporting service, which operates traffic information centers in every state.
Since November, the center has been supplying traffic and commuter information free of charge to county agencies, said Clifford Cole, the manager of the center.  5-Year Agreement With the County
"Our traffic-information clearinghouse is the first public-private project of its kind in the country," Mr.
Cole said.
"It is also a showcase for our system."


JUNE 13-19: Accepting Partition; A Victory for Sheer Force Seems at Hand in Bosnia
After 15 months of enduring warfare and atrocities, Bosnia and Herzegovina last week stared at the opening scene of its final nightmare: international sanctioning of its partition by force.
Lord Owen, the European co-chairman of the international mediation effort on Bosnia, cited the military realities on the ground as he abandoned his effort to preserve Bosnia's territorial integrity by dividing it into 10 ethnic zones.
He threw his weight instead behind division of the country into Serbian, Croatian and Muslim states, only loosely joined.


Robyn M. Berry, Keith V. Bradsher
Robyn Meredith Berry and Keith Vinson Bradsher, reporters in Washington, were married yesterday in Eden, Wyo.
The Rev.
Gary Turner performed the ceremony at the Oregon Trail Episcopal Church.
Ms.
Meredith, 25, is adopting the last name of her maternal grandfather, the late Robert Meredith.
She works for The American Banker, a newspaper in New York.


In the Region: Connecticut; Recent Sales
Branford, Conn.  $187,000
2 Pepperwood Lane  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 17-year-old raised ranch; new deck, adjacent land trust, close to shopping, 0.75 acre; taxes $3,080.
Hartford, Conn.  $75,900
245 Lyme Street  Three-bedroom, 1-bath, 66-year-old colonial; sunroom, formal dining room, period details, 50- by 157-ft. lot; taxes $1,863.
West Hartford, Conn.  $199,000
124 Lawler Road  Three-bedroom, 2-bath, 45-year-old colonial; pantry, 0.25 acre; taxes $3,780.
Cortlandt, N.Y.,  $330,000
14 Amanda Court  Four-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 13-year-old Colonial; entry hall, fireplace, cathedral ceiling, full unfinished basement; taxes $6,530.
New Castle, N.Y.  $150,000
277 King Street  Two-bedroom, one-bath, 44-year-old Cape; entry hall, eat-in kitchen, dining room, deck, one-car garage; taxes $4,249.
Peekskill, N.Y.  $116,000
1726 Westchester Avenue  Four-bedroom, one-bath, 44-year-old Cape; modern eat-in kitchen, deck, loft, full unfinished basement; taxes $2,934.
OTHER AREAS Albertson, L.I.  $131,000
54 I.U.
Willets Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, attic, 1-car attached garage; taxes $3,100.
Bayport, L.I.  $234,500
12 Verka Court  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 19-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, deck, inground pool; taxes $6,700.
Edison, N.J.  $114,000
65 Ovington Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 36-year-old Cape Cod; brick front, fenced lot, new roof, full basement; taxes $2,105.


A Value-Added Tax, No Matter the Adjustments, Can't Be Fair
To the Editor:
The very curious article "Answer: A Value-Added Tax" by Lester C. Thurow (Op-Ed, June 8) is an example of how one might travel from New York to New Jersey by way of California.
To begin with, value-added taxes are added incrementally at each stage of production, and they are not, as the author suggests, the difference between component cost and sales price.
However, no matter how the tax is calculated, it would increase the cost of every manufactured item without exception and raise the cost of living substantially.
The author, recognizing this, suggests $4,000 exemptions for each individual, rebates for exports and charges for imports.
More drawbacks and exemptions would undoubtedly be added case by case as need arises.
The struggle for a good fit would never end.


Prison and Nonsmokers: Yearning to Breathe Free
William Lynch might have stepped straight from a film noir prison scene of the 1940's.
A grizzled, toothless convict who goes by the name Pops and gives his age as "sixtyish," he squints at a visitor through the perpetual haze of bluish smoke that rises from the ever-present Camel cigarette dangling from his lips.
But these days Pops Lynch and his nicotine haze are becoming cellblock anachronisms as corrections officials push for smokeless prisons and the number of smoking prisoners falls.


Conner's New Boat Is Commissioned
With all the fanfare usually associated with his America's Cup campaigns, Dennis Conner today commissioned his new boat for the coming Whitbread Round the World Race.
The dockside ceremony took place here in Newport, the city that was home to the America's Cup before Conner's team lost the coveted trophy to Australia in 1983.
But the old angst seemed behind him as Conner prepared to move on into the unfamiliar territory of Whitbread racing.


Sprays That Slay Plant Pests, Safely
THE nibblers and chewers are about, those pesky insects that make nasty holes and cause yellow spots in plant leaves.
Gardeners everywhere usually like to get rid of these invaders as soon as possible.
But they like to do it safely.
In these days of environmental awareness, many gardeners hesitate to use just any spray, but seek the least toxic method.


Questions About Wealthy At Heart of Rent Debate
At the heart of the legislative battle over rent laws is a basic question: Should the wealthy continue to benefit from rent regulation, a system that protects thousands of New Yorkers from drastic rent increases?
The answer is an emphatic "No," say many landlords and their supporters in the Legislature.
And to bolster their arguments, they trot out the names of several well-to-do celebrities who they say milk the system by living in rent-stabilized apartments at posh Manhattan addresses.


A Switch That Fails Equals Inconsistency
THERE are situations in which it is clever to change horses in midstream, leaving a befuddled opponent to stare as you gallop off in a new direction.
But if your ploy doesn't work and you get smashed, your fans will lament your inconsistency.
And so it was in the game between the grandmasters Alexei Shirov of Latvia and Oscar Panno of Argentina in Round 3 of the Fourth Miguel Najdorf International Tournament in Buenos Aires in April.


A Leader in Cornea-Transplant Surgery
THE beeps of a heart monitor punctuated the smooth rhythms of Nat King Cole singing in the background as Dr.
Mitchell Stein prepared to remove Christopher J. Boufford's diseased left cornea late last month.
The scene was an operating room in the Northern Westchester Hospital Center here, where the 23-year-old patient lay anesthetized and draped with sanitary cloths, his exposed eye kept open with a speculum.
The cornea-transplant surgery, which could be watched on a closed-circuit television monitor in the operating room, takes place only six times a year at the hospital, and Dr.
Stein is the only ophthalmologist who performs the procedure here.


JUNE 13-19: Out of H.I.V. Prison; The Misery Is Lightened For a Handful of Haitians
After spending up to 20 months in detention at Guantanamo Bay Naval Base, 125 political refugees from Haiti who are infected with the virus that causes AIDS were admitted to the United States last week.
Complying with a Federal judge's order, three military flights took the refugees to Miami and New York, freeing them from what the judge called "an H.I.V. prison camp." Fifteen other Haitians are to be released this week, and then the detention center is to be closed.


Miss Montgomery And Mr. Moore
Allison Montgomery, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Clark T. Montgomery of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., was married yesterday to Nicholas Connell Moore, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George C. Moore of New York.
The Rev.
Richard McKeon Jr. performed the ceremony at Zion Episcopal Church in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
Mrs.
Moore and her husband are both 27 and graduates of Kenyon College.
She is an account coordinator in Philadelphia for the advertising firm of Foote Cone Belding.
Her father is an executive vice president and group director at Gray Advertising in New York.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
Albertson  $131,000
54 I.U.
Willets Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, attic, 1-car attached garage; taxes $3,100.
Bayport  $234,500
12 Verka Court  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 19-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, basement, deck, inground pool; taxes $6,700.
East Islip  $475,000
103 Hollins Avenue  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 5-year-old contemporary; dining room, 2 fireplaces, 3-car attached garage, 1.2 acres; taxes $10,800.
Mineola  $159,250
157 Marcellus Drive  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 60-year-old colonial; dining room, sunporch; taxes $3,000.
Sea Cliff  $243,000
109-111 14th Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 70-year-old Dutch colonial; dining room, fireplace, legal 1-bedroom, 1-bath rental apartment; taxes $3,000.
Williston Park  $205,000
169 Primrose Road  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 37-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, finished basement, fireplace, 2-car garage; taxes $4,100.
OTHER AREAS West Hartford, Conn.  $199,000
124 Lawler Road  Three-bedroom, 2-bath, 45-year-old colonial; pantry, 0.25 acre; taxes $3,780.
Cortlandt, N.Y.,  $330,000
14 Amanda Court  Four-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 13-year-old Colonial; entry hall, fireplace, cathedral ceiling, full unfinished basement; taxes $6,530.
Edison, N.J.  $114,000
65 Ovington Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 36-year-old Cape Cod; brick front, fenced lot, new roof, full basement; taxes $2,105.


Wimbledon '93 Favors Only the Brave and Lucky
Everyone knows about the treachery of Wimbledon's lawns, a damp expanse described as "slimy" by players for whom familiarity has not bred the sort of fondness nine-time champion Martina Navratilova harbors for the most difficult surface in the sport.
But this year, even before the grass can turn traitor or the moody weather can wreak havoc , several Wimbledon contestants have already been set dangerously adrift by a particularly unforgiving draw.
The trouble starts right with the defending men's champion, Andre Agassi, whose No. 8 seeding not only happens to be the lowest ever awarded a holder of the title, but is also something of a gift considering his actual computer ranking of, ominously enough, 13th in the world.


He's Lost in Yonkers, But Not in Plainview
WHEN Brad Stoll of Plainview was 14 he told his parents that he did not want to go to sleep-away camp again.
They agreed that he could stay home for the summer, but only if he found a job.
That week Brad rode his bicycle to the nearby Plaza Playhouse in Old Bethpage, auditioned for a part in "Treasure Island" and won the leading role of Jim Hawkins.


LIFE REMAINS GRIM FOR THE ALBANIANS
Tushe Xaka has lived all her 30 years in this village of 700 people, on a frighteningly winding, narrow dirt road along a deep gorge in the mountains 30 miles north of Tirana, the capital.
She has three children, could pass for double her age and owns only the clothes she wears.
She goes barefoot to save her one pair of shoes, which she says she puts on only for high occasions, like funerals.
She admits that sometimes, on harsh winter days, she has borrowed a pair from a neighbor.


The War Against Anita Hill
To the Editor:
I found Signe Wilkinson's review of David Brock's book "The Real Anita Hill: The Untold Story" (May 23) right on target.


South Africa Leader's Unlikely Target: Black Votes
With an African pageant of ostrich-plumed dancers and thundering tribal drums, President F. W. de Klerk today began his improbable campaign for the votes of South African blacks.
Mr. de Klerk, who was introduced as a "strong chief" and the man "who liberated South Africa," told the overwhelmingly black crowd at a livestock show ground in this northern farm town that the event symbolized his party's rebirth from the white oligarchy that invented apartheid to a rainbow coalition of peace-loving, prosperity-seeking moderates.


Small-Town Smart Alecks
NOBODY'S FOOL By Richard Russo. 549 pp. New York: Random House. $23.


Corrections
A photograph of Antoine de Saint-Exupery on May 30 omitted a credit.
The photographer was John Phillips.


William Golding Is Dead at 81; The Author of 'Lord of the Flies'
William Golding, the Nobel Prize-winning author of the classic "Lord of the Flies" and other disturbing novels exploring the dark side of human nature, died yesterday in his home in Perranarworthal, England.
He was 81.
A heart attack was the probable cause, said Matthew Evans, chairman of Mr.
Golding's publisher, Faber and Faber.


Looking for Cheerleaders in Montana
HOW I CAME WEST, AND WHY I STAYED Stories.
By Alison Baker. 182 pp.
San Francisco: Chronicle Books.
Paper, $9.95.


Wallpaper Removal Depends on the Paper
REMOVING wallpaper is always messy, but generally fairly easy.
The methods depend on the type of wallpaper and the wall or ceiling material.
The easiest to remove is so-called strippable paper.
To test removing it, try lifting the corner of a piece with a putty knife.
If the corner comes away easily, peel the paper further by pulling it parallel to the surface, not outward.
If the paper is strippable, entire sheets should be removable by this method.
Underneath may be a layer of backing paper.
That can be left on the wall as a base for new wall covering, but if it comes away in places it has to be removed like ordinary nonstrippable wallpaper.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 20, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
48
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
2
73
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
18
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
5
DARKEST HOUR, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The concluding volume in a series about the Cutlers, a plantation-owning family.
5*
62
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
6
4
THE MAGIC OF YOU, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A 19th-century British minx sets her cap for an American sea captain.
7
8
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Pocket, $5.99.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
8
7
SHADOWFIRES, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A woman is stalked by her supposedly deceased husband.
9
25
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The investigation of a woman's death involves the American-Japanese rivalry.
10
1
CASTLES, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) To save herself from danger, a princess agrees to marry a knight in 19th-century England.
11*
4
THE CAT WHO WASN'T THERE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) Jim Qwilleran contends with crimes in Scotland.
12
2
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
13
2
TURTLE MOON, by Alice Hoffman. (Berkley, $5.99.) Two damaged adults and a troubled child strive valiantly to achieve happiness.
14
9
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Kinsey Millhone investigates a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
15
5
FATHERLAND, by Robert Harris. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A thriller set in the Third Reich 20 years after Hitler wins World War II.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
8
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
2
7
NOT FOR SALE AT ANY PRICE, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $5.95.) America's problems.
3*
5
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President.
4
502
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
5
88
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
6
18
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
7
109
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
8
6
WHERE THE BLUEBIRD SINGS TO THE LEMONADE SPRINGS, by Wallace Stegner. (Penguin, $11.) Essays on the American West.
9
33
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.50.) A war against women.
10
19
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
11*
23
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on self-esteem.
12
18
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) Social life and sexual fantasies.
13*
1
A WORLD LIT ONLY BY FIRE, by William Manchester. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) An account of the Renaissance and the Reformation.
14*
133
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
15*
15
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) Navy memoirs.
16*
22
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) Factors affecting the environment.
16*
15
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Examples of waste.
18*
5
WRITTEN BY HERSELF,edited by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $15.)Writings by women.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-to, and Miscellaneous
1
97
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) A collection of some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
11
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK: Volume 2, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) More tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
122
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
4
139
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 5, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted torepresent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that abook's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Seen the One Where Arnold Sells Noodles?
Americans abroad will not have to wait for the foreign release of "Last Action Hero" or "Sliver" to see Arnold Schwarzenegger and Sharon Stone this summer.
All they'll have to do is turn on the television and wait for an ad.
Along with earning millions from summer blockbusters, stars reap additional benefits from commercials shown in foreign countries.
Not surprisingly, American celebrities who reluctantly endorse products at home are only too happy to appear in ads abroad.


Lisa Laplace, Matthew Smith
Lisa Jill Laplace, a lawyer, was married last evening to Matthew Adam Smith, a corporate finance associate, both in New York.
Rabbi Robert Rabb officiated at the Plaza.
The bride, 28, is an associate with the law firm of Sullivan &amp; Cromwell.
She graduated from Duke University and received a law degree from Brooklyn Law School.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Maurice Laplace of Tenafly, N.J.
Her father is a partner of L. J. &amp; M. Laplace, a chemicals distributor in Elmwood Park, N.J.,


Ending Up in Downsville
INNOCENT DARKNESS By Edward R. F. Sheehan. 339 pp. New York:  Viking. $22.


'Backlash' Pops Up As Prop du Jour
Once there was a serious book of feminist reportage.
"Hey, honey," some slick director told the book, "I can make you a star." Something like that must have happened, because suddenly Susan Faludi's best-selling "Backlash: The Undeclared War Against American Women" has become a movie icon.
The 1991 book appears on screen as a conspicuous and jokey prop in two current films and is the subject of a catty reference in a third.
When "Backlash" turns up in the movies, you can hear the Zeitgeist calling.
In "Indecent Proposal," Demi Moore walks into the office of the billionaire businessman played by Robert Redford.
His receptionist shows every sign of being a bimbette -- bleached-blond hair, heavy makeup, lethal fingernails -- except she is reading "Backlash."


In Summer, Film Needs Special Care
FILM should be treated as if it were a delicate food.
Like milk, ice cream and mayonnaise, it requires special attention, especially in the summer.
If temperature, time, humidity, X-rays or any number of other silent monsters attack film, it is usually not obvious to the photographer.
Spoiled film does not announce itself until it's too late.


A la Carte; What's Good for the Island May Even Be Good for Manhattan
POMODORO is turning the tables on the Manhattan restaurants that have opened outposts on the Island.
The casual Italian cafe, which first opened in Port Washington and then in Huntington and Great Neck, is commuting in reverse.
Fabio Machado and Piero Casaliocchio, who own the popular Pomodoro threesome, will open a fourth, on Columbus Avenue between 70th and 71st Streets, by July 1.
The beachhead in Manhattan will mirror their Island restaurants.


Aegean Idyll: Was It Really That Good?
LAST summer my friend Lynette and I spent a couple of weeks on the Greek island of Santorini.
We had a great trip, of course.
We bring it up sometimes, always wistfully: our hotel room was actually a tiny stone house, ancient, built right into the hillside at the town of Oia; our sunny balcony overlooked volcanic islets shimmering in the Aegean; the long sunsets hovered over the islets and seemed to vibrate with color and time.
In the morning, cats prowled or posed on the walls of the hillside houses; one little black kitty adopted us, and came every morning to lick the creamy dregs of our goat-milk yogurt.
When the day grew warm, we would walk down a long curving set of steps to the blue blue water, and swim for hours.
The crystalline sea seemed to lift us up, hold us in the buoyant moment; we were suspended at the still center of the world.


On Sunday; The Cost Crisis In Health Care Strikes Home
HOW bad is the health insurance crisis in America?
The Gay Men's Health Crisis -- the nation's oldest anti-AIDS advocacy group, an organization at the forefront in the fight for enlightened health-care policy -- is a target of a union-organizing drive because many of its 260 workers feel their health coverage is inadequate.


New Views on Contemporary Civilization and Its Discontents
IT is a yearly event: the Bronx Museum of the Arts selects 35 new artists to participate in a career-development seminar focusing on the realities of the art world, then exhibits works by them.
Though mainly produced, as usual, before the seminar, this year's crop of art looks more like its aftermath.
To put it another way, the 13th yearly "Artist in the Marketplace," seems restrained to the point of glumness.
It could be the tenor of the times, as reflected by Marysol Nieves and Lydia Yee, who, as curator of Latin American art and associate curator of contemporary art, respectively, did the choosing.
More likely, it is another manifestation of the mania for topicality, which is sweeping the scene.


Drawing the Line in Somalia
Americans stare with understandable confusion at the jarring images from Somalia.
What began last year as a humanitarian mission is now a bloody urban brawl in Mogadishu.
Provoked by the slaughter of 24 Pakistani peacekeepers on June 5, United Nations forces struck back with daily assaults by U.S. warplanes against a local warlord.
And although this is a U.N. operation under a Turkish commander, the cry in the street is "Down with America!"
Although the punitive actions seem justifiable, the operation now stands at a dangerous point.
The U.S. and U.N. could slide unthinkingly into deep involvement in Somalia's internal chaos.


THE DEATH OF EROS
Surely you will hear from outraged feminists regarding Allan Bloom's "The Death of Eros" (May 23).
As author of "The Girl Watcher's Guide" (Harper, 1954), I share Bloom's chagrin that even "lookism" is included among currently condemned "isms," and wish to defend my right to admire beauty -- the beauty of women as well as the beauty of sunsets and calla lilies.
DON SAUERS Chalk Hill, Pa.


Stacey J. Byer and Craig L. Farlie
Stacey Jane Byer, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Norman E. Byer of Columbia, Md., was married yesterday to Craig Leitzow Farlie, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William N. Farlie Jr. of Upper Montclair, N.J.
The Rev.
Charles Beirne, a Roman Catholic priest, and Cantor Judi Porecki jointly officiated at Oxon Hill (Md.) Manor.
The bride and the bridegroom, both 26, graduated from Princeton University.
Mrs.
Farlie is an admissions officer there.
Her father is an associate director of microelectronics for Martin Marietta Laboratories, an aerospace research and development center in Baltimore.
Her mother, Eleanor D. Byer, was until recently an accountant for the United Way in Baltimore.


A 4th Body Is Discovered in the Waters Off Queens
A body of an Asian man was pulled from the sea off Queens yesterday by the United States Coast Guard, the police said.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service said the body might be that of a passenger on the Golden Venture, one of 20 people believed to be missing from the immigrant-smuggling ship that ran aground off Rockaway Beach on June 6 with about 320 passengers.


Jennifer Embree, Michael Lannan
Jennifer Campbell Embree, a daughter of Mrs.
Thomas Wade 3d of Seacliff, L.I., and Jeb N. Embree of New York, was married yesterday to Michael Thomas Lannan, the son of Mrs.
Richard Burse of Newton, Mass., and Thomas Lannan of Boston.
The Rev.
Linda Quinlan performed the ceremony at the Presbyterian Church of Bridgehampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Lannan teaches prekindergarten classes at the Belmont Day School in Belmont, Mass.
She graduated from Wittenberg University and received a master's degree in education from Lesley College.
Her father is a vice president of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, the securities brokerage, in New York.


The Last Catch On the Hudson
James Carey and his fishing partner, Calman Greenburg, motored out to the middle of Haverstraw Bay, where the Hudson River is four miles wide, to check their nets one last time.
It was the final day of the first season limiting the catch of Atlantic sturgeon, a fish that grows to eight feet and can live for 60 years.
And the fishermen said the new restrictions would finally mark the end of commercial fishing on the Hudson.


From Bosnian Crisis To All-Out War
The horror in Bosnia will not reach a natural equilibrium at which the fighting will stop.
Nor will other areas of the former Yugoslavia remain quiet for long.
It is likely that at least as many innocent people will die as have already died -- more than 200,000 -- and that the conflict will inexorably spread outside the former Yugoslavia.
Western leaders cannot pretend their policy failure is a success.
Nobody, especially President Clinton, should think that because the West has abandoned Bosnia to partition the war will go away.
The repercussions of inaction remain sobering.
Here is a tour d'horizon and its likely development:


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended June 5  MANHATTAN  Chelsea  $200,000
109 West 26th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. loft co-op; elevator, 13-ft.-ceilings, south exposure; maintenance $640, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Herbert H. Kliegerman &amp; Associates)  Greenwich Village  $965,000
24 Fifth Avenue (9th St.)  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 3,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, den, 3,500-sq.-ft. wrapped terrace, 14-ft. ceilings, marble baths, whirlpool and steam room; maintenance $4,408, 48% tax-deductible (Broker: Bellmarc Realty)  FlatIron District  $385,000
105 Fifth Avenue (18th St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. loft co-op; elevator, 13 1/2-ft. ceilings, decorative columns, 10-ft. oak-trimmed windows, remodeled kitchen and baths; maintenance $972, 67% tax-deductible (Brokers: Manhattan Homes-Kanelba &amp; Robilotti)  TriBeCa  $500,000
20 North Moore Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 2,500-sq.-ft. loft co-op; private elevator, dining area, 1,200-sq.-ft. artist studio, 12-ft. arched windows, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,800, 60% tax-deductible (Broker: William B. May)  Upper East Side  $1.4 million
885 Park Avenue (78th St.)  3-bedroom, 4-bath, 3,700-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, maid's room, dining room, library, 2 exposures; maintenance $2,858, 44% tax-deductible (Broker: Corcoran Group)  BRONX  City Island  $160,000
295 Fordham Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family semi-attached brick town house; dining room, rear deck, hospitality suite on ground level, L.I.
Sound view, 19- by 90-ft. lot; taxes $1,900 (Broker: Jacquelene Kyle Kall)  Riverdale  $63,000
2736 Independence Avenue  (Mark Chester)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 925-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining area, remodeled kitchen and bath; maintenance $527, 50% tax-deductible (Broker: Marilyn &amp; Morris B. Sopher)  BROOKLYN  Boerum Hill  $350,000
249 Dean Street  2-family, 4-story brick house; 6 bedrooms, 3 baths, double parlor, dining room, 4 fireplaces in owner's triplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, dining area in garden rental; 21- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $2,587 (Broker: Cobble Heights Realty)  Brighton Beach  $225,000
8 Brighton 4th Terrace  4-family semi-attached brick house; 2 bedrooms in three units; 1 bedroom in other; eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; finished basement, 26 1/2- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Jacob Gold Realty)  Windsor Terrace  $313,000
27 Prospect Park South West  2-family house; 4 bedrooms, 1 1/2 baths, double parlor, dining room in primary unit; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath in other; 19- by 85-ft. lot; taxes $1,400 (Broker: Warren Lewis Realty)  QUEENS  Astoria  $280,000
27-20 27th Street  2-family detached frame house; dining room in upper unit; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each; finished basement, 2-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,678 (Broker: Century 21/Tri-Boro Terrace Real Estate)  Jackson Heights  $225,000
25-58 84th Street  5-bedroom, 3-bath, one-family detached Tudor; dining room, fireplace, finished basement, 2-car garage, 40- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,200 (Broker: Kremer Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Heartland Village  $65,000
154 Richmond Hill Road  (Honey Bee)  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 808-sq.-ft. condo in a 7-year-old building; dining area, utility room, pool and clubhouse; common charge $88, taxes $899 (Broker: Salmon Real Estate)  Westerleigh  $160,000
283 Clinton B. Fiske Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family dteached colonial; dining room, sun porch, 1-car garage, 40- by 75-ft. lot; taxes $1,306 (Broker: Coldwell Banker/DeSimone Realty)


In a 90's War On Poverty, Who Hands Out Money?
FOR more than a quarter century, the broad outlines of the debate over how to provide social services to poor neighborhoods has been set in stone: Liberals have touted the work of community organizations financed with government and foundation money.
The Clinton Administration shows every indication of trying to use them extensively, with Henry Cisneros, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, testifying last week before a House subcommittee in support of a new $50 million program to be funneled through neighborhood groups called community development corporations.
"I believe in community-based solutions," he said.
"I'm convinced that it is imperative for us to build, nurture and maintain community-based capacities such as community development corporations."
Conservatives, from the early days of the war on poverty in the mid-1960's, have rolled their eyes over this arrangement, citing inefficiencies and questioning the very premise.


INSIDE
De Klerk Seeks Black Vote
President F. W. de Klerk of South Africa began a campaign for votes from blacks, saying it symbolized his party's rebirth as a rainbow coalition of peaceful moderates.
Page 10.
U.S.
Captured Soviet A-Arms


Public &amp; Private; Daughter Of the Groom
My father was married for the third time last month.
This makes him sound a good deal more Liz Taylorish than is accurate or fair.
He is, happily, a good man who loves women and who, sadly, has had two wives die of cancer.
Our eldest child wanted to tell the bride, a warm and intelligent woman we liked instantly, that there was a curse on Grandpop.
But there was a blessing on him, really, and that was that he has been able to learn from death and grief the most useful lesson they can teach, the value of life and happiness.
He has taught me that, too, as he has so many other things.


A Wrong Message For Young People?
To the Editor:
Are you encouraging your readers to get stoned?
In two major pieces that have appeared in the Sunday Styles section ("Tripping, but Not Falling," May 2, and "Repotted," March 7), it seriously looks like the Times wants its readers to trip on LSD, preferably while smoking a joint and wearing clothing made from hemp.


In Turkey, Still Climbing
AT first sight, the election last week of Tansu Ciller as Turkey's first woman Prime Minister seemed an anomaly in a society whose secular ideals are offset by a profound, Islamic conservatism.
In a way, though, the vote by the ruling True Path Party showed just how enduring the legacy of Mustafa Kemal Ataturk has proven to be since the founder of modern Turkey launched the land on an often-frustrated Western trajectory in 1923.


Old and New Faces at Caramoor
GARRICK OHLSSON, Richard Stoltzman, the Tokyo, Emerson and Cassatt String Quartets and the Orchestra and Chamber Ensemble of St.
Luke's are returning to the Caramoor Festival this summer along with a good many old friends.
In fact, says the executive director, Howard Herring, "Many of the great international artists appearing this season were nurtured here; this adds another dimension to their performance."
Certainly this is true for conductor and soloist at the opening concert, Saturday evening at 8:30: Julius Rudel made his Caramoor conducting debut (and began a 15-year tenure as music director of the festival) in 1964, while Misha Dichter first played at the Festival in Katonah more than 20 years ago.
The all-Beethoven program lists the "Creatures of Prometheus" Overture, the Third Piano Concerto and the "Eroica" Symphony.


Treat Judge Ginsburg Like a Man
I accept that Senate confirmation of Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg is a foregone conclusion.
And of course I'm glad a second woman will soon grace the Supreme Court.
But let's face it: Were Judge Ginsburg a man who voiced similar criticisms of Roe v.
Wade, he'd be "Borked."
Judge Ginsburg's views, as expressed in public statements, on the constitutional right to an abortion are alarming.
To spare her a rigorous examination of those views in a general celebration of her womanhood would promote the condescending sexism and stereotyping that Judge Ginsburg herself has fought all her life.


Susan Arthur, Willard Whitson
Susan Elizabeth Arthur, the director of the Houk Friedman photography gallery, was married yesterday to John Willard Whitson, the senior exhibit developer at the American Museum of Natural History, both in New York.
The Rev.
Roger W. Smith, an uncle of the bride, performed the Episcopal ceremony in Skillman, N.J., at the home of Lauren Jones and Mark Horneung, friends of the couple.
Mrs.
Whitson, 34, graduated from Wellesley College and received a master's degree in art history from the University of Texas.
She is a daughter of Mrs.
John Glenn Yeager of Houston and the late Dogan H. Arthur.
Her stepfather, Mr.
Yeager, retired as the manager of commerce for the Exxon Corporation in Houston.


Europeans Try to Revive a Faded Dream of Unity
After a year in which little has gone right for them, European Community leaders will gather Monday for a summit meeting intended to convince skeptical Europeans that plans for greater regional unity have not been buried by a severe economic recession and the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
It will be no easy task.
The community's biggest governments have all been forced to look inward as a result of rapidly climbing unemployment, new intolerance of third-world immigrants, demands for greater trade protectionism and polls showing that their own popularity is tumbling.


Hospitals Begin Streamlining For a New World in Health Care
The Genesys Health System plans to close its four hospitals in Genesee County, Mich., and replace them with a single streamlined hospital with 439 patient beds, half as many as the old hospitals.
Genesys, based in Flint, is shrinking to get ready for the new world of managed competition in health care under which hospitals and doctors may have to bid against one another for insured groups of patients.
And it is struggling to make health care more affordable so that the county's dominant employer, the General Motors Corporation, will not close any additional local factories, further reducing the hospital's potential pool of patients.
Under an avalanche of economic and political pressures, hospitals nationwide are reinventing themselves.
In addition to cutting costs and delivering care more efficiently, they are providing services unheard of in the past like making house calls and competing with insurers in processing claims.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
WORLD WAR II 199 DAYS The Battle for Stalingrad.
By Edwin P. Hoyt.
Tor/Tom Doherty, $22.95.


On Psychiatry And Sexuality In America
NAME: A. M. Homes IDENTITY: 31-year-old novelist.
Lecturer at Columbia University.
NEW BOOK: "In a Country of Mothers" (Knopf, $22), the story of a psychiatrist who convinces herself that one of her patients is the daughter she gave up for adoption years before.


Cauthen Finds a Job
STEVE CAUTHEN has been hired to do promotional work for Turfway Park, the Cincinnati-area track in Florence, Ky.
He will share the title of associate vice president with STEVE FORD.
Cauthen, 33, grew up in nearby Walton and in 1978, at age 18, rode Affirmed to the Triple Crown.
Cauthen raced in England and Europe from 1979 until last year, then returned to his farm at Verona, Ky., unsure of his future, unwilling to return to Europe's reduced earnings opportunities and too heavy to ride in the United States.
He has been helping his mother train horses at River Downs in Cincinnati. (AP)


Add and Extract
HOW CAN THE SUMMER chef keep food light in fat and calories and still maintain the intense, fresh flavors of the season?
One alternative is cooking with vegetable juice.
The distilled essence of tomatoes and sweet red peppers, for example, lends a warm, sunny note to pastas, grilled vegetables, meat and fish, while the juice from vegetables like cucumbers and celery adds a delicate cool.
The cucumber itself may seem an unlikely candidate for juicing -- the vegetable is better known for its crunch than its flavor.
But after the pulp and skin have been removed, cucumber juice has a full, though delicate, flavor.
Much the same can be said for celery, though its juice is saltier and spicier.
Both add a surprising, if not immediately identifiable, vigor to the summer table.
Think of it as a garden that's been distilled.


Julia Wallace, Robert Bennett
Dr.
Julia Wallace, a veterinary surgeon in South Weymouth, Mass., was married yesterday to Robert Egan Bennett, a real estate consultant in Hingham, Mass.
The Rev.
John J. Bishop performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Dedham, Mass.
Dr.
Bennett, 31, is with South Shore Veterinary Associates.
She and her husband graduated from Princeton University.
She received her veterinary degree from Tufts University.
Dr.
Bennett is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Neil W. Wallace of Sherborn, Mass.
Her father is the chairman of the General Investment and Development Company, a real estate concern in Boston.


Craig L. Rodwell, 52, Pioneer for Gay Rights
Craig L. Rodwell, a vocal advocate of gay rights for more than 30 years and the founder and former owner of the Oscar Wilde Memorial Bookshop in Greenwich Village, died on Friday at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Manhattan.
A resident of the Village, he was 52.
Bill Offenbaker, who bought the store from him in March, said Mr.
Rodwell died of stomach cancer.


'She Loves Me' Is a Confection That Won't Cloy
Technically, the original Broadway production of "She Loves Me" was a flop.
Although it collected a sheaf of admiring notices in the spring of 1963 -- "a bonbon of a musical," cooed The Times -- and ran for more than 300 performances, it never recouped its investment.
By Broadway's unforgiving yardstick, that makes you a failure in the record books.
I don't know anybody who thinks of the show that way.
It's my experience that anybody who thinks at all fondly about past musicals feels passionately about "She Loves Me" and yearns for a revival.
Some hit musicals -- those that did turn a penny or two -- have far less devoted followings.


Hope for Overhaul Dims on a Crumbling Subway Line
At the Park Place subway station on the Franklin Avenue shuttle, the outdoor platform is covered with plywood boards because the concrete underneath is so badly eroded.
A collapsed fence invites children to play on the tracks and, one recent afternoon, 8-year-olds jumped on and off the wooden covering of the electrified third rail.
Long considered one of the most run-down and neglected parts of New York City's sprawling transportation network, the tiny, five-station Franklin Avenue shuttle, which cuts 1.7 miles across central Brooklyn to connect the A train with the D, needs an overhaul as badly as any subway line in the system.
Not since 1957, the last year the Dodgers played nearby in Ebbets Field, has the shuttle seen a healthy ridership, and it almost looks as if that was the last time any repairs were made.


Two Colorado Dance Festivals
Western Colorado will be the site of an avalanche of dance programs this summer.
In Aspen, the 24th season of DanceAspen Festival opens on July 1, featuring Martine Van Hamel's New Amsterdam Ballet with Marianna Tcherkassky, Amanda McKerrow and Gary Chryst.
Other companies scheduled to appear during the eight weeks of performances are: Lines Contemporary Ballet (July 8 to 10), Mark Morris Dance Group (July 15 to 17), Pilobolus (July 22 to 24), Ballet West from Salt Lake City (Aug. 5 to 7) and Hubbard Street Dance Chicago (Aug. 11 to 14 and 18 to 21).
From July 19 to 31, a minifestival of experimental work includes performances by the San Francisco-based dance theater company Contraband; a collaborative project between performance artists Eiko and Koma accompanied by Native American musicians Robert Mirabal and Reynaldo Lujan of Taos, N.M.; and Rachel Rosenthal.
All performances will be staged at the  DanceAspen Festival Theater, on Maroon Creek Road.
Tickets range from $5 to $30.
For ticket information call (800) 933-3820.
An hour away, people can improve their dance skills as well as watch the pros at work at the Glenwood Springs Dance Festival, June 28 to July 18.
Dendy Dance, Contraband and Denver Contemporary Dance companies will perform, and dancers from these companies, as well as other guest artists including Milton Myers, will teach courses geared to intermediate and advanced dancers.
There are also classes for children and young dancers.
Tickets for performances, which will be held at the Glenwood Springs High School, 1340 Pitkin Avenue, range from $5 to $9.
The cost of a full week of classes, which will be taught at Colorado Mountain College, 1402 Blake Avenue, ranges from $145 to $160.
Call (303) 928-0878.


Shawn Holmes, Charles Steers 3d
Shawn Holmes, a daughter of Diane D. Holmes and John B. Holmes, both of Purchase, N.Y., was married on Friday to Charles Robert Coster Steers 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Steers Jr. of Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
Patrick O'Neil, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of the Resurrection in Rye.
Mrs.
Steers, 31, is a sales representative for Absorba Ltd., a maker of childrens' clothing in New York.
She graduated from Rollins College.
Her father retired as the president of Izod Ltd., the apparel manufacturer in New York.


Jacqueline Pelosi, M. T. Kenneally
Jacqueline Frances Pelosi, a daughter of United States Representative Nancy Pelosi and Paul F. Pelosi of San Francisco and Washington, was married yesterday to Michael Terence Kenneally, a son of Patricia S. Kenneally of Houston and J. Thomas Kenneally of Kilquade, County Wicklow, Ireland.
The Rev.
Royden B. Davis performed the ceremony at the Catholic Church of St.
Helena, in St.
Helena, Calif.
The bride and the bridegroom graduated from Georgetown University.
She was until recently a promotions coordinator at Gourmet magazine in New York.
Her father is the president of Financial Leasing Services, a venture-capital company in San Francisco.
Her mother is a Democrat from California.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a memorial service for Algernon D. Black, leader emeritus of the New York Society for Ethical Culture, at 2 P.M. today in the society's Meeting House, misstated the address.
It is at 2 West 64th Street, at the corner of Central Park West.


Players Polish Their Shooters For U.S. Marbles Tournament
ON the amusement pier here, one recent Saturday, riders shrieked as the Sea Serpent dropped them from dizzying heights, but the two youngsters on the beach nearby paid no attention.
Alyisa Mercaldo, 7, from Villas, and Michael Vasser, 9, from West Cape May, were shooting marbles on a cement block.
As New Jersey's entrants in the four-day National Marbles Tournament, which begins here tomorrow, they were learning one of the secrets of marbles champions: concentration.


Tina Pray, Eric Grayson
Natasha Justina Pray, a daughter of Mrs.
F.
Richards Ford 3d and Malcolm S. Pray Jr., both of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Eric Grayson, a son of Lieut.
Col.
Cyrus Grayson, U.S.A.F., retired, and Mrs.
Grayson of New York.
The Rev.
Terence Elsberry, an Episcopal minister, and the Rev.
Richard Stearns, a Presbyterian minister, jointly officiated at Christ Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Grayson, known as Tina, is the vice president and the director of sales and member services for the American Fitness Institute in Greenwich.
She graduated from Hartwick College.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Mr.
Ford.


Style, Substance Make Memorable Meals
THE recent opening in Westport of Restaurant Zanghi -- on the ground floor of an 1873 Italianate building being converted to the Inn at National Hall -- adds a seductively elegant dimension to dining out in what has long been a good restaurant town.
The high ceiling, elaborately decorated space has three adjoining dining areas, each with soft green couches and chairs and well-spaced tables with green Art Nouveau-style vases.


'Hopefully' Springs Eternal
While the cat is away, let's play with a heretical notion.
Let's engage in a spirited defense of the word hopefully.
You know -- the bad hopefully.
The one without a verb to modify, or even an adjective to modify; the one floating, odd and defiant, at the beginning or the end of a sentence; the one you stop yourself from saying, train yourself never even to think -- that hopefully.
I never touch the stuff, myself, and never will.
I don't have the stomach for it.
My lips draw back from it in horror.
The resulting opprobrium is too great.
I am a novelist, not a revolutionary.
Having made that clear, I would like to say that I am also wrong.


Johnson Dominates In a 400 Showdown
Quincy Watts, the Olympic champion at 400 meters, was proud to claim third place.
Butch Reynolds, the world-record holder and runner-up, had worried so much about this race, he couldn't eat for two days.
But the winner of the final and featured race today in the USA/Mobil championships was Michael Johnson, a 200-meter sprinter who was reluctantly slumming in the 400 because of hamstring problems.


Caroline Oehmler, S. M. Chamberlain
Caroline Drew Oehmler, an associate at the law firm of Rome, George &amp; Klein in Boston, and Dr.
Sherman Morris Chamberlain, a resident in internal medicine at Deaconess Hospital, also in Boston, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Ronald Coyne, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Benjamin Rudavsky officiated at the Memorial Church at Harvard University in Cambridge, Mass.


Forgotten History: Furgol Won Here
He is Baltusrol's forgotten man.
While the last two Opens here have been celebrated as the site of victories by Jack Nicklaus, unsung Ed Furgol's victory in the Baltusrol Open before those is lost in golf's foggy mid-1950's.
It came after Ben Hogan's epic victory in 1953 at Oakmont outside Pittsburgh, and before Jack Fleck's Cinderella story at Olympic in San Francisco in 1955.


Japan's Ruling Party Learns to Tremble
The Liberal Democratic Party has governed Japan ever since it was formed in 1955, only temporarily shaken by the scandals and fierce rivalries that have periodically brought down governments.
But when Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa lost a no-confidence vote in Parliament Friday night, there was an ominous sense that the future of his once-monolithic party as well as Japan's postwar political order lay in tatters.
Mr.
Miyazawa announced that he would dissolve Parliament and call a snap election after suffering the humiliation, in which 39 members of his own party voted with the opposition.
This time, the stakes in the election will not be which governing party stalwart will succeed Mr.
Miyazawa, but whether opposition parties will join a coalition government with breakaway Liberal Democrats.
Voters are fed up with corruption and want election finance reformed, and a whole new style of government by compromise may have to be invented.


Badillo Campaigns For Remembrance
Herman Badillo was mingling with potential voters at a neighborhood fair in Co-op City in the Bronx when he came upon a woman who met his hand with both of hers.
"Long time no see," she said in Spanish. "What are you running for now?"


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
LAW WITH LIBERTY AND JUSTICE FOR SOME A Critique of the Conservative Supreme Court.
By David Kairys.
New Press, cloth, $25; paper, $12.95.


You Gotta Have a Broken Heart
MY LIFE AS A FAN By Wilfrid Sheed. 221 pp. New York: Simon &amp; Schuster. $20.


Catherine Harris, Michael Shraga
Catherine Lawrence Harris, the managing editor of equity research at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., was married yesterday to Michael Robert Shraga, a managing director at the Bankers Trust Company, both in New York.
The Rev.
James B. Jeffrey performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church in East Hampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Shraga, 41, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
She is the daughter of Mrs.
Eckley B. Coxe of East Hampton, and the late David T. Harris.
Her father was a senior executive vice president with the United States Trust Company in New York.


Patriots' Russell Stable After Stabbing
Also at Boston's Massachusetts General Hospital, New England Patriots running back LEONARD RUSSELL was in stable condition after he and teammate TIM EDWARDS were stabbed in a dispute outside a nightclub early Friday.
Edwards, who had come to Russell's aid in the incident, was treated for a minor wound and released.
Russell was stabbed in the chest during an argument with two men.
PATRICK FORTE, the Patriots vice president of football operations, was optimistic that both players would be ready for the start of training camp July 15.(AP)


Phoenix No Vacation For the Visiting Bulls
The Chicago Bulls expected to be on vacation today.
Instead, they were in Phoenix preparing for another challenge.
Thanks to the Suns' 108-98 victory Friday night in Game 5 of the National Basketball Association finals, the series returned to the Valley of the Sun.
And the Bulls were feeling the heat.


Wall Street; Investors Bring Precious Metals Back in Fashion
INVESTORS are pouring money into precious metals mutual funds and for the short term, at least, the pros seem to think that money is safe.
Gail Dudack, technical analyst at S. G. Warburg &amp; Company, said the surge of interest in precious metals funds itself will help push up prices.
"You're finding a concentration of money going into a small collection of stocks," she explains.
"That will have a bigger-than-life impact."
James Kennedy, portfolio manager of Dreyfus's New Era fund, which invests in inflation hedges such as gold, timber and oil, said he is increasing the gold portion of his portfolio.
Gold makes up about 13 percent of the fund today, up from about seven percent a year ago, he said.
His goal: to have about 20 percent of the portfolio in gold stocks.


Randy Karafin, Steven Hubert
Randy Hope Karafin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Karafin of Villanova, Pa., was married last evening to Dr.
Steven Lee Hubert, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Selmar Hubert of Rye Brook, N.Y.
Rabbi Max Hausen performed the ceremony at the Four Seasons Hotel in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Hubert and her husband, both 26, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, she summa cum laude and he magna cum laude.
He was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
The bride received a law degree from Harvard University.
Her father is a partner in Karafin &amp; Gruenstein, a Philadelphia law firm.
Her mother, Barbara Karafin, is a freelance photographer in Villanova.


Murder Trial in Beating by Detroit Officers Begins
A jury that took two painstaking weeks to assemble will have to decide whether the fatal beating of a black motorist was a wild exercise of raw power by the police or the action of committed officers confronted by a struggling man in a high-crime area.
As opening arguments began Friday in the trial of three white former officers, many people here wonder whether what happens inside the courtroom will ignite an explosion in the streets.
The trial is expected to last six to eight weeks.


Trina Pew, Matthew Gandal
Catherine Douglas Pew, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George L. Pew Jr. of Villanova, Pa., was married there yesterday to Matthew David Gandal, a son of Gabriele Gandal of Chevy Chase, Md., and Alvin Gandal of Washington.
The Rev.
Carol Ann Taylor, a Unitarian Universalist minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
The bride and the bridegroom both graduated from Trinity College, Hartford.
Mrs.
Gandal, who is known as Trina, is a teacher at St.
Patrick's Episcopal Day School in Washington.
Her father is a vice chairman of the Philadelphia Maritime Museum.
Her mother, Sally Pew, is a director of Planned Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania.


Wallpaper Removal Depends on the Paper
REMOVING wallpaper is always messy, but generally fairly easy.
The methods depend on the type of wallpaper and the wall or ceiling material.
The easiest to remove is so-called strippable paper.
To test removing it, try lifting the corner of a piece with a putty knife.
If the corner comes away easily, peel the paper further by pulling it parallel to the surface, not outward.
If the paper is strippable, entire sheets should be removable by this method.
Underneath may be a layer of backing paper.
That can be left on the wall as a base for new wall covering, but if it comes away in places it has to be removed like ordinary nonstrippable wallpaper.


Pakistanis in Somalia Showed Restraint
To the Editor:
"Bloody Sunday in Somalia" (editorial, June 15) raises important ideas on collective security and the future role of United Nations peacekeeping operations, particularly in an era that is likely to be characterized by increasing demands and expectations of United Nations peacekeeping, without a corresponding assurance of availability of resources.
Less commendable are the conclusions you appear to have somewhat hastily drawn from events that occurred in Mogadishu June 13.
The loss of life is deeply deplored by everyone, especially the United Nations peacekeepers.
The Security Council, basing its judgment on authentic United Nations reports from Mogadishu, has underlined that:


'Nightline' Wakes Itself Up
It is a little bit more than five hours until air time, and preparations for "Nightline" are running precisely the way Ted Koppel likes them -- just this side of panicked.
Sitting around a long table, Mr.
Koppel and his staff still can't decide on the topic for that night's show.
The executive producer, Tom Bettag, is pushing Waco, which has been the subject of hearings all day on Capitol Hill.
He has lined up three guests in three cities.
Mr.
Koppel is pressing for Bosnia, which has been the focus of tense behind-the-scenes discussions at the White House, but he has secured no guests.
Staff members are dispatched to place calls to Defense Secretary Les Aspin and the United Nations envoy Madeleine Albright.
A talkative general is located, but no camera crew.


Sprays That Slay Plant Pests, Safely
THE nibblers and chewers are about, those pesky insects that make nasty holes and cause yellow spots in plant leaves.
Gardeners everywhere usually like to get rid of these invaders as soon as possible.
But they like to do it safely.
In these days of environmental awareness, many gardeners hesitate to use just any spray, but seek the least toxic method.


Lyricist's Household A Blend of Cultures
MARGERY HARNICK was talking about her sea and skyscapes and the exotic handmade paper that textures her paintings.
Nearby, Sheldon Harnick was beaming at his wife's 16 watercolors now hanging in the C.F.M.
Gallery on Greene Street in SoHo, her first extensive collection to be seen in New York City.
Two Long Island exhibitions -- "more abstract and adventurous," Mrs.
Harnick said -- are to open, one on Aug. 7 at the Benton Gallery in Southampton and the other on Aug. 21 at the Elaine Benson Gallery in Bridgehampton.
On a Wednesday afternoon two weeks ago Mr.
Harnick was also edgy.
The next night, "She Loves Me," the 1963 musical, was to open in a new production on Broadway.
Two days later he felt bolstered by the sterling reviews that just might transform from cult to hit status a romantic musical set in a Budapest parfumerie in 1934.
Not that the lyricist of "Fiorello," which had opened four years earlier, and "Fiddler on the Roof," one year later, needs bolstering, but after 30 years it is nice to know that a favorite show's time has come.
Benefit Performance Saturday
Mrs.
Harnick, an artist in ascent, and Mr.
Harnick, who divide their time between an apartment on Central Park West and a house in East Hampton, will appear in "A Broadway Medley -- Hampton Style," one of 16 events next weekend on the South Fork to benefit Guild Hall in East Hampton.
In their hourlong performance at the house of Lillian Braude in East Hampton, the couple will include two selections from "She Loves Me" and two outtakes from "Fiddler on the Roof," "Dear Sweet Sewing Machine" and "The Butcher's Song." Their act is an outgrowth of a joint appearance at Rainbow and Stars in Manhattan several years ago.
"That was a nice detour," Mr.
Harnick recalled.
"But Margery needed to get back to art, and I wanted to go on writing."
Mr.
Harnick's numerous works in progress include a 45-minute cantata, a full-scale version of "Cyrano" and a musical fantasy adapted from a Russian play.
"Sheldon's a good director," Mrs.
Harnick said.
"He knows the essentials he wants from the act."  Former Broadway Performer
Once a Broadway performer under the name of Margery Gray, she worked in two of Mr.
Harnick's shows with scores by Jerry Bock, "Tenderloin" and "Fiorello." "But we weren't going out together then," she said.
"We were married after 'Fiddler.' "
And then Ms.
Gray appeared in, among others, "Tovarich," as the ingenue in the musical starring Vivien Leigh; "Drat, the Cat," as standby for Leslie Ann Warren, and opposite Hal Linden in a revival of "Anything Goes," but no longer in Mr.
Harnick's shows.
"Casts can be sensitive," she said, "and we didn't want it to seem like nepotism. So we kept our work apart."
After their marriage -- her second and his third -- Mr.
Harnick said: "I respected Margery too much to say, 'I hope you give this up.' But I was delighted when she decided she wanted to be home, not rehearsing, or on the road."
They have a son, Matthew, a marine biologist in his 20's who lives in the Hamptons, and a daughter, Beth, from Mrs.
Harnick's previous marriage.
She is a songwriter in her 30's and lives in Los Angeles.
As a wife and mother who sometimes performed on commercials and voice-overs, Mrs.
Harnick tried photography.
Mary Rodgers and Tom Paxton, two neighbors in the Hamptons, bought her work, "but that wasn't hands-on enough," she said.
Awaiting the "You're On" Call
"I grew up with a respect for art, and it was something to do in the dressing room while I was waiting to go on stage," Mrs.
Harnick recalled.
"My mother, Mildred Gray, was a fashion designer. She painted, and she's still at it at 88. While other kids had coloring books, she gave us drawing pads and unchewed pencils."
Musing on her creative beginnings, Mrs. Harnick said:
"All those years dancing in front of multimirrors in a rehearsal hall I was fascinated with the reflections' going out into space, the color play between light and people. I didn't realize that would grow into an obsession, and after I had done a piece of art, what an incredible revelation that I composed it, I lit it, I choreographed it. I did it all myself.
"My work is about nature -- wind, sunsets, things floating in water. People see different things in them, whatever they want it to be, but I know where I'm going before I put it together. It's as if the paper, paper so thin it's translucent when the light comes in, were the paint."
Mrs.
Harnick uses paper made of papyrus, carrots, Japanese rice, eggplant from South America and bark from trees in California.
"Beth sends those," she said.
On the harmony between greasepaint and watercolors in their lives, Mrs. Harnick said:
"We have a station wagon to constantly schlep canvases from New York to East Hampton. I have my own identity, and we do a lot of benefits. We get to rehearse together and laugh. It's the best of both worlds."


'I've Decided to Keep My Baby'; One Woman's Choice Reflects Issues of the Abortion Debate
Marisol Rodriguez and Robert Laboy grew up together here in the Lakewood projects and fell in love four years ago under Fourth of July fireworks.
"The Beginning of Forever," Marisol wrote on the cover of her diary.
Her mother considered premarital sex a sin and made Marisol swear to stay a virgin until her wedding.
"But everybody at school kept bugging us," she said, asking them, " 'When are you going to have sex? When are you going to have a kid?' "


New &amp; Noteworthy
BECOMING A MAN: Half a Life Story By Paul Monette.
HarperSanFrancisco, $12.
Winner of the 1992 National Book Award for nonfiction, this autobiography chronicles Paul Monette's struggle to accept his homosexuality after years spent hiding it.
"His fine memoir is affirmative and ultimately celebratory," Wendy Martin said here last year.
A GOOD SCENT FROM A STRANGE MOUNTAIN By Robert Olen Butler.
Penguin, $10.
Robert Olen Butler was an Army linguist in Vietnam and his experience infuses his first collection of short fiction, which won the 1993 Pulitzer Prize.
All 15 stories are told from the point of view of a Vietnamese emigrant to the American Gulf Coast, where his or her sense of loss is less a result of the war than of cultural displacement.
Last year our reviewer, George Packer, praised the stories' originality, calling them "the work of a writer who is intoxicated by Vietnam and the Vietnamese, who loves what has alienated so many other Americans."


Woman in the News; Immigration Expert Who Takes Broad Approach -- Doris Marie Meissner


SAINT HILLARY
Hillary Rodham Clinton has what the Bush Administration was sorely lacking and could grasp only vaguely as "the vision thing" ("Saint Hillary," by Michael Kelly, May 23).
Thank God that someone with considerable influence in the public arena, an "I.Q. of a gazillion and a backbone of steel" (to quote James Carville) does indeed have vision.
For "where there is no vision, the people perish" (Proverbs 29:18).
REV.
EUGENIA LEE HANCOCK New York, N.Y.


Sprays That Slay Plant Pests, Safely
THE nibblers and chewers are about, those pesky insects that make nasty holes and cause yellow spots in plant leaves.
Gardeners everywhere usually like to get rid of these invaders as soon as possible.
But they like to do it safely.
In these days of environmental awareness, many gardeners hesitate to use just any spray, but seek the least toxic method.


For Many Fathers, Roles Are Shifting
Today, for Father's Day, Johari Abdul-Malik Seale plans to pick up bagels for his wife, Mary, and their two children on his way home to Northwest Washington from his all-night job at Washington Hospital Center.
As he does every morning, he will do a load of laundry.
He and his wife will go running, taking turns pushing one child in their single jogging stroller and carrying the other in a backpack.
Later, they will have cake and ice cream.
Then he will end the day reading to his son and rocking his daughter in a cradle.
Mr.
Seale, a Howard University geneticist, prides himself on his involvement at home.
He even leads a fathers' discussion group at a community center every two weeks.
But trying to become an equal partner with his wife, sharing not just chores but decision-making, has not always been easy.


Playoffs to Decide Who Represents U.S.
SIX days of play beginning on Wednesday in Memphis will determine four teams to represent the United States in the 1993 World Team Championships at Santiago, Chile, in September.
When they get there, all four teams will be among favorites to win world titles.
In the open series, one team may be slightly weaker than it had hoped to be.
Cliff Russell, Sam Lev, Larry Cohen, David Berkowitz, Marty Bergen and Bjorn Fallenius qualified for these playoffs by winning the 1991 Reisinger Teams.
Fallenius had to withdraw because he represents Sweden internationally, and his partner, Bergen, wished to withdraw also.
The team would have added Jeff Meckstroth and Eric Rodwell, one of the world's best pairs, but the American Contract Bridge League did not allow Bergen to withdraw and he will play an improvised partnership with Rodwell.


As Hispanic Presence Grows, So Does Black Anger
When Cuban refugees began arriving here 30 years ago, Ruth Page was working as a seamstress in a tailoring and cleaning shop, and she says she had no strong feelings one way or another about the Spanish-speaking people.
But when she lost her job to a Cuban, her attitude changed.
Now Mrs.
Page remains resentful,and worried about the still-growing Hispanic presence in Miami.
So when the Dade County Commission met last month to consider abandoning a requirement that all county business be conducted in English, she was one of several black Miami residents who attended the meeting to speak out.


Letters; Oooooo, That Absolut
To the Editor:
It was surprising to read your treatment of what is becoming a growing trend in magazine publishing, which is that magazines are playing a greater role in the creative execution and marketing of our clients' products.


He's a One-Man Team
When JEROME (J.J.) ALEXANDER moved from the Bronx to the tiny Adirondack community of Westport, N.Y., his new high school didn't have a track team.
So he gave them one.
"I wanted to run, I set my mind on it," said Alexander, 17, was born in Trinidad and Tobago, moved to the United States at 3 and grew up in the Bronx, surrounded by drugs and violence.
Summers at a camp in the area helped Alexander fall in love with Wesport and he arranged to spend the school year there with friends.
A sprinter at DeWitt Clinton, he wanted to run for his small school (20 students in his junior class) and received permission to do so as a one-man team.
He competed at dual meets in the 400 meters and triple jump.
"I have no teammates to warm up with," he told The Plattsburgh Press-Republican.
"It's hard, but I've gotten used to it." (AP)


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Edison  $114,000
65 Ovington Avenue  3-bedroom, 1-bath, 36-year-old Cape Cod; brick front, fenced lot, new roof, full basement; taxes $2,105.
Madison  $253,000
16 Shadylawn Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 41-year-old colonial; 2-car garage, fireplace; taxes $3,593.
Metuchen  $172,500
25 Van Buren Avenue  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 30-year-old two-family; new furnaces, vinyl siding, separate utilities; taxes $3,797.
Montclair  $322,500
120 Christopher Street  5-bedroom, 3.5-bath, 68-year-old colonial; new kitchen, fireplace, family room, deck; taxes $6,753.
Oradell  $499,900
624 Blauvelt Drive  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 33-year-old colonial; 3-car garage, full finished basement, fireplace, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $9,018.
Park Ridge  $159,000
14 Glendale Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 54-year-old colonial; fireplace, full basement, eat-in-kitchen; taxes $3,310.
OTHER AREAS West Hartford, Conn.  $199,000
124 Lawler Road  Three-bedroom, 2-bath, 45-year-old colonial; bay window in living room, pantry, eat-in kitchen, 0.25 acre; taxes $3,780.
Cortlandt, N.Y.,  $330,000
14 Amanda Court  Four-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 13-year-old Colonial; entry hall, fireplace, cathedral ceiling, full unfinished basement; taxes $6,530.
Albertson, L.I.  $131,000
54 I.U.
Willets Road  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, attic, 1-car attached garage; taxes $3,100.


Albert A. Chambers, 86, Bishop Who Fought Women in Priesthood
Albert A. Chambers, a retired bishop who rebelled against the decision of the Episcopal authorities to ordain female priests in the 1970's, died Friday at a hospital in Sun City Center, Fla., where he lived.
He was 86.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


JUNE 13-19: Medical Research; New Method for Lessening The Effects of Diabetes
For decades, researchers have argued a key question: Are diabetic complications like eye and kidney damage primarily caused by the presence of high blood sugar or another aspect of the disease?
To find out, researchers divided 1,441 diabetics into two groups.
One received conventional treatment consisting of one or two insulin shots a day, which allowed their blood sugar levels to vary widely.
The others monitored their blood up to seven times and day and gave themselves three to five insulin shots, keeping their blood sugar levels close to normal.


Nantz Decides to Stay With CBS
JIM NANTZ, whose contract with CBS expires at the end of June, has decided to remain with the network rather than move to ABC, a spokeswoman for CBS confirmed yesterday.
ABC had sought to lure Nantz with the promise he would return to calling college football.
He is expected to take over CBS's golf hosting duties when PAT SUMMERALL retires and will continue as the lead announcer for men's college basketball.
Terms of the deal were not announced, and Nantz was unavailable for comment.
"We're happy to have him stay," said SUSAN KERR, the CBS spokesman.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Philadelphia; Market Slow, Towers Close
FACING downtown office vacancy rates nearing 20 percent and rents in Class A space close to those being charged in older buildings, some landlords are choosing to close office towers to wait for better days.
At least three have been emptied in recent months and others have been dark for some time.
The 17-story, 258,000-square-foot Avenue of the Arts Building, at Broad and Chestnut Streets, is the largest property emptied.
Shortly before its owner, Meritor/PSFS, was seized by Federal regulators last December, tenants were told the building would be shuttered by March.
The bank had a branch in the building.


Olympus Plan Likely To Raise Taxes
Supporters of the Olympus-Parr Development project are making the impossible assertion that Huntington taxpayers will receive a decrease in their taxes as a result of the project.
Even County Executive Robert J. Gaffney, on a recent radio broadcast made this very claim.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
The public-relations team lobbying to sell the project claims that some amount of payment in lieu of taxes would be paid on the 53.7 acres of state land on which the multimillion-dollar corporate headquarters would be built.
But first the public should know that Olympus and Parr Development may not be paying anything.
The State Urban Development Corporation, after repeated requests under the Freedom of Information Act and a court order, which is being appealed, still won't reveal the content of the property leases involved, thereby making it impossible for homeowners to know what taxes or other payments would actually be required by law.
This alone should arouse suspicion as to who will be paying for what when the deal is completed.
Public-relations talk doesn't legally commit Olympus-Parr to anything.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 20, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
48
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
2
73
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
18
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
5
DARKEST HOUR, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The concluding volume in a series about the Cutlers, a plantation-owning family.
5*
62
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
6
4
THE MAGIC OF YOU, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A 19th-century British minx sets her cap for an American sea captain.
7
8
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Pocket, $5.99.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
8
7
SHADOWFIRES, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A woman is stalked by her supposedly deceased husband.
9
25
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The investigation of a woman's death involves the American-Japanese rivalry.
10
1
CASTLES, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) To save herself from danger, a princess agrees to marry a knight in 19th-century England.
11*
4
THE CAT WHO WASN'T THERE, by Lilian Jackson Braun. (Jove, $4.99.) Jim Qwilleran contends with crimes in Scotland.
12
2
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
13
2
TURTLE MOON, by Alice Hoffman. (Berkley, $5.99.) Two damaged adults and a troubled child strive valiantly to achieve happiness.
14
9
"I" IS FOR INNOCENT, by Sue Grafton. (Fawcett, $5.99.) Kinsey Millhone investigates a man once charged with murdering his rich wife.
15
5
FATHERLAND, by Robert Harris. (Harper Paperbacks, $6.50.) A thriller set in the Third Reich 20 years after Hitler wins World War II.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
8
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
2
7
NOT FOR SALE AT ANY PRICE, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $5.95.) America's problems.
3*
5
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President.
4
502
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
5
88
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
6
18
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
7
109
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
8
6
WHERE THE BLUEBIRD SINGS TO THE LEMONADE SPRINGS, by Wallace Stegner. (Penguin, $11.) Essays on the American West.
9
33
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.50.) A war against women.
10
19
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
11*
23
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on self-esteem.
12
18
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) Social life and sexual fantasies.
13*
1
A WORLD LIT ONLY BY FIRE, by William Manchester. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) An account of the Renaissance and the Reformation.
14*
133
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
15*
15
ROGUE WARRIOR, by Richard Marcinko with John Weisman. (Pocket, $5.99.) Navy memoirs.
16*
22
EARTH IN THE BALANCE, by Al Gore. (Plume, $13.) Factors affecting the environment.
16*
15
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Examples of waste.
18*
5
WRITTEN BY HERSELF,edited by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $15.)Writings by women.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-to, and Miscellaneous
1
97
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) A collection of some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
11
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK: Volume 2, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) More tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
3
122
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
4
139
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 5, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted torepresent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that abook's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Kiss Of the Lace
The actress Chita Rivera is not the only one caught in a spider's web.
The summer fashion scene appears to be enveloped in a crochet-and-lace cobweb of sleeveless coats, vests, sweaters, pants and skirts.
This diaphanous style signals a very strong feminine and romantic impulse emerging from the cookie-cutter dominance of T-shirts, jeans and Armani suits.
Today's transparent looks have none of the racy, see-through shock that designers showed in their collections.
While crocheted and lace clothes date to the Edwardian era, they are now being mixed with bodysuits, jeans and shorts, giving the concept a fresh vitality.


Chekhov in a Lifelike Setting
BEHOLD an esthetically correct "Cherry Orchard." In the Rushmore mansion at Woodbury in Orange County the audience regards Chekhov's powerless elite through an arched doorway, on a sprawling lawn and in a grand ballroom.
Liubov Ranyevskaya and her entourage sweep through a real library with a sculptured ceiling, brushing right by spectators seated on the aisle.
When the actors are strolling or waltzing on the grass, the audience watches them through open French doors.
Such stageless environmentally authentic productions bear the catch phrase "site specific." This one is site spectacular.
One could do worse than take in Chekhov's last musings upon life and death on a summer night, on a real country estate, on 10 torchlighted acres, surrounded by some 500 more.
Even when it is less than picture perfect, "The Cherry Orchard," in the second season of the Rushmore Festival of the Arts has three things going for it: location, location, location.


Commercial Property: Looking for the Right Space; Why Mastercard Stayed in Manhattan
AS it turns out, Mastercard International isn't leaving Manhattan after all.
Instead, the fast-growing interbank organization, which has been bursting out of its headquarters space at 888 Seventh Avenue, at 53d Street, will spread out across some 350,000 square feet at 1345 Avenue of the Americas, the old Burlington House at 55th Street.
New York City gets to keep 450 jobs now and a promise of more than double that number before the decade is out.
Mastercard gets as much space as it needs at an excellent price, gets its name on the door of a Class A building in central Manhattan and doesn't have to put any employees through the enervating process of relocating.


IS HUMANITY SUICIDAL?
Of the 5.5 billion people on earth (four billion too many), how many have seen the 68 shallow-water mussels of the Tennessee River shoals?
How many want to?
How many lives would be impoverished by not doing so?
There will always be other species.


Who's Got Clout
Three months into his Presidency, Clinton was still deriding as a "political smoke screen" reports that "somebody's up and somebody's down." But soon afterward, he had to backtrack: "We think that there needs to be a little tighter coordination here," he admitted, and announced that his chief of staff, Thomas (Mack) McLarty, was being given a second deputy, freeing Clinton's best friend from kindergarten days to give unspecified policy advice.


RECORD BRIEFS
Bachir Attar: 'The Next Dream' CMP CD 57; CD only.


SURFACING
HUMILIATION -- Kill-all-the-lawyers redux: Echoes of Shakespeare's maxim are found in "Jurassic Park" (T. rex's first victim is a money-grubbing coward-at-law) and in a Miller Lite commercial in which several briefcase-toting lawyers are chased and roped in a rodeo.
CLUBS -- Valet parking in Manhattan: Proof of the trend-fuse on the South Beach-Los Angeles-Manhattan axis.
Valet parking has appeared at New York clubs like the Roxy and the Palace.
RECREATION -- Windskating: Two of the slickest modes of getting from here to there -- Rollerblading and windsurfing -- are married in this sport, in which bladers carry a kite-like sail roll and blow around.


Carrie Miller, L. A. Goldberg
Carrie Lynne Miller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John D. Miller of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., was married last evening to Laurence A. Goldberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Barry Goldberg of Livingston, N.J.
Cantor Bernard Fitch officiated at the Woodcliff Lake (N.J.) Hilton.
Mrs.
Goldberg is a merchandiser in New York for the specialty stores division of R. H. Macy &amp; Company.
She graduated cum laude from Tufts University.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS Navratilova Wins For Martina Navratilova, it was a familiar first step.
First Eastbourne, then Wimbledon.
Seven of Navratilova's nine Wimbledon crowns have followed triumphs on the grass courts at Eastbourne, England.
Yesterday, the top-seeded Navratilova captured a record 11th singles title in this warm-up tournament, defeating Miriam Oremans of the Netherlands, 2-6, 6-2, 6-3.
Oremans, ranked 42d in the world, stunned the American in the first set with a biting serve and competent net play.
The 20-year-old Dutch player, playing in her first final on the women's tour, became rattled in the third set and received a warning for racket abuse after several unforced errors. (AP) Leconte Takes German Title: Henri Leconte won his ninth career tournament yesterday and taught Andrei Medvedev a lesson on grass by routing the young Russian, 6-2, 6-3 in the final of the Halle Open in Germany.
Leconte, a few weeks shy of his 30th birthday, dominated the match against the 18-year-old Ukranian, who was playing only his second tournament on grass.
Medvedev has climbed to No. 9 in the world after winning two tournaments and reaching the French Open semifinals last month. (AP)
Quick Work by Stoltenberg: Unseeded Jason Stoltenberg defeated fellow Australian Wally Masur, 6-1, 6-3 yesterday to win the Direct Line Insurance Manchester Open in England for his first tour title.(AP) AUTO RACING Toyota Leads Le Mans Eddie Irvine drove Toyota into a tenuous lead over the defending champion Peugeot of Philippe Alliot and 45 other drivers in the Le Mans 24-hours yesterday, with both carmakers trading the lead and suffering serious setbacks with some of their racers.
Five hours into the race, the Toyota TS-010 driven by Irvine and Japan's Masanori Sekiya and Toshio Suzuki held about a one-minute lead over the pole-sitting Peugeot 905 of Alliot, fellow Frenchman Jean-Pierre Jabouille and Italian Mauro Baldi.
Another Peugeot 905 was in third.
A Toyota RY-2 from the turbo-charged Category II was a surprising fourth place, followed by another Toyota TS-010. (AP) BOWLING Williams Wins 3d Title Walter Ray Williams Jr. became the first three-time winner this year on the Professional Bowlers Association tour when he beat Bryan Goebel, 258-254, in the championship match of the $125,000 Northwest Classic in Kennewick, Wash., yesterday. (AP) SOCCER Ecuador Tops U.S.
Ecuador, getting goals from Raul Aviles and Eduardo Hurtado, beat the United States, 2-0, yesterday in Quito, Ecuador, and became the first team to qualify for the America Soccer Cup quarterfinals.
Aviles scored in the 10th minute and Hurtado in the 35th for Ecuador.
Angel Fernandez assisted on both goals.
Ecuador leads Group A with 4 points, followed by Uruguay with 3 and Venezuela with 1.
The United States has no points.
The United States is on the brink of elimination, although it could still qualify by beating Venezuela on Tuesday.
The two best third-place teams also will remain in the competition. (AP)


Rosemary Ryan, Jack D. DeGrado
Drs.
Rosemary Ryan and Jack D. DeGrado, dentists in New York, were married there yesterday.
The Rev.
William Leydon performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Monica's Church.
The bride, 28, is a general-practice dental resident at Lenox Hill Hospital.
She graduated from Marymount Manhattan College, and she and her husband received their dental degrees from Columbia University.


2 Birdies At Start Let Janzen Lead by 1
At every stage of his career in golf, Lee Janzen has made sudden, dramatic leaps.
As an amateur who didn't begin playing seriously until he was 15, he became a college all-America.
As a young professional who had to wait four years before he made the PGA Tour, he won the first time he was in serious contention.


At the Village Well
To the Editor: Libby Lubin's "Hanging Out With the Wash" recalled a trip of ours to Paris in April 1992, where we met our daughter.
After a semester in Wales, she had been spending her spring break vagabonding around Europe -- and had the dirty laundry to prove it.
One morning at breakfast, as we planned a day at the Musee D'Orsay, my husband announced that he had seen a coin laundry and intended to go do the wash.
Over our protests ("We did not come to Paris to rinse and fold!"), he set off in the Metro with two suitcases full.


FIGHTING IN BOSNIA EASES UNDER TRUCE
On the second day of a countrywide cease-fire, fighting reportedly waned today, although Bosnian, nationalist Serbian and Croatian news reports traded accusations of violations, especially around the United Nations "safe area" of Gorazde.
Unconfirmed reports on the Sarajevo this morning said Bosnian Serbs had stopped shelling Gorazde but continued attacking Muslim positions on the edge of the eastern Bosnian enclave.


Letters; Oooooo, That Absolut
To the Editor:
How fascinating the piece about the auditions of the Absolut czar.
How awful the ordeal and sad the suitors welcoming indignity.
Good job.
F.
BRADLEY LYNCH  Bronxville, N.Y., June 10


An Outlet Masquerading as a Gallery
IN Little Italy, Julie Dermansky's storefront gallery provides a refreshing art-world experience.
Ms.
Dermansky, 27, dispenses her own paintings, sculpture, furniture, jewelry, ceramics, collages and art books out of a cluttered shop called J. S. D. Studio, where the floor is thick with paint spatters, an old sign that reads "Segunda Iglesia Pentecostal" still hangs above the door, and prices are as low as $15.
"I opened the store in the spirit of the pop artist Claes Oldenburg, who used to sell his work out of a storefront in the East Village," Ms.
Dermansky said.
"When I moved to New York two and a half years ago, it seemed really difficult to get representation, so I thought, why not open a store?"


Sleeping With the Ghosts of Silver City
ON most evenings the desolate Owyhee mountains in the high sagebrush desert of southwestern Idaho take on a bluish hue as you reach them from the dusty and barren foothills beneath.
I had returned deliberately late in the day to this lonely spot to see the inky blue sky crep over the granite peaks.
And a friend and I planned to spend the night in Silver City, a ghost town over 6,000 feet above sea level that lay 23 miles along a dirt road in the interior of these mountains.
Formerly the jewel of Idaho's mining camps during the gold rush days of the late 1800's, Silver City is a rare example of one that is still intact -- neither gussied up like a theme park after the manner of Deadwood, S.D., or Virginia City, Nev., nor obliterated by modernization.


Sports of the Times; Looking at New Jersey, But Thinking of Queens
IT happens every spring, or so it seems, the rumble emanating from the Bronx concerning a potential move by the Yankees.
This time, though, the rumbles may be for real.
George Steinbrenner, baseball's version of the boy who cried wolf, may be about to unleash a bite of his own.


Those Who Are Behind The County Executive
Mr.
O'Rourke's inner circle consists of eight administrators, one of them a Democrat.
The sessions they hold are freewheeling with members confident enough to challenge their boss and likely to seek a consensus among colleagues in an effort to get the County Executive to change his mind.
Those involved in weekly "issues" meetings of this group are:


Who's Got Clout
Three months into his Presidency, Clinton was still deriding as a "political smoke screen" reports that "somebody's up and somebody's down." But soon afterward, he had to backtrack: "We think that there needs to be a little tighter coordination here," he admitted, and announced that his chief of staff, Thomas (Mack) McLarty, was being given a second deputy, freeing Clinton's best friend from kindergarten days to give unspecified policy advice.


Jennifer Segal, David Madden
Jennifer Ann Segal, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Sheldon J. Segal of Hartsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Michael Madden, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jean D. Madden Jr. of Warwick, R.I.
Catherine Norris Norton, a justice of the peace in Falmouth, Mass., officiated at the outdoor wedding at Juniper Point, in Woods Hole, Mass.
Mrs.
Segal Madden, 27, is an account executive at Moret Advertising Inc., an advertising agency in Tucson, Ariz.
She graduated cum laude from Wellesley College and received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.
Her father is a scientist at the Population Council, a nonprofit research organization in New York.
He led the team that developed the Norplant birth-control device.
He is also the chairman of the Marine Biological Laboratory at Woods Hole.
Her mother, Harriet Segal, is a novelist.


In This Dream Station Future and Past Collide
Already, it is a landmark: that soaring arch of white steel, rising above granite walls of classical Beaux-Arts grandeur.
Depicted in architect's renderings with sunlight streaming through its sparkling glass skin, the arch brings out the primal emotions aroused by the sight of a rainbow after a storm.
It may be years before this vision materializes.
The $315 million needed to build it is not yet in hand.
But Amtrak's proposal to resurrect Pennsylvania Station from a pit beneath Madison Square Garden and enshrine it within the landmark general post office building across the street has aroused more anticipation than any civic project in years.
No wonder, for this project pushes some of the hottest buttons in architecture and urbanism today.
Public space.
Infrastructure.
Mass transit.
Regional planning.
But the hottest button of all is one that touches off a painful memory: the destruction of the original Pennsylvania Station station 30 years ago.
The razing of this station, McKim, Mead &amp; White's 1910 masterpiece of Beaux-Arts design, was one of the greatest traumas New York City ever suffered.
Public reaction was profound, and in some ways beneficial.
Historical preservation was transformed from a genteel pastime to a nationwide movement with political clout.
Architects began to admit that the Modern movement was turning out to be less than a boon for cities.
Above all, New Yorkers began to assert a proprietary interest in the city as their collective cultural heritage.


Who Knows Best?
To the Editor:
I agree with Lawrence O'Toole that putting valuable musical properties to "good, tasteful and interesting" use is a highly subjective task.
But I ask him who is best to make that determination: the director who put Nellie Forbush in a straitjacket, as Mr.
O'Toole reports, or William and James Hammerstein, who observed their father as he created the shows, heard his reactions to numerous performances good and bad, and in the 33 years since his death staged and supervised dozens of productions of these shows?
STEVEN SUSKIN New York The writer is the author of "Show Tunes, 1905-1991: The Songs, Shows and Careers of Broadway's Major Composers."


Editors' Notes
The Westchester Q&amp;A column on page 3 in some copies of the Westchester Weekly today interviews Harold E. Vogt, chairman of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield.
It quotes him as saying that his company was subjected to erroneous claims of mismanagement and that he and other board members understood what was happening as its financial problems developed.
As the introductory paragraphs report, the interview took place early in June, before the acknowledgment by Mr.
Vogt last week that Empire had repeatedly submitted erroneous financial reports to New York State regulators and had used the false data to help secure a major revision of insurance law in its favor.


The Voice of Barkley Rises Above Others
The unveil ing of a new basketball monument call it Beyond Magic -- was sabotaged Friday night in Chicago.
When the curtain was raised, there stood the intruder, with the maniacally comic veneer of Jack Nicholson and an eerily familiar message.
"Heeeere's Chuckie," roared Charles Barkley.


Elise B. Packard, Bryan D. Jones
Elise Barry Packard, a daughter of Sandra G. Packard and Thomas W. Packard, both of New York, was married yesterday to Bryan David Jones, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Larry Jones of Knoxville, Tenn.
The Rev.
William Bergen, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Church of St.
Ignatius Loyola in New York.
The Rev.
Robert Graham, an Episcopal minister, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Packard, 26, is keeping her name.
She is a clerk for Chief Judge Judith W. Rogers of the District of Columbia Court of Appeals.
She and her husband graduated magna cum laude from Brown University.
The bride received a law degree from Georgetown University.


The Power of Love
She had to keep the Mercedes out of sight.
The '74 burgundy sedan with the polished wooden dashboard was the last vestige of a time when Darlene Love was Somebody, and moreover, the only transportation she had.
But she knew it would make her employers uncomfortable, so she parked it half a mile down the road and walked the rest of the way to the exclusive residence in Los Angeles where she was to report for "day work," which could earn her a fast $50.
"When you go to clean someone's house," she says, "they don't want to know that you have nice things."


Lobbyist at Work


At Work; Financing Strategies for Child Care
ALL appearances in Washington to the contrary, an illegal, Social Security-free nanny at home is not the typical child-care arrangement in the United States.
Nearly half of all preschool children with a working mother are in daycare centers or family day care and several million more would be if the slots were available.
The Urban Institute estimates the shortfall at some six million places, caused by lack of capital, low wages that limit the pool of workers and the need to keep the cost to parents at an affordable level.
Child-care experts say the traditional places to turn for help, state and local government, are themselves desperately in need, drained by burdens transferred to them during the Reagan-Bush years.
So, advocates for children are beginning to turn to the private sector.
Policy groups, led by the Center for Policy Alternatives, a Washington research organization, have recently been talking about an innovative financing strategy that uses the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 to encourage partnerships between banks and child-care providers.
In the best tradition of enlightened self-interest, the tactic could work to the benefit of both.


Perspectives: 40 Wall Street; Asian Buyer Accepts a Leasing Challenge
"THEY wanted a signature building, but anything over $100 million they wouldn't touch," said Edmund Yu, who acted as consultant last year to Hong Kong businessmen seeking a major real-estate investment in New York City.
The search led downtown.
And last month Kinson Properties closed on the purchase of the long-term leasehold to the distinguished if tattered 1.1-million-square-foot skyscraper at 40 Wall Street.
Within weeks, after major new capital investment, the 66-story building is expected to be back on the leasing market.
It is 80 percent vacant.


IN SHORT: FICTION
TWO SCHOLARS' ROMANCE CHANGING HEAVEN By Jane Urquhart. Godine, $22.95.


America Out of Reach
DECLINING FORTUNES The Withering of the American Dream.
By Katherine S. Newman. 257 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $23.


Shalini Stevens and Robert Schetty 3d
Shalini Maria Stevens, a daughter of Yvor and Gwen Stevens of Bombay, India, was married yesterday to Robert Austin Schetty 3d, the son of Gloria Schetty-Plante of Miller Place, L.I., and the late Mr.
Schetty.
The Rev.
Claude J. D'Souza performed the ceremony at St.
Louis de Montfort Roman Catholic Church in Sound Beach, L.I.


Auerbach Stable After Quintuple Bypass
RED AUERBACH, the 75-year-old Boston Celtics president, was in stable condition yesterday, a day after six hours of open-heart surgery at Massachusetts General Hospital.
Five arteries were bypassed during the operation Friday, a hospital spokesman, MARTIN BANDER, said.
Auerbach, the winningest coach in National Basketball Association history, had two blocked arteries cleared in procedures last month. (AP)


Martha C. Clarke, James F. Kiley 3d
Martha Campbell Clarke, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard W. Clarke Jr. of Katonah, N.Y., was married yesterday to James Francis Kiley 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kiley of Palm Beach Gardens, Fla.
The Rev.
Ronald Gliatta performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Weekapaug (R.I.) Chapel.
Mrs.
Kiley is a freelance public-relations specialist in East Hampton, L.I.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father is a money manager at Ingalls &amp; Snyder Inc., an investment bank in New York.
Her mother, Lua Clarke, retired as a librarian for the Bedford (N.Y.) Free Library.


For the Protection Of Village Residents
It would be inefficient to operate a hospital with a staff composed only of doctors.
This is why there are nurses, practical nurses, nurses' aides and orderlies to meet the varying needs of the patients.
Law enforcement is similar.
It is inefficient to have only police academy graduates -- police officers -- meet the various needs for the security and safety of the residents of different communities.
This is why there are peace officers, code-enforcement officers and security guards to provide the various degrees of protection needed.


Miranda Cowley And Bruno Heller
Miranda Phillips Cowley, a daughter of Blair Resika and Robert Cowley, both of New York, was married yesterday to Bruno Heller, the son of the late Caroline Carter and the late Lukas Heller.
The Rev.
John H. Smith, an Episcopal minister, performed the ceremony on the banks of Horseleech Pond in Wellfleet, Mass.
Mrs.
Heller, 31, is a freelance book editor in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
Her father is the editor in chief of Military History Quarterly, a magazine in New York.
Her mother is a mezzo-soprano in New York.


Nabisco Stock: A Tough Sell for Morgan Stanley
One nice thing about being a Wall Street underwriter is that mostly you get to sell what investors are dying to have.
These days, that is a category that includes junk bonds and real estate investment trusts.
At its best, the job of the lead underwriter is to decide which eager buyers will be allowed to hand over their money.
But sometimes underwriters must sell what buyers don't covet.
That is when they earn their living, as Morgan Stanley is doing now in trying to sell the new food stock that RJR Nabisco announced in March.
The offering is due late this week.


'Hopefully' Springs Eternal
While the cat is away, let's play with a heretical notion.
Let's engage in a spirited defense of the word hopefully.
You know -- the bad hopefully.
The one without a verb to modify, or even an adjective to modify; the one floating, odd and defiant, at the beginning or the end of a sentence; the one you stop yourself from saying, train yourself never even to think -- that hopefully.
I never touch the stuff, myself, and never will.
I don't have the stomach for it.
My lips draw back from it in horror.
The resulting opprobrium is too great.
I am a novelist, not a revolutionary.
Having made that clear, I would like to say that I am also wrong.


Megan P. Shea And Cyrus Cook
Megan Patricia Shea and Gavin Cyrus Cook, both English teachers at the Choate Rosemary Hall school in Wallingford, Conn., were married yesterday.
Two Roman Catholic priests, the Rev.
Joseph Devlin, the chaplain of Choate, and the Rev.
Joseph O'Keefe, performed the ceremony in the Chapel of Our Lady at Canterbury School in New Milford, Conn.
Ms.
Shea is keeping her name.
She graduated from Bates College and received a master's degree in English from Middlebury College.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James P. Shea of New Milford.
Her father is the chairman of the history department at Canterbury.
Her mother, Patricia T. Shea, is a saleswoman at Devoe Realty, a real estate brokerage in New Milford.


CRIME
What's an Elizabeth George novel without the usual grotesque characters, twisted psyches and monstrous perversities?
A better book, that's what.
The author maintains her florid style, but by toning down the Grand Guignol claptrap that made such an unholy racket in her earlier novels, she finds a stronger voice in MISSING JOSEPH (Bantam, $21.95) to tell the mournful story of a village priest who comes to no good trying to reform his unruly flock.
When the gentle Anglican vicar of Winslough dies from eating hemlock root in a meal prepared by a woman who knows her herbs, the gossips have a field day spreading nasty rumors of murder throughout the country parish.
The herbalist grows sullen and secretive; the unstable constable who is her lover gets mean and ugly; the woman's 13-year-old daughter acts out sexually; and the local witches fire up their caldrons.
By the time the series detectives descend from London on the bleak wintery fields of Lancashire, the scene is well and truly set for a juicy mystery based on the provocative theme of parental love and protectiveness -- and their dangerous outer limits.


Gregg Solomon and Robin Kramer
Robin Kramer, a daughter of Madeline Kramer of New York and Robert S. Kramer of Dallas, was married last evening to Gregg Solomon, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Solomon of New York.
Rabbi David Posner officiated at Le Club in New York.
The bride, 30, is the director in New York of Calvin Klein's in-store shops.
She graduated from the Fashion Institute of Technology.
Her father is the owner of Remark, a manufacturers' consulting company in Dallas.


Airlines Try Selling the Sizzle, Not the Seat
ALL too often, travelers planning a flight are confronted with choices that leave them feeling as if they are taking a multiple-choice exam with no right answers.
For them, the news is not promising: more choices are coming, but lower prices are not likely to be among them.
The reason is that airlines are scrambling for unique features, many of them made possible by new technology, to draw passengers away from competitors' ticket counters.
The goal is to distract passengers from what is often their top priority when flying, a cheap ticket.
And, adding more irony to the upside-down world of airline economics, such marketing tactics often add to the cost of flying.


Bumped Traveler May Sue
The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in San Francisco, ruled earlier this month that airline passengers can sue for compensatory, but not punitive, damages if they are bumped from flights for which they have a confirmed reservation.
In doing so, it rejected arguments that the Airline Deregulation Act of 1978 barred any claim against carriers under state law.
The decision is applicable in California, Idaho, Montana, Oregon and Washington.
But because the court disallowed the claim for punitive damages, airline officials and consumer advocates do not expect any change in advance booking procedures, nor do they expect a rash of lawsuits.


Jean Cau, French Writer, 67
Jean Cau, a French author and journalist, died on Friday in Paris. He was 67.
The cause was cancer, news agencies reported.


What's Pilobolus Doing With 'Finnegans Wake'?
Year after year, "Finnegans Wake," its spine uncracked, sat on their bookshelves like a dare.
"There was always this nagging sense that you somehow weren't man enough to have tackled it," Robby Barnett said.


Hot Hotels
WHAT puts the hot in a hot hotel?
What is it about the Royalton in Manhattan, to take one established example of the genre, that has made it the sexiest place to stay?
Is it Philippe Starck's luxuriously outre big round bathtubs and sleek slate fireplaces?
Or is it just that Ian Schrager, the hotel's owner, is something of a celebrity himself?
Yes, and yes again.
There's a peculiar alchemy between location, design and personality that creates a High Desirability Quotient.
This month there are two new entries in the field: the $360 million Four Seasons in Manhattan and the somewhat more modestly produced Bridgehampton Motel on Long Island.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
LAWN MUSIC
Westport has a long history of providing cultural perquisites, from the Westport Country Playhouse founded in the 30's by the prestigious New York Theater Guild, to the Famous Artists School begun in the 40's, to the Levitt Pavilion, celebrating its 20th anniversary this year.


Corrections
A picture caption on June 6 about a father and son who play tennis on the same college team misidentified the man on the left in the photograph.
He was the team's coach, Stan Dlugosz, not the father.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SPORTS PUNCH LINES Berger on Boxing.
By Phil Berger.
Four Walls Eight Windows,  cloth, $24.95; paper, $13.95.


Rebecca Spencer, Charles Rice
The Rev.
Rebecca L. Spencer, the senior minister of the Central Congregational Church in Providence, R.I., was married yesterday to Charles B. Rice, a liquidator in Franklin, Mass., for the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
The Rev.
Dr.
William Nye, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's mother in Middlebury, Conn.
The bride graduated from Wellesley College and received a master's degree in divinity from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Henry C. Spencer of Green Valley, Ariz., and Evelyn Burchard Spencer.
Her father, now retired, was a vice president of the Kerite Company, a manufacturer of copper wire and cable in Seymour, Conn.


Human Greed Holds the Reins
To the Sports Editor:
It took me years to recover from the tragedy of the Ruffian-Foolish Pleasure race, but with the Belmont, I have watched my last race.
It is purely for man's profit that these magnificent, fragile creatures are pushed beyond their limit.
George Vecsey ("Racing Can't Afford More Tragedies," The Times, June 6) asks when animal rights' groups are going to speak out against this human (not humane) narcissism.
I echo the question and mourn Prairie Bayou.
PATRICIA B. COHEN New York


Stirrings of Self-Restraint on Campaign Spending
CAN Congress reform the way it gets elected?
Can it reduce the influence of special interest money and make it easier for challengers to take on incumbents?
Or are the incentives to do so too feeble to overcome the obvious advantage of the current system?
For each incumbent, the way things now work seems to have produced the proper result: a certificate of election.
And even if change starts appealing to lawmakers, it will be hard for them to make their way through the forest of interparty and House-Senate conflicts.


Fresh Air Hosts Nurtured A Lasting Relationship
Diana C. Vila's childhood was full of adult responsibilities.
As far back as she can remember, she cooked her own food, washed her own clothes and baby-sat for her two brothers and various cousins while her mother was scraping out a living.
But Ms.
Vila could escape.
She could close her eyes and dream about "a pretty white home with the big green lawn where there weren't any problems." It was the home in Pennsylvania Dutch country that she visited every summer through the Fresh Air Fund.


U.S. Steps Up Prosecution Of Sea-Dumping
For years, environmental groups and governments have been complaining about debris dumped from cruise ships that washes up on shores from the Caribbean to Alaska.
Now something is being done about the problem.
In April, Princess Cruise Lines pleaded guilty in Federal Court in Miami to discarding plastic garbage bags off the Florida Keys and paid a record fine of $500,000.
A vigilant passenger with a video camera had recorded the incident.
Officials said the case marked the first successful prosecution of a cruise ship line in a United States court for violations in American waters of international agreements on marine pollution.
Three other cases are being pursued in two Florida jurisdictions, thanks to a 1992 decision by the Coast Guard to stop relying on countries where cruise vessels are registered to carry out such prosecutions.


Melinda Duryea, Alexander Draper
Melinda Farnsworth Duryea, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James M. Duryea of Lattingtown, L.I., was married yesterday to Alexander Yearley Draper, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank W. Draper of Atlanta.
Msgr.
Charles A. Ribaudo performed the ceremony at St.
Dominic's Chapel in Oyster Bay, L.I.
The bride and the bridegroom both graduated from the University of Virginia.


Another Perspective On Bob Jones University
To the Editor:
As one who had the misfortune of attending Bob Jones University for three semesters in the late-1970's, I read Lynda Edwards's article ("Worldly Lessons," May 30) with both interest and horror.
Though some teachers there may stress the importance of caring about workers with H.I.V., feelings of hatred and intolerance of gays are widespread at the school.
They can speak of living in the 90's, yet the institution lost its tax-exempt status in the 80's for its racial policies.


Conversations/Rita Dove; A Poet's Topics: Jet Lag, Laundry And Making Her Art Commonplace
IT wasn't what she was supposed to do, this poetry business.
As far as her parents knew, Rita Dove was at Miami University studying to be a lawyer.
Back in Akron for Thanksgiving, the young woman sat down with her father, a chemist at Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company, and told him she intended to be a poet.
"My father swallowed once and said, 'Well, I've never understood poetry, so don't be upset if I don't read it,' " recalled the country's new poet laureate, her soft voice untouched by regret or resentment.
"That was okay." Although he seemed to feel she was moving to some inaccessible island of the mind, at least she welcomed the honesty.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-15  CHINA'S POINT OF DEPARTURE


Oooooo, That Absolut
To the Editor:
If advertising budgets were ever to allow a full page in The New York Times, Victoria magazine would buy the Sunday Business Section.
The portrayal of what actually happens at "Advertising's Marathon Auditions" captured everyone's attention!


For Some Collectors, Graphics Is the Name of the Game
It's not how the game was played or even who won that keeps board-game collectors haunting auctions, art galleries, flea markets and garage sales for a Monopoly or a Parcheesi set in mint condition.
"The pictorial part is what you remember," said Ivan Karp, owner of the O. K. Harris gallery in SoHo, where the exhibition "Vintage Board Games" remains through July 16.
"The format is the emblem that stays with you."


Clinton Issues Call to Arms at Northeastern U.
President Clinton told a cheering audience of Northeastern University graduates today that their futures depended on the ability of leaders in Washington to make tough decisions, and he challenged recalcitrant politicians in Congress to start making some.
Mr.
Clinton made no effort to hide the campaign-style nature of his remarks, directing his criticism at opponents in Congress who he said have opposed his plan to reduce the deficit and raise taxes without providing workable alternatives.


Profile/Jan Davidson; Is It Learning or Fun? It's Both, She Insists
In 1978, Jan Davidson invested $3,000 in an Apple II for her after-school tutoring business, but she soon found there was no software that met her students' needs.
So she designed a simple program to teach speed reading, had a friend write the computer code and quite unknowingly planted the seeds for what has become one of the three top producers of educational software.
Today Mrs.
Davidson is president of Davidson &amp; Associates, a $40 million company based in this Los Angeles suburb.
Davidson's Math Blaster, an arcade-style game that lets children shoot space aliens out of the sky by solving equations, has sold over 1 million copies, earning it a place in the educational software hit parade along with Broderbund Software's Carmen Sandiego and the Learning Company's Reader Rabbit.


Just Sit Down Anywhere and Tell Us What's New
It's time to get to the bottom of one of the major mysteries of television in the 90's: Why is Dan Rather on the left and Connie Chung on the right?
Surprisingly, considering how many male-and-female local anchor teams are on the air and how many network programming decisions are based on extensive audience research, Mr.
Rather and Ms.
Chung seem to have sailed into uncharted territory.
"There's no evidence I can find that the placement of the anchors makes a difference," said Frank N. Magid, a consultant who is widely credited with developing the bantering-anchor local news format known as "happy talk."


Hamadi Khouini, Tunisian Diplomat, 50
Hamadi Khouini, a career Tunisian official and diplomat who held a number of posts at the United Nations, died on Tuesday at New York Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 50 and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Khouini was Tunisia's senior envoy and chief delegate at the United Nations.
He also served there as chairman of the Special Political Committee and as deputy chairman of its Commission on Sustainable Development.
In 1991 he was a vice president of the General Assembly.


Oooooo, That Absolut
To the Editor:
I enjoyed the Absolut marathon article immensely.
You really captured the atmosphere, quite accurately, too.
Ever the comedian, RICHARD LEWIS  New York, June 7  The writer is senior vice president of TBWA Advertising Inc., the agency for Absolut.


Infiniti's G20: Luxury at the Entry Level
IT must be tough to be an automotive-product planner.
Sure, you have an easy day when the boss comes by and tells you to whip up a fantastic sports car.
Or a utility vehicle.
Or even a new station wagon.
But what do you do if you work for a luxury line and you have to invent an "entry-level" car?


Woodcuts in the Japanese Style; Photos of Japan
OF the two current exhibitions bearing witness to the opening up of Japan in the 19th century, one is at the MacCulloch Hall Historical Museum in Morristown, the other at Rutgers Zimmerli Museum in New Brunswick.
The main gallery at MacCulloch Hall has been born again -- with walls painted a color that lies somewhere between lime and apple green.
Even so, the display of woodcuts by Arthur Wesley Dow (1857-1922) more than holds its own -- as well it might, for Dow was a man intoxicated by color and well before the advent of Orphism and its American counterpart, Synchromism.
One reason the artist's work has not attracted comparable attention from historians may be that, drawing inspiration from Japanese prints, he expressed his chromatic ideas in landscape, rather than in abstractions.
And though he took a "holistic" view that encompassed the decorative arts, he was primarily a printmaker.
Yet as a teacher and writer he exerted considerable influence -- Georgia O'Keeffe, Max Weber and Alvin Langdon Coburn were among his students -- and did much to further the American branch of the Arts and Crafts Movement.


Move to Curb Incentives To Businesses
Concerned that some cities and counties in New York have gone too far in their efforts to attract new jobs and to keep companies that are being wooed by other states, the State Legislature is seriously considering measures that would curtail some of the incentives that could be offered.
The proposals are intended to increase accountability and to limit some of the incentives, like sales-tax waivers, that local industrial development agencies have offered to companies, usually to keep them from leaving town.
While such incentives have been used liberally by New York City to keep companies like Prudential Securities and the Morgan Stanley Group from moving to New Jersey or elsewhere, the legislators say their bills are aimed at abuses that have been reported around the state.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
I WAS A TEENAGE PROFESSIONAL WRESTLER Written and illustrated by Ted Lewin. 128 pp.
New York: A Richard Jackson Book/Orchard Books.


Surge in Free Lunches At Schools a Sign of Tough Times
IN what state and local education officials say is a good measure of a bad economy, the number of children receiving free lunches at schools on Long Island is rising.
Even so, the officials said, many children who qualify for the lunches do not receive them because their parents are afraid or embarrassed to apply.
As more family incomes begin to feel the effects of long-term unemployment, the surge of applications for free or reduced-price lunches, which began to hit districts last year, has continued in the school year that ends this month.
According to the State Education Department, the number of specially priced lunches served on the Island has also grown again.  21% Increase in Two Years
Of the nearly 14 million lunches served in Long Island schools through February of this school year, 34 percent were free or reduced in price, up from 32 percent last year and 28 percent in the 1990-91 school year.
That is, proportionally, a 21 percent increase over the two years.


Killing What Slavery Could Not
CLIMBING JACOB'S LADDER The Enduring Legacy of African-American Families.
By Andrew Billingsley. 446 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.


Wall to Wall Jazz


Correction
An article last Sunday about New York City hotels referred incorrectly to the Latham Hotel.
The building's northern half remains a conventional hotel, the Latham, at 4 East 28th Street; the southern half now operates as a youth hostel and budget hotel, the Gershwin, at 7 East 27th Street.


2 Houses From Hartford's Greener Era
THE corner of Sisson and Farmington Avenues in Hartford has become frumpy over the last century.
Elm-shaded mansions have given way to a submarine-sandwich franchise, a drugstore and monolithic apartment buildings, candy wrappers whirl across the street in the hot summer wind and even pigeons hurry by.
From that vantage point at least, it's hard to believe Mark Twain once called Hartford "a vision of refreshing green." In fact, after his first visit in 1868 to see his publisher, Twain said, "You do not know what beauty is if you have not been here."
He went home to Buffalo, but remained smitten.
Two years later Twain, whose real name was Samuel L. Clemens, decided to transplant himself and his bride to Nook Farm, Hartford's socially progressive settlement of literary figures and philanthropists, which included the author of "Uncle Tom's Cabin," Harriet Beecher Stowe.


Mayors, Meeting in New York, Have Eyes Set on Washington
Five months after a new President took office with a pledge to tackle the problems of the nation's cities, more than 200 mayors gathered in Manhattan yesterday for a meeting dominated by the question: what happened to the early promise of the Clinton Administration?
Many at the 61st convention of the United States Conference of Mayors said that despite Mr.
Clinton's stumbles, they were still optimistic that he would succeed in helping their cities.
But they also said they were disappointed that some of his legislation had foundered -- although they went out of their away to avoid criticizing the President personally.


POSTINGS: Hetrick-Martin; Fewer Sites, More Space
By reducing its quarters from three buildings to one, the Hetrick-Martin Institute in Manhattan is going to be doubling its space.
The 14-year-old institute, which offers education, counseling and support services to lesbian and gay teen-agers, plans to move this fall into 17,000 square feet on the third floor of 10 Astor Place, at Lafayette Street.
As part of the institute, the Harvey Milk School will move to Astor Place from its current home at 401 West Street.
The institute's other programs and offices are operated at 24 Horatio Street and 80 Eighth Avenue.


Shuttle Is Readied to Retrieve European Satellite
The space shuttle Endeavour and its crew of six were completing preparations today for a mission to track, catch and retrieve a European research satellite.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration officials said today that no major problems, including weather, appeared to stand in the way of liftoff on Sunday of the nation's newest shuttle on its fourth flight.
The launching is planned for 9:38 A.M.


At AIDS Epicenter, Seeking Swift, Sure Death
Scores of gay men gathered last week in a church meeting room here, at the epicenter of the AIDS epidemic, to learn which drugs to use for suicide, how to avoid a botched attempt and whether to involve their loved ones and doctors.
The unusual how-to seminar was led by Derek Humphry, the founder of the Hemlock Society and the author of a best-selling suicide manual, who said that teaching people to kill themselves was a "sad commentary on our society" but a logical development in a country that largely outlaws doctor-assisted suicide.


BOXING: Fear Suffers a Technical Knockout; Holyfield Bulks Up and Returns to Ring for Pride and Against Prejudice
Evander Holyfield has had to overcome his fear of the ring each time he has stepped between the ropes.
Now, after an eight-month absence from boxing, he will have to do it again.
Holyfield, who has not fought since losing the heavyweight championship to Riddick Bowe last November, will take on Alex Stewart on Saturday night in Atlantic City in what marks the beginning of an effort to regain the title.


Town-House Sales Pick Up as Their Prices Fall Off
LIKE those of much of the New York residential real estate market, the sale prices of one-family town houses in Greenwich Village, the Upper East Side and other prime Manhattan neighborhoods have been, for the most part, falling for the last five years.
The decline, however, has now left prices at what some real estate brokers believe are bargain levels and, according to several recently released reports, has prompted a small resurgence in sales in some parts of the city, particularly on the Upper East Side.


Using Sorrel, A Lemony Accent
ONE year I planted a couple of sorrel seedlings in a corner of my garden.
We had rented the house for the summer and when we returned the following year, I was amazed to see that the entire flower bed had been overrun.
The sorrel had gone to seed and stood two feet high with leaves as big as the pages of a book.
No matter how hard I tried to cut it back, it seemed to grow up again overnight like Jack's beanstalk.
But I love sorrel, and I was delighted to have so much of it.
Sorrel has a sharp, lemony taste that is great with lamb, veal, chicken, fish and eggs.
A few raw leaves are delicious in salads, too (you can add other leaves like nasturtium, basil, lemon balm and young lettuces and dress them with nothing but lemon and olive oil).


The Thrill of the Kill
On a sunny afternoon at Republic Airport, two airplanes prepare to taxi to the runway.
In the cockpits, two doctors are anxiously waiting to kill each other.
The control tower operator gives the signal for departure, and in one cockpit, Dr.
Ron Mann waves into a video camera.
"Hi, Mom," he says.
"We're going against Peter Welsh today. We're going to wax his fanny."


Suzanne Topalian and Drew Pardoll
Dr.
Suzanne Louise Topalian, a senior investigator at the National Institutes of Health in Bethesda, Md., was married yesterday to Dr.
Drew Mark Pardoll, an associate professor at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore.
Walter Duke, the Mayor of Alpine, N.J., officiated at the Hackensack Country Club in Oradell, N.J.
Dr.
Topalian, who is keeping her name, is with the surgery branch of the National Cancer Institute.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received a medical degree from Tufts University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Malcolm F. Topalian of Alpine.
Her father is the president of the Topalian Trading Company, an Oriental rug concern in New York.


BEST SELLERS: June 20, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
45
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
3
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $24.) A lawyer in pursuit of his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
3
4
14
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
4
3
3
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $23.95.) A former naval officer tracks down a terrorist conspiracy headed by a vengeful woman.
5
5
10
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
6
7
131
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
7
6
7
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences when she covers a story.
8
8
7
GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Delacorte, $27.50.) Cordial relationships and terrorism between the Japanese and foreigners in Yokohama in 1862.
9
9
9
THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
10
10
8
A SEASON IN PURGATORY, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $22.) The political and social machinations of a wealthy Irish Catholic family.
11
12
2
PAPER DOLL, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) Spenser tracks the killer of an upper-crust Boston woman to her past in a small South Carolina town.
12
13
10
"J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $21.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man who apparently committed suicide.
13
15
15
EINSTEIN'S DREAMS, by Alan Lightman. (Pantheon, $17.) Fantasies said to be dreamed by Albert Einstein in 1905, when he was a young patent clerk.
14*
14
8
CHARMS FOR THE EASY LIFE, by Kaye Gibbons. (Putnam, $19.95.) The fortunes of three indomitable North Carolina women.
15*
1
THE RED HORSEMAN, by Stephen Coonts. (Pocket, $23.) An American intelligence officer struggles to obtain control of Soviet nuclear forces.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
45
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
2
2
40
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
3
3
6
THE REAL ANITA HILL, by David Brock. (Free Press, $24.95.) A journalist's account of the relationship between the law professor and Clarence Thomas.
4
8
3
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Morrow, $20.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
5*
4
18
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians and others about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
6
6
6
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
7
7
27
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
8
1
THE FIFTIES, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $27.50.) A journalist's social, political, economic and cultural history of the 1950's.
9
5
9
THINKING OUT LOUD, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) Essays on current topics by the New York Times columnist.
10
6
REMEMBERING DENNY, by Calvin Trillin. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $19.) A memoir of a bright young man of the 50's who committed suicide two years ago.
11*
11
31
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under Government debt.
12
9
6
CULTURE OF COMPLAINT, by Robert Hughes. (New York Public Library/Oxford University, $19.95.) Essays critical of current cultural trends.
13*
9
A WORLD WAITING TO BE BORN, by M. Scott Peck. (Bantam, $22.95.) A call for people to make civility part of their lives.
14*
6
CONDUCT UNBECOMING, by Randy Shilts. (St. Martin's, $27.95.) The roles that gay men and lesbians have played in the United States armed forces.
15
1
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Beacon, $15.) A Princeton professor assays issues affecting black Americans and suggests ways for addressing them.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to, and Miscellaneous
1
1
8
A WOMAN'S WORTH, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $17.) Advice for women.
2
2
49
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf.
3
1
MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $21.95.) The 10th edition.
4
4
14
BEATING THE STREET, by Peter Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Advice about investing in stocks and mutual funds.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 5, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
BALKAN GHOSTS: A Journey Through History, by Robert D. Kaplan. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) A reporter's gallery of heroes and villains who made Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Romania and the former Yugoslavia the sweethearts they are.
BEAR TRAP: Why Wall Street Doesn't Work, by Paul Gibson. (Atlantic Monthly, $22.) Mr.
Gibson, a veteran financial journalist, contends that mismanagement, inflated pay and shoddy ethics are slowly strangling Wall Street.
DAYS OF GRACE: A Memoir, by Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad. (Knopf, $24.) The reflections by the tennis star on the many roles he played: sportsman, protester against racial injustice, person with AIDS.
G.
M.
TREVELYAN: A Life in History, by David Cannadine. (Norton, $32.95.) Trevelyan (1876-1962), a Cambridge historian and Whig aristocrat, hoped to see decent liberal values established in Europe in the 20th century, but lived to see them disappear everywhere.
THE INNER SIDE OF THE WIND: Or, the Novel of Hero and Leander, by Milorad Pavic. (Knopf, $22.) A retelling of the ancient myth in which a brutal coincidence of time connects two stories set centuries apart.
THE INVENTION OF TRUTH, by Marta Morazzoni. (Knopf, $18.) An absorbing novella about artists and lookers at art; it concerns John Ruskin and 300 women working on the Bayeux Tapestry.
LENIN'S TOMB: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire, by David Remnick. (Random House, $25.) Decline and fall, observed by a Washington Post reporter in the Soviet Union, 1988-91.
LIFE'S DOMINION: An Argument About Abortion, Euthanasia, and Individual Freedom, by Ronald Dworkin. (Knopf, $23.) Mr.
Dworkin contends that the relevant choices proceed from the idea that life is sacred, and that therefore the state must not interfere.
NIGHTMARE ON WALL STREET: Salomon Brothers and the Corruption of the Marketplace, by Martin Mayer. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A history of the investment firm, with an emphasis on its transgressions in the 1980's and 1990's.
ORDINARY TIME: Cycles in Marriage, Faith, and Renewal, by Nancy Mairs. (Beacon, $20.) An account of spiritual growth and discovery by the author of "Remembering the Bone House."  THE PUGILIST AT REST: Stories, by Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $18.95.) A collection of short stories that portray prizefighters and war heroes surviving, but just barely.
SPY TRADER: Germany's Devil's Advocate and the Darkest Secrets of the Cold War, by Craig R. Whitney. (Times Books/Random House, $25.) The story of an East German lawyer who acted as middleman for the exchange of political prisoners during the cold war.
TINTIN IN THE NEW WORLD: A Romance, by Frederic Tuten. (Morrow, $22.) An American novelist introduces a French comic strip hero to the temptations of the real world.


In This Dream Station Future and Past Collide
Already, it is a landmark: that soaring arch of white steel, rising above granite walls of classical Beaux-Arts grandeur.
Depicted in architect's renderings with sunlight streaming through its sparkling glass skin, the arch brings out the primal emotions aroused by the sight of a rainbow after a storm.
It may be years before this vision materializes.
The $315 million needed to build it is not yet in hand.
But Amtrak's proposal to resurrect Pennsylvania Station from a pit beneath Madison Square Garden and enshrine it within the landmark general post office building across the street has aroused more anticipation than any civic project in years.
No wonder, for this project pushes some of the hottest buttons in architecture and urbanism today.
Public space.
Infrastructure.
Mass transit.
Regional planning.
But the hottest button of all is one that touches off a painful memory: the destruction of the original Pennsylvania Station station 30 years ago.
The razing of this station, McKim, Mead &amp; White's 1910 masterpiece of Beaux-Arts design, was one of the greatest traumas New York City ever suffered.
Public reaction was profound, and in some ways beneficial.
Historical preservation was transformed from a genteel pastime to a nationwide movement with political clout.
Architects began to admit that the Modern movement was turning out to be less than a boon for cities.
Above all, New Yorkers began to assert a proprietary interest in the city as their collective cultural heritage.


Please Don't Shoot This Player Piano
"Perfection without practice," boasted an advertisement early in the century.
"All the joy without hard work!" said another.
"You need no musical training to play it," proclaimed a third.
So appealing were player pianos that by the 1920's they accounted for more than half the keyboards sold annually in the United States.
Pianists like George Gershwin and Sergei Rachmaninoff recorded piano rolls, paper scrolls intricately perforated so that sensors in the player mechanism could more or less recreate their playing.
Much has changed since then.
Recordings have obviated the need for elaborate pieces of self-playing furniture.
The piano itself has suffered, having lost its prominent place in middle-class domestic life.
It has even acquired an adjective -- acoustic -- to distinguish it from electronic keyboards with no connection to the home and no specified character.


Carolee Gabel, Steven Inskeep
Carolee Roberts Gabel, the daughter of Rebecca A. Dann of Wallkill, N.Y., was married yesterday to Steven Alan Inskeep, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Roland L. Inskeep of Carmel, Ind.
The Rev.
Paul Z. Reuter, a minister of the Dutch Reformed Church, performed the ceremony at the French Church in New Paltz, N.Y.


A Very Personal AIDS Project
Protection Productions, a group of young New Yorkers who are producing an educational film about AIDS, has some big-name backers: Saul Steinberg, Robert Woolley, Bill Blass and Mark Hampton all showed up at Amanda Burden's apartment on June 8 for a fund-raiser for the project.
The filmmakers include, below, from left to right, Michael Swanhaus, Beatriz de la Sierra, Belle Burden (Ms. Burden's daughter), Rafael de la Sierra and Nancy Hirsch.


IS HUMANITY SUICIDAL?
Edward O. Wilson argues that we must save other species, not for their own sake, but so "they can be understood and employed in the fullest sense for human benefit" ("Is Humanity Suicidal?" May 30).
What is needed, instead, is to see human beings merely as one part of the whole earth system and probably as that part whose job is to bring about healing, where previously we have caused destruction and degradation.
ELEANOR RAE Ridgefield, Conn.


Shaking It Off
Early last summer, two days after arriving in Belgrade, I was summoned to an interview with Slobodan Milosevic, the Serbian leader I consider a war criminal and a mass murderer.
I was led past a squad of thugs into an ornate chamber and told to wait.
Presently, the stocky English-speaking politician came in smiling.
He extended his hand and I took it.
It is a troubling memory.
Milosevic was not my first despot.
Over the years I had interviewed Idi Amin of Uganda, Mobutu Sese Seko of Zaire, Mengistu Haile Mariam of Ethiopia, and the two men who brought Communist rule to Afghanistan, Noor Mohammad Taraki and Hafizullah Amin.
But each of them had maintained autocratic aloofness, showing a contempt for a lowly scribe that I thought was just fine.
I could do my job and they could do theirs.
They never offered their hands.


Corrections
A report in the Travel Advisory column on May 9 about 15-day Scandinavian tours that commemorate the 50th anniversary of the rescue of Danish Jews from the Nazis misstated the cost.
A letter from the tour company, dated June 3, pointed out that the price of $2,588 a person is for land arrangements only and does not include air fare.


Boys of Summer Find They're Never Too Old
DIVING to his left, the shortstop, Hank Els, makes a scintillating stop of a hard-hit ground ball.
Then, with his glove, he flips the ball backhanded to the second baseman, Dennis Leach, for a force-out on a base runner coming from first.
The play would draw cheers at a game in the major leagues.
On the very next play, the third baseman, Mark Beers, lunges to his left and spears a line drive for another out.
Again, a major-league play.


At the Village Well
To the Editor: I can share some of the feelings about the Welsh language Pamela Petro described in "Gymru and Cymru and All That." I travel often in Wales, and perhaps, someday, I will have the courage to attempt a conversation in Welsh (although courage should not be necessary, since the Welsh are truly kind and helpful).
Potential Welsh learners should know that substantial rewards accrue long before attainment of conversational fluency.
Welsh is so unpredictable that anyone who enjoys languages will become addicted from the first lesson.
As reading facility develops, the learner will enjoy one of Europe's great literatures.
Most poetry is difficult but the sagas are simple, direct, concise and powerful narrative.
"Branwen Ferch Lyr" is a Greek tragedy in prose, 18 pages of elegantly parsimonious narrative (but material for a thousand-page novel) which begin with a pageant of majestic international harmony but soon explode in sadistically murderous violence that pits family against family, stirs up genocidal paranoia, and leaves Branwen to die of grief because "two such marvelous islands" (as Britain and Ireland) have been despoiled on her account.


Airborne Spirits Lose Altitude
WAVE farewell to the three-martini flight.
The days of the airplane as a flying cocktail lounge are pretty much over, as health-conscious passengers and business travelers on tight schedules forgo cocktails and cognacs in favor of a little wine or water.
Overall consumption of alcohol on planes is down, with a decline of about 10 to 15 percent a year for the last several years at most airlines, according to food and beverage managers at major domestic and foreign carriers.
Passengers who do drink spirits tend to drink vodka, but most others are ordering beer or wine or water.


Mount Vernon Gets in Step on Band Day
ON Band Day, a yearly event in June here, this city turned out to celebrate its children.
Thousands gathered along Gramatan Avenue for the event -- a spectacular parade of the marching bands, drill teams and special ensembles of the city's 13 public schools.
Toddlers stared in awe as students from kindergarten through high school marched past, uniformed in glittering colors and showing off skills they had practiced all year.
The drummers were especially exuberant, sending volleys of rhythm into the noonday crowd as sweat from the effort rolled down their cheeks.


Devils Sign Two Young Defensemen
The New Jersey Devils announced Friday the signing of two 19-year-old defensemen, third-round draft choice CALE HULSE and seventh-round selection GEORDIE KINNEAR.
Hulse, a 6-foot-3-inch, 210-pounder played last season for Portland in the Western Hockey League.
He had 10 goals and 26 assists in 72 games and amassed 284 penalty minutes.
Kinnear, 6-1 and 200, played 58 games last season for Peterborough in the Ontario Hockey League, scoring six goals and 22 assists.
He had 161 penalty minutes.


Sports of The Times; The 'We' In Watson's Open Bid
AFTER seven holes in Thursday's first round of the United States Open at Baltusrol, Tom Watson was already four over par.
But walking to the eighth tee, a voice said reassuringly, "We were four over in the first round at Pebble Beach, too."
We.


Letters; Oooooo, That Absolut
To the Editor:
Have they no shame?


For Heroes With Hooves
A benefit for the Mounted Unit of the New York City Police Department, Sardi's restaurant, June 14.


Katharine Walker Gregory Brown
Katharine Timmins Walker, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Peter F. R. Walker of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I., was married there yesterday to Gregory Curtis Brown, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Curtis E. Brown of Southborough, Mass.
The Rev.
T.
Carleton Lee performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Brown, 24, graduated cum laude from Georgetown University.
Her father is the chairman of the department of anesthesiology at North Shore University Hospital-Cornell University Medical College in Manhasset, L.I.
Her mother, Susan Walker, now retired, was a vice president of the former Browne-Ladd Tours Inc. in Cold Spring Harbor, which ran summer trips for students.


Your Home: The Walk-Through; Inspections That Can Pay Off
IT is customary on the day before a closing for buyers to visit homes they are purchasing one last time to make sure everything is working and it is being left in exactly the condition outlined in the sales contract -- ceiling fixtures, washing machine, dog house, azaleas and all.
Though this particular inspection frequently takes a back seat to other 11th-hour dramas -- documents that must be picked up or final arrangements with the movers -- it should not be lightly dismissed, even if the broker takes it all very casually.


Kamieniecki's Wish Is Nokes's Command
Scott Kamieniecki wanted the ball back for the top of the ninth inning.
He was only a substitute, a call-up starter asked to do the job while Jim Abbott is on the disabled list.
He had never pitched a complete-game victory in the major leagues.
He had not won two games in a row for almost a year.
He wanted the chance.
Yankees Manager Buck Showalter set this as his rule: If the Yankees could get one more run in the bottom of the eighth inning yesterday, if they could increase their lead over the Minnesota Twins to four runs, he would let Kamieniecki go back out for the ninth.


'Backlash' Pops Up As Prop du Jour
Once there was a serious book of feminist reportage.
"Hey, honey," some slick director told the book, "I can make you a star." Something like that must have happened, because suddenly Susan Faludi's best-selling "Backlash: The Undeclared War Against American Women" has become a movie icon.
The 1991 book appears on screen as a conspicuous and jokey prop in two current films and is the subject of a catty reference in a third.
When "Backlash" turns up in the movies, you can hear the Zeitgeist calling.
In "Indecent Proposal," Demi Moore walks into the office of the billionaire businessman played by Robert Redford.
His receptionist shows every sign of being a bimbette -- bleached-blond hair, heavy makeup, lethal fingernails -- except she is reading "Backlash."


Corrections
An article on April 11 about Skye, Scotland, incorrectly identified the part of the island from which Charles Edward Stuart, known as Bonnie Prince Charlie, was taken to the mainland in 1746.
A reader's letter dated April 17 pointed out that the prince left Skye from the town of Elgol, not the Sleat peninsula.
This correction was delayed by an editing lapse.


Jennifer Rothkopf, Marc A. Ness
Jennifer Rothkopf, a daughter of Barbara and Arthur Rothkopf of Washington, was married yesterday to Marc Aimont Ness, a son of Jeannine Ness and Dr.
Gayl Ness of Ann Arbor, Mich.
Cantor Siegfried Rowe performed the ceremony in Annapolis, Md., at the weekend home of the bride's parents.
Ms.
Rothkopf, 30, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Oberlin College and is now a second-year medical student at Case Western Reserve University.
Her father, a former Deputy Secretary of Transportation in the Bush Administration, is to become the acting president of Lafayette College in Easton, Pa., next month.
Her mother is the administrator at Woodley House, a psychiatric and social-services agency in Washington.


Corrections
A review on May 23 about "For God, Country and Coca-Cola," a history of the soft drink and its maker by Mark Pendergrast, misstated the location of a 1960 sit-in at a Woolworth's lunch counter.
It was in Greensboro, N.C.


Where Chinese Yearn for 'Beautiful' U.S.
As the hogs outside grunted their protests at the drizzle, R. T. Liang sipped cheap tea from one of his set of cracked cups and spoke of the Beautiful Country with a reverence that Americans might find both flattering and unsettling.
"The United States -- what a place!" Mr.
Liang said wistfully, as family members clustered around him in his home, next to a porcelain God of Wealth apparently erected less in gratitude than in hope.
"It's so rich! If there weren't restrictions, everybody would leave here. We would go to look for work in America, Hong Kong or Taiwan. If we could figure out how to get there, we would all go. The villages would become empty."


A 'Taming of the Shrew' That Trusts in Love
IF only as a truce in the ceaseless battle of the sensibilities over what "The Taming of the Shrew" means -- is it a feminist parable? a sexist put-down? -- the New Jersey Shakespeare Festival staging of Shakespeare's provoking comedy is to be embraced with a relieved sigh.
Make love, not war, Dylan Baker's saucy staging seems to be saying, and with that, the weight of decoding Shakespeare with cryptic and coy interpretations is lifted.
Here is a successful production that takes the side of benevolent reconciliation.


Empire Audits Show $51 Million Inflated In '89-90 Loss Data
Internal auditors examining two sets of books kept by Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield have found new discrepancies showing that losses on the company's "high-risk" accounts were exaggerated by $51 million in reports filed with New York State regulators in 1989 and 1990.
Last week, the company acknowledged exaggerating its losses by at least $28 million in 1991.
The false reports to the state apparently started about the time Empire, the nation's largest nonprofit health insurer, began an intense lobbying campaign for sweeping changes in state insurance law.
The campaign was based on the premise that Empire was unfairly burdened with high-risk customers.
These were generally the oldest and sickest New Yorkers, whom the for-profit insurers were not required to take, but they also included self-employed people and others who could not get insurance elsewhere.


Topics of The Times; Dads in the Ads
A colleague has been walking around mumbling, not exactly to himself, "Oh yeah, yeah. Sure. Phooey!" He seemed distressed enough to warrant asking what the problem was.


AIRBORNE
Add Lesley Hazleton to the long list of people who just don't get it regarding a woman's "right" to go into military combat (Hers: "Airborne," May 30).
Let me make sure I got her arguments straight: we should send women out to kill and be killed in order to bolster their self-confidence; open up more military and commercial flying jobs to them, and learn to "wage more sensible war." Is that it?


A Child So Light He Could Fly
There's more than a whiff of menace in MR.
SUMMER'S STORY (Knopf, $17), a seemingly sprightly fable of childhood adventure and discovery by the German novelist Patrick Suskind, whose malevolent first novel, "Perfume," was an international best seller.
Unlike most coming-of-age stories, this one explores not only the mysteries of duty and desire, injustice, aging and death -- but also Galileo's laws of falling bodies.
Set in a pleasant lakeside village "shortly after the war," the tale is narrated by a nameless boy who loves his typically incomprehensible parents, dotes on his elusive sweetheart and despises his hilariously cranky piano teacher.
Gravity (and perhaps gravitas) enters the life of this child "so light I could fly" in the form of the mysterious Mr.
Summer, an eccentric recluse who spends all his time ferociously striding about the countryside, and whose single utterance is an angry "Why can't you just leave me in peace!" Like a force of nature, Mr.
Summer pulls the airy narrator down to earth, providing sobering lessons about childhood foibles and grown-up fears.
And if the translation by John E. Woods occasionally provides a few thuds of its own ("They were only dreams, and like all dreams not really emotionally satisfying"), the accompanying drawings by Jean-Jacques Sempe have the ethereal quality of innocence just on the brink of being lost.


Russians Flee Strife in Region of Geogia


Taking the Measure of Summer Stock
THE defective septic system that caused Gateway's Candlewood Playhouse to shut down in New Fairfield last year has been replaced.
And the Ivoryton Playhouse had a new staircase built in accordance with fire regulations.
While the removal of fire and health code violations are hardly the stuff of inviting theater news, it's the repairs and the numerous renovations, not the repertory, that tell the story of Connecticut's summer stock.
What's left of it.
Ivoryton Playhouse, beginning its 64th season, one ahead of the Westport Country Playhouse, is the winner in the survival game.
But statistics simplify.
They do not reflect changes.


In the Region: Connecticut; State Eases the Plight of Small Landlords
IN the final hours of the last day of the legislative session on June 9, Connecticut lawmakers made life marginally easier for the state's mom-and-pop landlords.
They passed a bill that permits direct payment of rent by city welfare agencies to the landlord after one month of nonpayment by the tenant.
But measures that would speed the eviction process, and let towns require rent to be paid into the local housing court until the landlord gets a certificate of occupancy, did not reach the floor.
Currently, tenants may stop paying rent when no such certificate exists.


Manager's Profile; Michael F. Price
Fund: Mutual Discovery.
Assets: $255 million.
Inception: Jan. 1. (Sponsor: Mutual Series Inc., Short Hills, N.J.)
Born: July 3, 1951; Glen Cove, L.I.


HAPPY EVER AFTER IN CAMELOT
Did I miss something?
According to your story, Robert Goulet works very hard at his job, is appreciated tremendously by the people who pay to see him and was treated with micron-thin respect, veneered over deep scorn, by your writer.


Good Works
Contributing to worthwhile causes, and dining, dancing and mingling around New York.


In the Cause of New War Memorials
THREE new commemorative coins honoring Americans who served in World War II will be issued by the United States Mint beginning July 9.
The coins come in denominations of $5, $1 and a half-dollar.
The profits will be used to create a memorial in Washington to all those who served in the war and to help pay for a United States D-Day and Battle of Normandy Memorial in Normandy, France.
The Mint is authorized to issue 300,000 $5 coins, a million $1 coins and two million half-dollar coins.


Shrimpers Voice Fear On Growth of Factory
Out on San Antonio Bay, as a hazy Texas sun arches overhead, shrimp trawlers with names like the Lady Harvester and the Gulf Tide drag their nets placidly back and forth before puttering back to the fish markets here for a decades-old ritual of local commerce.
Tens of thousands of bay shrimp pass along conveyor belts, then are cleaned, weighed, packed in ice and bartered over. (Current price, 65 cents or so a pound.)
But the languorous pace in the fishing villages along this stretch of the Gulf of Mexico belies a profound anger among those whose livelihood has long been tied to the seafood-rich bays and estuaries of the Texas coast.


Data Update
*4*INDEXES OF HOUSING COSTS N.Y.-Northeast N.J. area*
% change from
% change from
May 93
Apr. 93
May 92
Rents
182.5
0.0
+2.9
Homeowner's costs
181.8
-0.1
+2.6
Fuel and utilities
110.9
+1.0
+5.3
*4*Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
*4**Five counties of New York City plus Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester
*4*Rockland, Putnam, Bergen, Essex, Morris, Union, Hudson, Middlesex
Somerset and Passaic.
Indexes: 1982-84=100
MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.63
7.65
8.74
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.73
4.74
5.91
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.49
7.53
8.60
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.55
4.57
5.74
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.51
7.53
8.64
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.33
4.38
5.72
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.78
7.79
8.85
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.37
5.32
6.42
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.61
3.58
4.18
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.06
7.06
8.26
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes. (Source: HSH Associates)


A Long Shot for Casinos: Sports Betting on Ballot
In a campaign akin to a political race, the Casino Association of New Jersey is conducting a last-ditch effort to get a sports betting referendum on the ballot in November.
The association, which represents the 12 Atlantic City casinos, is in the final week of a two-week, $500,000 campaign that has included newspaper, television and radio advertisements, mailings to state legislators and the recruitment of gamblers off gaming floors.


Confessions of a Rider On Metro-North   I laughed when I read Kate Stone Lombardi's article "A Who's Who of the Commute" (May 30) describing the four types of Metro-North commuters.   I was definitely a "worker" type. For three years, while I commuted from my home in Westchester to law school in Manhattan, "my" seat on the train was the one nobody wanted -- the windowless corner seat across from the bathroom. Yes, it had dim lighting, cramped leg space and the often unsavory odors emanating from the nearby lavatory. But to a law student it had the perfect combination of privacy and lack of distractions.


Giving the Boot To Soccer Critic
To the Sports Editor:
Even though Richard Sandomir admits a certain "xenophobia," his lack of understanding concerning American soccer fans' appreciation of the game borders on offensive ("Soccer and Television Make a Bad Sports Mix," The Times, June 15).
First of all, "continuous play without commercials" is hardly a "revolutionary . . . big innovation." Soccer fans have been frustrated for decades missing live play during commercials of N.A.S.L. and World Cup matches while scrambling to find the same game on non-English speaking telecasts.
Also by the nature of continuous play, virtually every soccer telecast is guaranteed to be under two hours.


Human Rights: The West Gets Some Tough Questions
IT is tempting to reduce the global human rights debate today to a clash of good guys against bad guys, of Western democracies against Asian dictatorships, of countries defending the principle of universal human rights against third world attempts to water down the concept with economic, cultural and religious arguments.
It is all the more tempting because the attack on traditional "Western" human rights is being led by the likes of China, Syria and Iran, countries not exactly renowned for their love of democracy.
Further, with barely a blush, the Asian bloc seems to have assumed the Soviet bloc's old role of opposing international "meddling" on human rights.


Marion Atherton and John Reager
Marion Phelps Atherton, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan G. Atherton of Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday to John Reager, the son of Claire Reager and Osborne Reager, both of Claremont, Calif.
The Rev.
William C. Rhodes performed the ceremony at Grace Episcopal Cathedral in San Francisco.
Ms.
Atherton, who is keeping her name, is an arts administrator with the Philharmonia Baroque Orchestra in San Francisco.
She graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in music education from Columbia University.


Deals and Discouts
PARIS PACKAGES Europe Express has Xpress Paris packages from New York, among other cities, with T.W.A.
From July 1 to 15, the cost is $959 for air fare; six nights' hotel accommodation at the Pierre Hotel, part of the Quality Inn chain, or the Comfort Inn Montmartre, with tax and service charges; Continental breakfast; airport transfers, a Seine cruise, and other extras.
The deadline to buy this package at this price is June 25.
The price rises to $1,029 from New York from July 15 through August, then drops to $949 from Sept. 15 to Oct. 31.
Airport tax of $33 a person is extra.
Prices are based on travel Monday through Thursday.
Call (800) 927-3876.
Discounted purchases must be made with the Visa card.
Call (800) 442-2489.
HONG KONG PROGRAMS The Mandarin Oriental Hong Kong and T.B.I.
Tours (a division of Japan Travel Bureau International) have a six-night package for $1,345 through August that includes hotel, air fare from the West Coast on United, Continental breakfast daily, round-trip transfers by private car and a half-day tour.
Air fare from the East Coast is an additional $230 round trip.
Trans-Pacific travel from Friday through Sunday costs $50 more each way, and departure taxes of about $40 are extra.
Rates are per person, based on two in a room.
Call (800) 223-0266.
BARGE DISCOUNTS Abercrombie and Kent is offering discounts on its barge cruise programs in France.
For departures Aug. 11, 18 and 25, the 12-passenger Napoleon cruising the river Rhone between Avignon and Lyons now costs $2,463 in a standard cabin and $2,630 in an upper deck cabin; these rates are a third off regular prices.
Fares include meals, drinks and wine and sightseeing.
Travelers who book a six-night cruise on the barges Lafayette or L'Abercrombie for July or August and purchase an economy class ticket to Paris on United Airlines from most United States gateways will receive another ticket free.
The Lafayette sails the upper Loire and Sancerre regions; the L'Abercrombie cruises the Saone and lower Burgundy.
Prices for both start at $2,690 a person sharing a double cabin.
Call (800) 323-7308.


Kathleen King and Christopher Moran
Kathleen P. King, the daughter of Thomas F. and Kathleen M. King of Rockville Centre, L.I., was married there on Friday to Christopher G. Moran, a son of William A. and Dr.
Theresa K. Moran of West Hempstead, L.I., and Chicago.
Msgr.
Robert Mulligan performed the ceremony at St.
Agnes Cathedral.
Mrs.
Moran, 26, graduated from the University of Virginia.
She and her husband are associates at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company in New York, she in the investment banking division and he in the municipal bond department.
The bride's father is a trader in the equities division at Goldman, Sachs in New York.
Her mother is a real-estate broker in Rockville Centre.


Cynthia Sulzberger and Gary Simpson
Cynthia Fox Sulzberger, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur Ochs Sulzberger of New York and Southampton, L.I., was married in New York on Thursday evening to Gary Leonard Simpson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Simpson of Old Westbury, L.I.
Dr.
Ronald Sobel, senior rabbi of Temple Emanu-El in New York, performed the ceremony at the Plaza.
The bride, who will keep her name, graduated from Duke University.
She is an intern in the Language and Learning Disability Unit at St.
Luke's Hospital in New York.


Virginia Galda, Andrew Woelflein
Virginia Aletha Galda, a daughter of Odessa P. Galda of Tryon, N.C., and the late Frank D. Galda, was married yesterday to Andrew Buckley Woelflein, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kevin G. Woelflein of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Christina Condit performed the ceremony at the Episcopal Church of the Transfiguration in Saluda, N.C.
Mrs.
Woelflein is a project manager in global operations for the American Express Bank in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Duke University.
Her father was the manager of a J. C. Penney store in Grosse Pointe, Mich.


Sound Bytes; A Woman Who Rides the Digital Wave
Denise Caruso is editor of Digital Media: A Seybold Report.
The newsletter examines trends in the merging fields of computers, consumer electronics, communications, multimedia and entertainment.
Seybold also sponsors the Digital World conference that begins next week in Beverley Hills, the primary meeting place for high-tech experts and investors, which she is helping to coordinate.
It's a far cry from being a carhop at the Pismo Beach A&amp;W, where her career started.
She entered journalism, using a manual typewriter, at a small newspaper in San Luis Obispo, Calif., moved on to become a reporter for Infoworld and Electronics Magazine, and was a high-tech columnist for The San Francisco Examiner until she became founding editor of Digital Media in 1991.


Having to Say 'Sorry' After All
Israelis have a well-earned reputation for taking brusqueness to the limit and for holding outsiders who spurn them in contempt.
But they also crave international acceptance, even affection.
And so after years of being well out of the rock music loop, many of them have been made dizzy by the gaggle of stars suddenly at their door: Guns N' Roses and Bob Dylan have appeared, Michael Jackson is scheduled, and, rumor has it, maybe Madonna will show up.
Last week, Elton John went to Tel Aviv to bang his piano before 30,000 fans.
In no time, things went wrong.
Either he didn't get proper V.I.P. treatment at the airport or he played the prima donna.
Either aggressive paparazzi menaced him at his hotel or he foolishly panicked.
In any event, he had barely arrived before he flew off in a Brobdingnagian huff.


Imprisoned 'Nice Girl' Puts It All On Tape
HERB MEADOW is best known for screenplays like "The Robe" and "Redhead From Wyoming" and for his television series "Have Gun, Will Travel." Along with his television and film credits, he is also known for his children's stories.
On top of that Mr.
Meadow is a playwright.
His new drama, "What's a Nice Girl Like You Doing in a Place Like This?" is having its premiere at the Arena Players Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale, where it will continue on the Second Stage through July 11.


Topics of The Times; Stop Flogging Franks
"Wait! I'm a Republican!" That's what Gary Franks, the Republican Representative from Connecticut, once yelled as white voters breezed by him on the stump.
Mr.
Franks was the first black Republican they'd seen.
"Wait! I'm black, too" is what he yells now as the Democrats of the Congressional Black Caucus throw him out of meetings.
As the only Republican in the caucus, Mr.
Franks is suspected of being an agent of the G.O.P.
As such, the Democrats periodically eject him so that they can discuss "strategy" among themselves.


No Arnold. No T. Rex. Just Art.
This time of year, you might feel as if you need a private detective to track down a serious movie -- one without superstars, life-threatening stunts or fast-food tie-ins.
In fact, the situation isn't nearly so desperate.
There are plenty of new films aimed at viewers who don't care to see Arnold climb a mountain carrying a dinosaur under his arm.
Though "Much Ado About Nothing" and "Orlando" are the most visible signs of counterprogramming, they are just the beginning.
Here is a critical guide to this summer's art films. (Most have opened in New York and Los Angeles and will gradually make their way across the country during the next two months.) Some are better than others at avoiding dopey situations, but all are guaranteed dinosaur-free.


Elizabeth A. Joffe, George J. Nolan
Elizabeth A. Joffe, a vice president at Marine Midland Bank in New York, was married yesterday to George J. Nolan, a vice president with Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
The Rev.
William Benwell performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of the Mount Church in Warren, N.J.


Sonya Stevens, Michael Watts
Sonya Malynda Stevens, a daughter of Carol B. Stevens Eno of West Tisbury, Mass., and William H. Y. Stevens Jr. of Madison, N.J., was married yesterday to Michael John Watts, a son of Denise Russett of Litchfield, Conn., and William A. Watts of Manchester, N.H.
The Rev.
James Martin performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church of West Tisbury.


Giving Voice to the Renaissance in Siena. Siena?
Sculptor, painter, architect, engineer, theorist and, in general, "homme extraordinaire," Francesco di Giorgio can lay claim to the dubious honor of being the most undervalued artist of the 15th century.
Sit through a course on the Renaissance and chances are his name will not be mentioned: he was a nova in that constellation of Italian artists that held all Europe in thrall.
The problem is that he was born a Sienese, and as all visitors to that Tuscan city know, Siena and its artists are synonymous with the Middle Ages.
Writing on the occasion of a visit in 1873, Henry James remarked that "other places perhaps may treat you to as drowsy an odor of antiquity, but few exhale it from so large an area."
The means of rectifying this neglect has been provided in the form of a lucidly conceived exhibition, "Francesco di Giorgio and the Sienese Renaissance: 1450-1500," on view here through July 31 in the church of Sant' Agostino.
The exhibition, which includes 120 paintings, sculpture, drawings and manuscript illuminations, is as rich and multifaceted as the personalities it features.
Foremost among these is the great Florentine sculptor Donatello, who spent the years 1457 to '59 in Siena; Francesco's mentor, the sculptor-painter Vecchietta; his associate Nerroccio de' Landi; and the North Italian miniaturists Girolamo da Cremona and Liberale da Verona, who were called upon to illuminate the choirbooks of the cathedral.


There's Grass in the Dome, and 3 Shots in the Net
Germany and England created an electrifying atmosphere here in today's finale of U.S.
Cup '93, but the playing surface in the Silverdome was the day's top star.
The Americans made history in the world of soccer by successfully staging the first game to be played on natural grass in an indoor stadium, creating a sight never seen before in what amounted to a dry run for next summer's World Cup.


In Belgrade, Young Try To Dance the War Away
Glowing in shiny new suits and dresses, the class of 1993 from Belgrade High School No. 11 swirled through the polished lobby of the Hyatt Hotel here last Saturday night, laughing and mugging for one another's cameras.
It was the graduation ball, an annual ritual that had set back many of their families a half-month's salary, but outside the hall, where a band pounded out a loud rock-and-roll beat, not everyone felt like dancing.


Wallpaper Removal Depends on the Paper
REMOVING wallpaper is always messy, but generally fairly easy.
The methods depend on the type of wallpaper and the wall or ceiling material.
The easiest to remove is so-called strippable paper.
To test removing it, try lifting the corner of a piece with a putty knife.
If the corner comes away easily, peel the paper further by pulling it parallel to the surface, not outward.
If the paper is strippable, entire sheets should be removable by this method.
Underneath may be a layer of backing paper.
That can be left on the wall as a base for new wall covering, but if it comes away in places it has to be removed like ordinary nonstrippable wallpaper.


Partygoers, On Your Toes!
A 'Dance With the Dancers' benefit for the New York City Ballet, New York State Theater, June 14.


Corrections
A review on May 23 about "The Real Anita Hill," by David Brock, misstated Ms.
Hill's law school affiliation.
She is at the University of Oklahoma, not Oklahoma State University.


INDIA LEADER FACES POLITICAL BATTLE
Three days after a Bombay stockbroker stunned many Indians by saying he had paid a $300,000 bribe to Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao, the governing Congress Party rallied today around Mr.
Rao.
Members of Parliament from the Congress Party said they had "full faith" in Mr.
Rao, but his main political opposition, the Bharatiya Janata Party, stepped up its demands for his resignation, comparing the allegations to the Watergate scandal.


Japan's Crisis: U.S. to Profit?
For the better part of four decades America has held tight to the view that the unshakable dominance of a single, conservative party in Japan is essential to Washington's most critical alliance in the Pacific -- first as a bulwark against Communism, and second as a platform for one of the world's most remarkable economic success stories.
But as the party grew bloated with power, and the endless payoffs and influence-peddling became an international embarrassment for Japan, American officials increasingly found themselves forced to avert their eyes from the system's rotting core.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE PERILOUS PIT.
By Orel Odinov Protopopescu.
Illustrated by Jacqueline Chwast.
Green Tiger/Simon &amp; Schuster. $14. (Ages 3 to 8) Katie throws a peach pit over her shoulder as she sits under a tree.
The pit sets off a chain of improbable events leading back to a girl sitting under a tree.
Witty, stylized illustrations.


American Indian Artists Deserved Better Review
I was dismayed at Vivien Raynor's inappropriately brief review of "Bridging Two Worlds: Contemporary Native American Art," the exhibition that I co-curated at the Pelham Art Center.
The review  [ "Finding One's Way in Contemporary and Native America" ]  appeared on May 16.
The "Bridging Two Worlds" exhibition includes works by seven Native American artists from all over the country and the accompanying catalogue essay, based on interviews with them, is 12 pages.
Moreover, this is the most thorough exhibition of its kind ever presented in Westchester, and given multicultural concerns, it is unfortunate that Ms.
Raynor found little to say.


Corrections
An article on May 23 about the Eastern Shore of Maryland misstated the locations of Oxford and Vienna.
The towns are south of St.
Michaels.


Pennsylvania's South Beach?
Night and day, an army of fashion models descends on the town.
Calvin Klein, Randolph Duke, Michael Kors, Bill Blass, Isaac Mizrahi and other designers have visited recently, and so have celebrities like Joan Rivers, C. Z. Guest and Paul Prudhomme.
Could this be South Beach?
Oh, please.
The hot destination is West Chester, Pa., the home of the QVC Network.
Since Barry Diller became chairman of the home-shopping network in January, the trip to rural West Chester, about 24 miles west of Philadelphia, has become a sort of pilgrimage for retailers and publishers.
Executives from Saks, Bloomingdale's, the Gap, Random House and Simon &amp; Schuster have made the trek.
Herewith, a quick guide to what's what in town:


Shirien Taylor and Ron Wasserman
Shirien Taylor, the principal second violinist with the Metropolitan Opera Orchestra in New York, was married on Monday to Ron Wasserman, the principal bassist with the New York City Ballet Orchestra.
Paul Phinney, a town justice in Orangetown, N.Y., performed the ceremony in his chambers in Orangeburg, N.Y.
Ms.
Taylor is keeping her name.
She is a daughter of Sharlyn Matthews of Green Valley, Ariz., and the late Edward Taylor.
Her mother, who is retired, taught music in the Albuquerque, N.M., school system.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Ellery Matthews.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


On Behalf of Doris Lessing
To the Editor:
On May 2 you carried an author's query by Carole Klein indicating that she was engaged on a biography of Doris Lessing and asking if any of your readers had relevant correspondence, memorabilia or personal recollections.


Philistines in the Board Room
To the Editor:
I was quite interested to read "U.S. Decline: A New Clue" (Viewpoints, May 30) about the dismally low scores of first-year business students on a standardized test of general knowledge.
I disagree with the conclusions, however, to which we are led: "Acme Corporation sends its new vice president, in the top half of his class at Wake Forest, to Nicaragua to drum up business. He never arrives. A sales representative from Omega Corporation meets with the female head of another large enterprise. The talk turns to the suffrage movement. Bye-bye, business."


Men's Style; Slouch Like a Man
From Milan and Paris, we've been listening to a lot of lusty brays.
"The bad boys" and "geniuses" of European men's wear (several having acquired these appellations through self-anointment) are feeling kind of feisty.
And their clothes show it.
But as gorgeous as many recent collections were, even their champions occasionally wince and admit (after the initial dazzle of shrink-wrapped suits, vests atop jackets, sternum-high pants and I-know-you're-in-there-somewhere sweaters) that they're not exactly sure how American males are supposed to wear this stuff.
It's no wonder, then, that less adventurous souls come racing back to New York looking for Reassurance -- proof that men's wear isn't changing as fast as it seems across the ocean.
See, it must have been the jet lag, or that extra cafe au lait before the Yamamoto show.
Ah, this looks familiar.
This we know.
Thank you, New York, We're feeling better already.


Older Musicians Playing With Brio
"YOU can retire from a particular job," Victor Norman said, "but you can't retire from music. The music is always with you." To prove his point, the 87-year-old founder and conductor emeritus of the Eastern Connecticut Symphony, created the National Senior Symphony in 1989 and is now ready to convene its fifth annual assembly in New London.
There's an opening party tonight, but starting first thing tomorrow morning these mostly-retired musicians, ranging from top-notch professionals (the group's concertmaster, Donald Radding, recently stepped down after 43 years as a violinist with the National Symphony) to people 50 and older who simply enjoy playing, will spend four days in orchestral, sectional and chamber rehearsals at the Radisson Hotel.


Israel Seeks to Keep North Korea From Aiding Iran
Although the countries have no diplomatic relations, Israel has quietly had a series of contacts with North Korea, hoping that a lure of economic cooperation may stop the Koreans from providing nuclear technology and a nuclear-capable missile to Iran, officials here say.
The missile, Rodong 1, also known as Scud-D, is still being developed.
But Israeli officials have already expressed great concern because it is believed able to carry nuclear or chemical warheads and because, unlike earlier generations of the Scud, it has a stated range of about 600 miles and would put Israel within striking distance of missile sites in western Iran.


Winning Moves


Regulating Travel Insurers
New York State will regulate travel insurance more strictly starting July 1.
After a review starting in 1991 and a public hearing in January on its handling of insurance against 300 types of "special risks," the state Insurance Department concluded that trip cancellation, accidental death on a trip, lost luggage and similar problems did not constitute a "special risk," as insuring a skydiver did.
So all underwriters of travel insurance packages delivered in New York State must get approval for their rates and forms before selling the policies.
Formerly, most policies were sold under the looser "special risk" provisions without prior approval.
So far, seven companies have submitted policies to the Insurance Department for approval: BCS Insurance Company of Chicago; National Union Fire of the American International Group in New York; TransAmerica of Los Angeles; Mutual of Omaha; Federal Insurance of Chubb of New Jersey; Travelers Insurance in Hartford, and Twin Cities Fire of the Hartford Company.


Kelly Cooper, Gregory Lesko
Kelly Kathareen Cooper, a daughter of Robert R. Cooper of Dallas and Marjane Gaston of Tampa, Fla., was married yesterday to Gregory John Lesko, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William S. Lesko of Franklin Lakes, N.J.
The Rev.
Richard Ringenwald Sr. performed the ceremony at the First Congregational Church in Manchester, Vt.


Ms. Edmonds, Mr. Messinger
Catherine Edmonds, the owner of Wallis &amp; Edmonds, an event-planning company, was married yesterday to Matthew S. Messinger, a casting director for film, television and theater.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Gaylord Shimnoski, an Episcopal priest, and Rabbi Nathaniel Schwartz officiated at the Americas Society in New York.


Miss Kyropoulos, Mr. McIntyre
Adriane Kyropoulos, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Leon Kyropoulos of Hartsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Fred Headen McIntyre 3d, a son of Mr.
McIntyre Jr. of Lexington, N.C., and the late Ann M. McIntyre.
The Rev.
Peter N. Kyriakos performed the ceremony at Holy Trinity Greek Orthodox Church in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Mrs.
McIntyre, 25, is a database administrator in the New York law firm of Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton.
She and her husband graduated from Duke University.


Killing What Slavery Could Not
CLIMBING JACOB'S LADDER The Enduring Legacy of African-American Families.
By Andrew Billingsley. 446 pp.
New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.


Oblique Angles Deserve Applause
To the Editor:
No doubt sexiness, along with realism, went out of Hollywood movies in 1934 when the Production Code came in, as Caryn James points out in "Movies Used to Be Really Good by Being Bad"  [ May 30 ] .
But sexiness wasn't always replaced by "coyness and romantic haze," as she seems to think.
The popular arts are often at their most inventive and entertaining when they come up against the stops of the form and the culture and they have to deal obliquely with what can't be shown explicitly.


Railroads Are a Growth Industry, for a Change
IN Washington, the Virginia Railway Express is about to celebrate its first anniversary, carrying commuters from Union Station to Manassas and Fredericksburg.
Amtrak is well on the way to a historic improvement in the tracks from New York to Boston, electrifying those east of New Haven with overhead power lines that will allow faster trips, possibly luring substantial patronage from the air shuttles.
And in Miami, a makeshift commuter line that helped to ease traffic to West Palm Beach during major construction on Interstate 95 is now permanent.
Railroads are trying to make a comeback.
Around the country, air pollution from cars seems to be a nearly intractable problem, and society is concluding that in many places it cannot build enough highways or runways to cure congestion.
The decision to build commuter rail lines, said William E. Loftus, president of the American Short Line Railroad Association, is "a recognition that you can live an hour away from work and still have a pleasant commute."


Natalie Monroe, Richard Thigpen
Natalie Patrice Monroe, a daughter of Patricia Hart of Teaneck, N.J., and Nathaniel Monroe of Montclair, N.J., was married yesterday to Richard Thomas Thigpen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Phillip Thigpen of East Orange, N.J.
The Rev.
Canon Michael Du Plessis performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Englewood, N.J.
Mrs.
Thigpen, 28, is an associate product manager at the Sterling Winthrop pharmaceuticals company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University, where her husband received a law degree.
Her father is a food service manager at the Isabella Geriatric Center, a nursing home in New York.
Her mother teaches social studies at Dwight Morrow High School in Englewood.


Don't Let the Pesticide Polluters Fool You; We're All Lab Animals
To the Editor:
Re "Mother Nature's Pesticide Factory" by Michael Fumento (Op-Ed, June 9): Environmentalists are correct in wanting to ban potentially toxic chemicals, and Carol Browner, Environmental Protection Administrator, is equally justified in seeking a revision of the Delaney Clause, though not for the right reasons.
Since 1958 the Delaney Clause has allowed innacurate and misleading data to steer regulation.
Until the flawed methodology behind its guidelines is replaced, humans will continue to be industry's real guinea pigs, irrespective of the chemicals tested.


Using Sorrel, A Lemony Accent
ONE year I planted a couple of sorrel seedlings in a corner of my garden.
We had rented the house for the summer and when we returned the following year, I was amazed to see that the entire flower bed had been overrun.
The sorrel had gone to seed and stood two feet high with leaves as big as the pages of a book.
No matter how hard I tried to cut it back, it seemed to grow up again overnight like Jack's beanstalk.
But I love sorrel, and I was delighted to have so much of it.
Sorrel has a sharp, lemony taste that is great with lamb, veal, chicken, fish and eggs.
A few raw leaves are delicious in salads, too (you can add other leaves like nasturtium, basil, lemon balm and young lettuces and dress them with nothing but lemon and olive oil).


Wickman: Lucky? Good? Maybe Both?
So which is it? Is he just lucky? Or is he a talented survivor?
Bob Wickman weighed the questions.
He sat, bent over in front of his locker, while relief pitcher Neal Heaton told him to put this game behind him.
He couldn't.


Correction
A report in the Benefits column last Sunday about a jazz concert this Thursday for the Jewish Presence Foundation misstated the location.
The event, at 8 P.M., will take place at Avery Fisher Hall in Lincoln Center, not at Carnegie Hall.


Short of Money, U.N. Refugee Official Asks for Aid
Faced with a serious shortage of money, the United Nations official charged with caring for the world's 18.9 million refugees plans to summon representatives of the richest countries to a meeting here in July to ask them squarely whether they are willing to continue paying the bill.
"With this funding we can't continue," Sadako Ogata, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, said in an interview at her headquarters here this week.
"For most operations I've only got money for another month or two."


Q and A
Discount Paris Fashions
Q.
I will be traveling to Paris next month and wonder if there are any discount shops there offering designer merchandise? -- Vicki A. Schneps, Melville, L.I.


Beleaguered Parish Welcomes a New Pastor
With a simple, warm embrace, John Cardinal O'Connor installed the Rev.
Richard T. Adams as pastor of St.
John the Evangelist Church today, amid thunderous applause from parishioners during an afternoon Mass.
The Roman Catholic parish and its 2,000 members have been beleaguered since April, when allegations surfaced that the former pastor, the Rev.
Edward A. Pipala, had sexually abused boys at St.
John's and at Sacred Heart Church in nearby Monroe, where he formerly served.


Note to Readers
The Op-Ed page welcomes unsolicited manuscripts.
Because of the volume of submissions, however, we regret that we cannot acknowledge an article or return it unless it is accompanied by a self-addressed, stamped envelope.
If manuscripts are accepted for publication, authors will be notified within two weeks.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
1893 FAIR RECALLED
The Columbian Exposition of 1893 in Chicago celebrated the 400th anniversary of Columbus's discovery of America in 1492.
The fair was dedicated in 1892, but the 633 acres of buildings, gardens, exhibits and amusements were not completed in time, so the opening actually took place in 1893.


How Big Were Garbo's Feet?
To the Editor:
I look forward to reading "First Nights," by Susan Fromberg Schaeffer, reviewed in the May 30 Book Review by Robert Plunket.
The reviewer declares Ms.
Schaeffer's heroine, Anna Asta, to be "inspired by" -- or, actually, "totally based on, down to the smallest detail" -- Greta Garbo.
After referring to various similarities between the character and Garbo, Mr.
Plunket mentions that Anna "is sensitive about the size of her feet."


Women Players Still Shooting For a League of Their Own
Sheryl Swoopes, star of the Texas Tech national collegiate champions, couldn't make it to the game.
But Sue Wicks, a former Rutgers all-America who has been playing in Japan for the past few years, could.
And there were lots of other names from the recent past who made it.
The Adidas All-Star Classic at the State University of New York here tonight was a gathering of some of America's finest female basketball players, getting together to drum up some interest in another women's professional basketball league.


Wall Street; This Money Manager Can't Count
MASTERING even simple mathematics can be darned hard, and if you don't think so, ask Norman L. Yu.
Mr.
Yu, a popular money manager who operates out of Newport Beach, Calif., is the sort of fellow you'd expect to excel at demanding numerical calculations like addition and long division.
The publicity-minded inventor of a "six-key stock selection system," Mr.
Yu wooed hundreds of clients with his winning investment record.


Flights Of Artistic Fancy
A TWIST of the imagination can transform practical crafts into art forms.
At the Sheila Nussbaum Gallery in Millburn, Marylou Higgins's vessels, candle holders, teapots, necklaces and tables have one thing in common: their surfaces are covered with realistic portraits of imaginary people.
In Fair Lawn, the Kornbluth Gallery's display of garden accessories includes a ceramic wart hog by Hilda Hortens and Elyse Saperstein's grimacing lizard; both are functional planters.
Ms.
Higgins has portrayed literally hundreds of faces and small sculptured figures on her 74 pieces.
Some are drawn with a special pencil on bisque-fired clay, others are painted in soft glaze tones and framed in lustrous borders of gold and silver.


The 'Timeless Genius' Of 'Gilligan's Island'
To the Editor:
Among the litany of pop culture horrors that William Grimes warns are returning to haunt us ("Revival of the Fittest, May 23), the enduring "Gilligan's Island" is described as "little more than a situation and a handful of little-known actors with a laugh track attached." That critique misses the timeless "genius" of that show. Its characters and comedic structure are shamelessly lifted from commedia dell'arte, the proletariat political street farce of the Italian Renaissance.


Mountain, Sea and Story At Clew Bay
"THE most beautiful view I ever saw in the world," wrote William Makepeace Thackeray in 1842 of Clew Bay.
It was his first visit to this beguiling sweep of water speckled with 365 oddly shaped islands amid the bleak mountains and boglands of County Mayo.
The sun was just setting as the carriage bearing the author-to-be of "Barry Lyndon" and "Vanity Fair" rounded Croagh Patrick and rumbled along the coast road on into Westport: "The mountains were tumbled about in a thousand fantastic ways and . . . the bay . . . which sweeps down to the sea, and a hundred islands in it, were dressed up in gold, and purple, and crimson, with the whole cloudy west in a flame. Wonderful, wonderful!"
In the 150 years since Thackeray -- who was usually more prone to satire than hyperbole -- published his sharply observant travel narrative "The Irish Sketchbook," little has changed along the shores of Clew Bay.
A paved road now winds among the villages and resorts along the north-facing coast, spilling out onto the pier at Roonagh Quay, meandering inland through the pub-lined main street of Louisburgh, and skirting the swatch of brilliant white sand against the bay's dark aqua at Old Head Beach.
Just to the east, the mottled green and black slopes of Croagh Patrick loom above the ancient path that in pre-Christian times brought crowds of pilgrims to the mountain's base for a festival honoring the Celtic god Lug, long before St.
Patrick and his followers spread the new faith to the West of Ireland.


The Dinosaur Era, Frozen in Amber
AS thousands of moviegoers in 39 theaters across the state stood on long lines last weekend to see Steven Spielberg's dinosaur epic, "Jurassic Park," researchers from the American Museum of Natural History in New York were unearthing ancient material in New Jersey that, at some point in the distant future, could make the movie's scientific premise a reality.
The film, based on Michael Crichton's best-selling 1990 novel, centers on a theme park built on a remote island off Costa Rica where dinosaurs roam in jungle habitats bound by electrified fences.
The dinosaurs are clones, created from DNA extracted from parasitic insects that had ingested dinosaur blood and then been imbedded in tree resin.
When the resin hardened into amber, the film suggests, the insects -- and the dinosaur blood -- were preserved.


Setting the Pace in the Cafe Competition
CASUAL Italian cafes are more numerous on Long Island than sun-bathers at the beach on a glorious summer day.
Yet, just as every June day is not picture perfect, all pasta-pizza cafes are not alike.
Blue skies are more likely when a cafe is in the hands of experienced restaurateurs.
That is the case at the new Caffe Milano in Woodmere.
It has the same owners as three of the Island's top-rated Italian restaurants, Navona in Great Neck, Stresa in Manhasset and Trattoria Tulipano in Huntington.


Using Sorrel, A Lemony Accent
ONE year I planted a couple of sorrel seedlings in a corner of my garden.
We had rented the house for the summer and when we returned the following year, I was amazed to see that the entire flower bed had been overrun.
The sorrel had gone to seed and stood two feet high with leaves as big as the pages of a book.
No matter how hard I tried to cut it back, it seemed to grow up again overnight like Jack's beanstalk.
But I love sorrel, and I was delighted to have so much of it.
Sorrel has a sharp, lemony taste that is great with lamb, veal, chicken, fish and eggs.
A few raw leaves are delicious in salads, too (you can add other leaves like nasturtium, basil, lemon balm and young lettuces and dress them with nothing but lemon and olive oil).


Suzanne Hopkins, Jonathan Chase
Suzanne Middleton Hopkins, a daughter of Barbara Hopkins of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., and Chester Hopkins of New York, was married yesterday evening to Dr.
Jonathan Seth Chase, a son of Gertrude Chase of Pearl River, N.Y., and the late Howard Chase.
Rabbi Steven Pearce performed the ceremony at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard Hirsch, friends of the bride's parents, in Hastings-on-Hudson.


A Dual View of Debussy
The English pianist Paul Crossley has taken a cleansing look at Debussy's "Preludes," to begin his survey of the composer's complete piano music (Sony Classical SK 52583 and 53111; two CD's).
Also included here are both books of "Images," "Children's Corner," "Estampes" and "La Plus que Lent."
Mr.
Crossley offers considerable pleasure even before he plays a note.
He writes as interestingly about Debussy's music as he plays it.
And when, in his program notes, he wants to put his finger on one of music's most elusive methodologies, he wisely quotes the composer himself.


Mentor to Some, Cult Leader to Others
TO his followers, he is Rama, a gifted teacher and spiritual leader with special powers who offers a path to enlightenment, happiness and career success.
To his detractors, he is everything from a sophisticated con man to a dangerous cult leader.
Controversy has surrounded Dr.
Frederick P. Lenz for the last 15 years as he has moved his base of operations to different cities around the country.
Trina Walker, a former student, said that Dr.
Lenz has more than a hundred students in Westchester County.
He offers lectures at several places, including regular monthly lectures, by invitation only, at the Performing Arts Center at the State University of New York at Purchase.
The group has been renting space at SUNY for three years but is not affiliated with the college.


Mutual Funds; Shut Out? No Reason for Frenzy
MUTUAL fund investors have been frustrated by a rash of fund closings lately: Lindner Dividend, Strong Common Stock, T. Rowe Price Small Cap Value, Monetta and Pennsylvania Mutual have all shut their doors to new investors in recent months.
Some investors have been reacting by rushing to buy before the scheduled closing.
In an extreme case, a Chicago couple drove to St.
Louis to deliver an application for Lindner Dividend on the eve of the deadline.
But is this behavior warranted?


Bill Clinton's Brightening Sky
What a difference a week makes.
Here was an Administration bloodied by self-inflicted wounds and reduced to arguing that it was not incompetent.
And then, surprisingly, came three real achievements on a single day: committee approval in both the Senate and House of President Clinton's national service program, serious progress on campaign finance reform and a big victory in the Senate Finance Committee for the deficit-reduction plan that lies at the heart of Mr.
Clinton's strategy for economic renewal.
The optical lesson is that a modest amount of substantive achievement can overcome a whole lot of stylistic failure.
Only the most churlish opponent could fail to smile upon Mr.
Clinton's overdue good fortune; indeed, one could almost hear a collective sigh of relief not only among the President's friends but also among puzzled citizens who had begun to wonder whether Mr.
Clinton would ever locate the leadership capacities he left lying around the White House a few months ago.


Ease Up!
To the Sports Editor:
During the 40 years I have lived here, and especially when the salaries of star athletes rose to the stratosphere, it seems there has always been at least one athlete on the receiving end of the contumely of the local press corps: Reggie Jackson, Dave Winfield, Darryl Strawberry, and now Bobby Bonilla ("Lost in a City He Calls Home," The Times, April 25).
Strangely enough, they all seem to be black and/or Hispanic.
Once one is driven out of town via trade or whatever, once the atmosphere is so poisoned that life becomes intolerable for the athlete, there is a round of self-congratulation by sports reporters about what a tough town New York is.


THE DEATH OF EROS
I chuckled at Allan Bloom's sniffy rants about how the excluded persist in clamoring for power, guffawed at his dunderheaded certainty over what's nature and what's culture.
I howled at his Severity-of-Rape-o-Meter (rape of Mother Teresa, awful; rape of Mary Magdalene, so much less awful).
What a wacky guy.


Geraldine Visco, Paul A. Capello
Geraldine Winifred Visco, a daughter of Carmella Watkins of Santa Barbara, Calif., and Louis Visco of Burlington, Mass., was married yesterday to Paul Anthony Capello, a son of Gilda Tisa of Brooklyn and Luciano Capello of Zurich.
The Rev.
Bruno J. Visco, a Unitarian Universalist minister and the bride's uncle, performed the ceremony at the White Horse Tavern in Newport, R.I.
Mrs.
Visco Capello, 38, writes short stories and is an administrator for the department of industrial engineering and operations research at Columbia University.
She graduated from Columbia and received a master's degree in writing there.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Rhonda Visco of Burlington and the late John Watkins.


Flying to Florida
To the Editor: I am writing to add my voice to the chorus of outraged and disappointed travelers on Skybus.
In February I purchased round-trip tickets (Newark-Fort Lauderdale) for myself and my daughter.
As I informed Skybus, the sole purpose of the trip was a brief visit to my elderly father, who was hospitalized in Florida.
The tickets were for departure on Feb. 5 and return Feb. 6.
We arrived on time and waited in line for almost two hours.
We were then curtly informed that our plane would not depart at 7 P.M., as scheduled, but at 1 A.M. the next day -- meaning that we would arrive in Fort Lauderdale at 5 A.M., the same day we would have to leave.


New Hockey Museum in Toronto
Civic boosters in Toronto like to say it is a world-class city of many dimensions, including sports.
The diverse, modern metropolis on the shore of Lake Ontario boasts of the Blue Jays, who won baseball's World Series last fall and play in a stadium with a retractable dome, quite a tourist attraction in itself.
And there is serious discussion about the National Basketball Association expanding north of the border and putting a team in the city.
Still, Toronto's sports soul belongs to hockey, and it is hockey, particularly Canadian hockey, that is honored in a new museum, the Hockey Hall of Fame, which opened last week.


Landmarking Enters the Jet Age
Mammon and modernism dominated the agenda of the Landmarks Preservation Commission last Tuesday.
It considered giving landmark status to six grand banking rooms in Brooklyn and Manhattan that resemble temples, basilicas and palazzi.
Perhaps more remarkably, it examined the gull-like T.W.A. terminal at Kennedy International Airport, the crystalline former Pepsi-Cola Building on Park Avenue, a glass-fronted town house by Philip Johnson and two interiors at the New School for Social Research: the egg-shaped auditorium and a classroom with murals by Jose Clemente Orozco.


BOMB KILLS SEVEN IN A CAIRO STREET
A nail-packed bomb exploded late Friday in a crowded Cairo street, killing 7 people and wounding 15, in the latest incident in what appears to be a new and deadlier round of urban warfare in Egypt's capital.
The explosion killed and wounded vendors and men sipping tea in a small cafe.
It was the fifth bombing in a public place in the last four months.


Letters; Oooooo, That Absolut
To the Editor:
In discussing Vanity Fair's annual subscription rates, Claude P. Fromm, executive vice president and media director at TBWA Advertising, argues that his client, Absolut, should not have to "pick up the freight" when the magazine raises its subscription rate to $15 from $12, because the annual subscription rate is less than the cost of a bottle of Absolut.


Where to Stop and Smell the Flowers
AT Norfolk, in the foothills of the Berkshire Mountains, Fred and Mary Ann McGourty have tucked Molly the Witch in a raised flower bed near a Korean Stewartia tree.
As the owners of Hillside Gardens and Nursery, the couple hope that the rare peony will become another hallmark of their perennial paradise.
On six gently sloping acres, impressionistic displays of flowers set against the backdrop of the couple's 18th-century home to provoke the senses as well as the mind.


JUNE 13-19: Contempt of Clinton; The Chain of Command Reins In a General
Every so often, America's political and military leaders get an opportunity to remind themselves that the civilian in the White House really is the Commander in Chief.
It happened again last week, when the Air Force announced that Maj.
Gen.
Harold N. Campbell, who had spoken derisively about President Clinton, would be fined $7,000 and forced to retire.


SAINT HILLARY
Michael Kelly's attempt to lampoon Mrs.
Clinton's pursuit of a new social compact might have been more effective had he demonstrated greater knowledge of emerging trends in the American work place.
He would be surprised to learn that many companies are formulating work-place charters that define clear purposes and codes of conduct expressed in terms of mutual respect and responsibility.


Expensive Hair, Continued
Nearly three weeks after the "Hair Force One" brouhaha that beseiged President Clinton, Barbara Bush also retained the services of a high-priced hairdresser.
On June 8, the former First Lady celebrated her 68th birthday at the Upper East Side home of Robert and Georgette Mosbacher.
Before the party, Mrs.
Bush had her hair done at the Mosbacher home by a stylist from the Coppola salon on Madison Avenue.
While the salon wouldn't comment on what it cost Mrs.
Bush, it generally charges $200 for at-home visits.


Apprehension on 2 Sides: AIDS Cases and Members of Clergy
"I WAS the type of Catholic that only went to church on holidays," Louis Wiese, 27, of Centerport, said.
"But when I found out I was H.I.V. positive, I felt dirty and humiliated, like I had done something wrong and got caught.
"I was intimidated by the diagnosis and wanted to find my inner strength to help me deal with what would come. I wanted to reach back to the Catholic Church, but it was so difficult."


Susanna Cassell, R. S. Kopchains Jr.
Susanna Dawn Cassell, the daughter of Dr.
Samuel and Carol Cassell of Wyckoff, N.J., was married yesterday to Robert Stuart Kopchains Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kopchains of Hamburg, N.J.
Rabbi Alfred Landsberg and the Rev.
Chester Carina, a Roman Catholic priest, jointly officiated at the Indian Trail Club in Franklin Lakes, N.J.
Mrs.
Kopchains is a graphic designer and computer graphics specialist at Lewis &amp; Gace, an advertising agency in Fort Lee, N.J.
She graduated from the University of Vermont and received a master's degree in graphic design from Rochester Institute of Technology.


IN SHORT: FICTION
INTERNATIONAL THRILLER THE SCORPIO ILLUSION By Robert Ludlum. Bantam, $23.95.


Britta A. K. Herlitz, Daniel H. Lerner
Britta Ann Katherine Herlitz, the assistant publisher for the J. B. Lippincott Company in New York, was married last evening to Daniel Hamilton Lerner, an independent options trader on the American Stock Exchange.
The Rev.
James Gardiner, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel officiated at the Larchmont (N.Y.) Yacht Club.
Mrs.
Lerner, 28, graduated cum laude from Middlebury College.
She is the daughter of Bruce and Geraldine Herlitz of Larchmont.
Her father is the president of the Herlitz Company, a medical convention-management and publishing company in New York.
Her mother is a public elementary-school teacher in New York.


Telemarketing's Impact on the Bottom Line
RETAILERS are the lifeblood of daily newspapers, buying full or partial pages each day.
So imagine the concern in the advertising offices of the country's major newspapers as one department store chain after another announces plans to explore selling its wares on cable television.
After all, if R.H.
Macy &amp; Company goes ahead with its new home-shopping channel, hawking everything from apparel to comestibles, its newspaper ads might appear somewhat redundant.


Racing Report Ignoring The Key Question: How
Many racing people reacted with skepticism yesterday to the report by the Governor's special commission on horse racing, and suggested that the commission had tried to be all things to all people in a business surrounded by red ink, an unknown future and politics.
Nobody disagreed with the warning issued by the chairman of the commission, Vincent Tese, who also serves as Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's director of economic development: "Unless there is change in the way this industry does business, I can guarantee you that in three years the purses will be down. Unless there is change, this industry is in for a long, deep slide."


Turns of Fashion's Wheel
THE store is so crowded that customers fight to hand over their money.
The atrium is a seething, swirling mass of humanity clutching shopping totes.
Women with glossy hair and sleek suits rub padded shoulders at the beauty counter.
Outside on the sidewalk, yuppie couples juggle attache cases and ice cream.
A shopping mall in America?
A rerun of a 1980's movie?
An ad man's fantasy?
No.
Just an ordinary shopping day in Shanghai.


New Hydrofoil In Vietnam
Until recently, traveling from Ho Chi Minh City to the beach at Vung Tau 60 miles away required a land trip that took anywhere from two to four hours because of the condition of the roads (basic, at best) and the traffic (a melange of trucks, bicycles, cyclos, motorcycles and oxen carts).
Now, a Russian-built hydrofoil leaves every morning at 8 A.M. from the docks on the Saigon River near the Saigon Floating Hotel (Me Linh Square) and arrives 90 minutes later at the resort the French called Cap St.-Jacques.
The 112-foot craft is crewed by Russians and has a snack bar.


Jennifer J. Brokaw and M. Allen Fry
Dr.
Jennifer Jean Brokaw, a daughter of Tom Brokaw, the NBC News anchor, and Meredith Brokaw of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Michael Allen Fry, the son of Allen and Lynne Fry of Claremore, Okla.
The Rev.
Mitzi Noble, an Episcopal minister, officiated at the Trinity Episcopal Church in Lime Rock, Conn.
Lois Gatchell, an Episcopal deacon and a great-aunt of the bride, took part in the ceremony.
Dr.
Brokaw and Dr.
Fry, both 27, received their medical degrees last week from Dartmouth College.
Later this month they are to become residents at the University of New Mexico Hospital in Albuquerque, N.M., she in emergency medicine and he in radiology.


Ukraine's Not A Kid Brother Anymore
RELATIONS between Russia and Ukraine were bound for trouble from the moment the old Soviet Union broke up 18 months ago.
Even now, most Russians find it difficult to adjust to the loss of territory that for centuries they considered their own, while Ukrainians are learning that independence requires something more than a flag, a quasi-currency and a foreign policy that has been mostly about proving to the world, and to Russia, that theirs is a serious country, worthy of respect.
But as they try to forge a new relationship, these two Slav neighbors, the two most populous former Soviet republics, have received little help.
Their shared history has proved more of a burden than a guide.
Both governments, mired in internal crises, have had to fend off nationalist oppositions, while the outside world has taken a laissez-faire attitude that has left both Russians and Ukrainians feeling a bit put out.


How Women Moved Up in Canada
A BARRIER fell in North America last week when Canada's governing Progressive Conservative Party elevated Kim Campbell as its leader and the first woman to become Prime Minister.
But in Canada, obstacles to women in politics and society have been tumbling for years.
When the Liberal Party leader, Jean Chretien, takes to the hustings for elections likely this fall, he'll be the only man of the three national party leaders.
Four years ago, the New Democrats elected Audrey McLaughlin.
Accentuating his isolation is Sheila Copps, chosen as the Liberals' first female deputy leader two years ago.


Publisher Gives $365 Million To 4 Schools
Walter H. Annenberg, the billionaire who made his fortune from TV Guide magazine, announced yesterday the largest one-time gift to private education in American history, $365 million in cash grants to three universities and one little-known preparatory school in Hightstown, N.J.
Mr.
Annenberg, through his family foundation, will award $25 million to Harvard College, $100 million to the Peddie School, his alma mater, and $120 million each to the communications programs at the University of Southern California and the University of Pennsylvania.


Susan L. Golden, Victor Del Rio
Susan L. Golden, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph F. Golden Jr. of Teaneck, N.J., was married on Friday to Victor Del Rio, a son of Adeline Del Rio of Brooklyn and the late Jose Del Rio.
The Rev.
Jack Lord performed the ceremony at St.
Thomas More Roman Catholic Church in New York.
Mrs.
Del Rio, 30, is a reading specialist and the assistant to the head of the lower school at the Allen-Stevenson School in New York.
She graduated from Villanova University and received a master's degree in education from Fordham University.
Her father is the president of Milberg Factors Inc., a factoring and commercial financing concern in New York.


Happy Days?
THE FIFTIES By David Halberstam. Illustrated. 800 pp. New York: Villard Books. $27.50.


Coming Out in Business School
To the Editor:
Regarding "A Quiet Liberation for Gay and Lesbian Employees" (June 13), the experiences of your interviewees are far more positive than I would have expected.
If their colleagues (most of whom have eight or more years of experience in a corporate environment) who are in my class at Columbia Business School's executive M.B.A. program are any indication, gay people have a very long and painful struggle ahead of us.


The Executive Computer; A Strong New OS/2, With an Uncertain Future
Refusing to concede defeat in the face of daunting opposition, the International Business Machines Corporation is once again attempting to persuade the world that OS/2 is the best operating system for the current generation of personal computers.
This time it may be right, though right doesn't always make might in the software business.
At a technical symposium last week in Austin, Tex., the home of its new personal software products division, I.B.M. introduced what is by far the most impressive version yet of OS/2.


Nita Lelyveld, Benjamin Powers
Nita Lelyveld, a daughter of Carolyn and Joseph Lelyveld of New York, and Benjamin Erling Powers, a son of Sally and William Powers of Needham, Mass., were married yesterday in a civil ceremony at the country home of the bride's parents in Gardiner, N.Y.
The bride, 28, is a writer for The Associated Press in Washington.
She is a magna cum laude graduate of Harvard University.
Her mother is the director of the Bronx Municipal Hospital Day-Care Center, which serves children with AIDS.
The bride's father is the managing editor of The New York Times.


How the Laws Work In Regulating Rent Market
The rent-regulated housing market in New York City and some suburban counties includes more than a million apartments and is divided into two categories, rent controlled and stabilized.
Rent-controlled apartments are those built before 1947 that have been continuously occupied by the current tenant, or a legal successor, since 1971.
The tenants have no leases, but instead have a statutory right to occupy the apartment for as long as they want.


NOTES
Steven Spielberg, left, who is raking it in with dinosaurs, now has high hopes for transvestites.
The director's production company, Amblin Entertainment, plans to produce a film based on a screenplay titled "To Wong Foo, Thanks for Everything, Julie Newmar."
The screenplay is about three New York drag queens on a road trip that ends when their car breaks down in a small Midwestern town.
The script is by Douglas Carter Beane, who wrote the 1991 Off Broadway play "Advice From a Caterpillar."


Trying to Beat Swords Into Other Swords
WITH the Soviet threat gone, American military commanders are scrambling to find new missions for some of their fiercest and most costly cold war weapons.
The Navy is deploying marines aboard aircraft carriers.
Submarines built to hunt Soviet subs now practice disgorging commandos near beaches.
And the Air Force wants to spend $3 billion to retool the B-1B bomber, which was designed to drop nuclear bombs on Moscow, to drop laser-guided bombs in local battles.


No Arbitrary Whim
To the Editor:
As managing director of Music Theater International, a company that represents the dramatic licensing of musicals by the composer/ lyricists Frank Loesser, Leonard Bernstein, Stephen Sondheim, Meredith Willson, Jerry Bock and Sheldon Harnick, and the Gershwins, among many others, I should like to make a couple of points regarding Lawrence O'Toole's article "Ego, Paranoia and Power in the Land of Musical Rights"  [ May 30 ] .


Low-Level Criticism
To the Editor:
In John Russell's profile of Michel Laclotte  [ "The Man Who Invented the Louvre," June 6 ] , he quotes Mr.
Laclotte as having referred, when a young man, to the designers of badly lighted, dingy, poorly organized museums as "cretins."


Elisa Sickmen, Brian L. Zied
Elisa Bonnie Sickmen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Sickmen of Stony Brook, L.I., was married last evening to Brian Lee Zied, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest Zied of Alpharetta, Ga.
Rabbi Eugene Lipsey officiated at the Garden City (L.I.) Hotel.





HAPPY EVER AFTER IN CAMELOT
I don't much care about Robert Goulet one way or another, but sending a New York Times style reporter out after him has all the subtlety, esthetically and morally, of shooting fish in a barrel ("Happy Ever After in Camelot," by Alex Witchel, May 23).


Cardinal Installs New Pastor in Beleaguered Parish


NO QUICK SOLUTION IN HAITI FORESEEN
Diplomats involved in efforts to resolve Haiti's nearly 21-month political crisis say they consider it unlikely that Haitian military leaders will respond positively to a United Nations oil embargo imposed on their country until the reality of functioning without fuel sinks in.
Haiti's oil supplies, needed for transportation, power generation and industry, are thought to guarantee four to six weeks of normal consumption.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York Senate
1.
Campaign Finance: Vote to kill an amendment to a campaign-finance bill that would have eliminated all public financing from the bill.
Approved 53 to 44, June 16.
2.
Campaign Finance: Vote to end nearly three weeks of debate and vote on a major campaign-financing bill.
Approved 62 to 37 (two votes more than needed), June 16.
3.
Campaign Finance: Vote on passage of a campaign-finance bill that would create voluntary spending limits and reduce the amounts that political action committees can give candidates.
Approved 60 to 38, June 17.
Connecticut  Dodd (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y. . .
Y  Lieberman (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y. . .
Y  New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y. . .
Y  Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y. . .
Y  New York  D'Amato (R) . . .
N. . .
N. . .
N  Moynihan (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y. . .
Y  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York  House
1.
Replacement of Strikers: Vote on passage of a bill that would prohibit employers from hiring permanent replacements for union members who strike.
Approved 239 to 190, June 15.
2.
Aid to Russia: Vote on an amendment to a $13 billion foreign aid appropriations bill that would have cut $1.6 billion from the aid total to Russia and the former republics of the Soviet Union.
Rejected 289 to 140, June 17.
3.
Foreign Aid: Vote on passage of a bill providing $13 billion in foreign aid for the budget year that begins Oct. 1.
Approved 309 to 111, June 17.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y
4. Shays (R) . . . N. . . Y. . . Y
5. Franks (R) . . . N. . . Y. . . Y
6. Johnson (R) . . . N. . . N. . . Y  New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . . Y. . . Y. . . Y
2. Hughes (D) . . . Y. . . N. . . N
3. Saxton (R) . . . N. . . Y. . . Y
4. Smith (R) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y
5. Roukema (R) . . . N. . . Y. . . Y
6. Pallone (D) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y
7. Franks (R) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y
8. Klein (D) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y
9.
Torricelli (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  10.
Payne (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  11.
Gallo (R) . . .
N. . .
N. . .
Y  12.
Zimmer (R) . . .
N. . .
Y. . .
Y  13.
Menendez (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y
2. Lazio (R) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y
3. King (R) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y
4. Levy (R) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y
5. Ackerman (D) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y
6. Flake (D) . . . Y. . . Y. . . N
7. Manton (D) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y
8. Nadler (D) . . . Y. . . N. . . Y
9.
Schumer (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  10.
Towns (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y. . .
N  11.
Owens (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  12.
Velazquez (D) . . .
Y. . .
Y. . .
N  13.
Molinari (D) . . .
N. . .
N. . .
Y  14.
Maloney (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  15.
Rangel (D) . . .
A. . .
Y. . .
Y  16.
Serrano (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  17.
Engel (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  18.
Lowey (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  19.
Fish (R) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  20.
Gilman (R) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  21.
McNulty (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  22.
Solomon (R) . . .
A. . .
Y. . .
N  23.
Boehlert (R) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  24.
McHugh (R) . . .
Y. . .
Y. . .
Y  25.
Walsh (R) . . .
N. . .
Y. . .
Y  26.
Hinchey (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  27.
Paxon (R) . . .
N. . .
N. . .
Y  28.
Slaughter (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  29.
LaFalce (D) . . .
Y. . .
N. . .
Y  30.
Quinn (R) . . .
Y. . .
Y. . .
Y  31.
Houghton (R) . . .
N. . .
N. . .
Y  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


For Car Renters, The News Is Bad
AUTO renters who have been saving the cost of a collision damage waiver because a credit card or charge card provided this protection will need to take a close look at any new rules coming from their credit card company or bank.
The protection may be disappearing.
American Express and the Visa card and Mastercard issued by Chase Manhattan Bank are cutting back.
American Express is limiting the number of companies in the United States where its card will provide a C.D.W. alternative, and has eliminated coverage in Italy and New Zealand.
The Chase Bank's standard Visa and Mastercards will no longer provide a C.D.W. alternative at all.


Elana Seaman, Timothy Walsh
Elana Felicia Sophia Seaman, a social worker in New York, was married on Friday to Timothy Charles Walsh, an associate at Epstein &amp; Cresci, a law firm in New York.
Associate Justice Kristin Booth Glenn of the New York State Supreme Court officiated in her chambers in Manhattan.
Ms.
Seaman, 32, is keeping her name.
She is a social worker in private practice and a therapist at the Hudson Guild, a settlement house in New York.
She graduated from Bard College and received a master's degree in social work from Hunter College.
She is completing training in early childhood group therapy at the Jewish Board of Family and Children's Services, a social services agency in New York.


The Isle Without the Emerald
ANYONE who associates Ireland with all things green may be startled by the Burren, a limestone plateau covering about 200 square miles of northern County Clare on the Atlantic coast, not far from Shannon Airport.
Rather than rich rolling hills, it has a gray, timeless austerity.
This stark landscape of megalithic tombs, caverns and castles, craggy lunarlike rocks and the most unusual flora in the country takes its name from the Gaelic boirinn, meaning stony area.
Unlike the topography of the rest of Ireland, there are no bogs and few pastures.
The limestone is deeply fissured, and most streams and rivers have gone underground.
The only lakes are known as turloughs, hollows that fill up after a heavy rainfall saturates the underground systems and then evaporate after a few dry days.
With few prominent landmarks, the Burren's landscape appears to stretch in an endless series of bare, irregularly shaped stones, dry and treeless.


Data Bank/June 20, 1993


Jennifer Sargent, D. B. Clayson Jr.
Jennifer Woods Sargent, a daughter of Diana W. Sargent of Penllyn, Pa., and Hugh A. A. Sargent of Ambler, Pa., was married yesterday to Davis Barr Clayson Jr., the son of Pamela F. Clayson and Mr.
Clayson of Weston, Mass.
The Rev.
David Robb performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church on Fishers Island, N.Y.
Mrs.
Clayson, 29, is a program researcher at Joseph A. Wetzel Associates Inc., an exhibit design concern in Boston.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father, now retired, was a senior partner in the Philadelphia law firm of Ballard, Spahr, Andres &amp; Ingersoll.


Beasts With Friendly Offerings
Squatting clay figures with bowls on their heads were found in the Mediterranean region thousands of years ago.
Julie Dermansky has revived the form, in collaboration with Sue Jensen, a potter.
Each ceramic beast is one of a kind, with charming pop eyes and an irresistibly demented smile.


Railroads Are a Growth Industry, for a Change
IN Washington, the Virginia Railway Express is about to celebrate its first anniversary, carrying commuters from Union Station to Manassas and Fredericksburg.
Amtrak is well on the way to a historic improvement in the tracks from New York to Boston, electrifying those east of New Haven with overhead power lines that will allow faster trips, possibly luring substantial patronage from the air shuttles.
And in Miami, a makeshift commuter line that helped to ease traffic to West Palm Beach during major construction on Interstate 95 is now permanent.
Railroads are trying to make a comeback.
Around the country, air pollution from cars seems to be a nearly intractable problem, and society is concluding that in many places it cannot build enough highways or runways to cure congestion.
The decision to build commuter rail lines, said William E. Loftus, president of the American Short Line Railroad Association, is "a recognition that you can live an hour away from work and still have a pleasant commute."


Robin Gethers, LeVerne Summers
Robin Denise Gethers, a news assistant at The New York Times and a textile artist, was married yesterday to LeVerne Summers, an actor in New York.
The Rev.
John O. Fowler, a Baptist minister, performed the ceremony at the Ramada Plaza Hotel in New Rochelle, N.Y.
Mrs.
Summers, 38, graduated cum laude from Wells College.
She is the daughter of Dorothy Tilghman of Mount Vernon, N.Y., and Alfred Gethers of the Bronx.
Her father is a foreman at the General Rags Textile Corporation, a maker of industrial clothing and rags in Brooklyn.
Her mother, now retired, was an administrative assistant with the Bankers Trust Company in New York.


No Headline
As a nation, we have pretty much developed our notion of minority policy based on the black population, and just stuck Latinos and Asians into that profile.
The problem is that the profile doesn't fit.
DAVID HAYES-BAUTISTA, a sociologist at U.C.L.A. [ 27:4. ]


Anne V. Zaldastani, John W. Griffen
Anne V. Zaldastani, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Othar Zaldastani of Chestnut Hill, Mass., was married yesterday to John Winslow Griffen, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Clyde Griffen of Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
The Rev.
Mark J. Baker performed the ceremony at St.
David's Episcopal Church in South Yarmouth, Mass.
Ms.
Zaldastani, 27, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Duke University.
Until recently, she was a legislative assistant in Washington to Representative Richard J. Durbin, Democrat of Illinois.
Her father is the chairman of Zaldastani Associates Inc., an engineering-consulting concern in Boston.


American Jets Fly Over Somali Capital, Provoking Jeers and Insults
United States jets screamed over Mogadishu today, the first sign that a Marine amphibious force is approaching as part of a continuing show of force in support of United Nations operations against a Somali clan leader.
The jets were greeted by jeers and insults from about 2,000 Somalis who had gathered in a raucous but peaceful demonstration in support of the clan leader, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid.


Fathers Trying to Get Used to Their New Roles at Home


Sprays That Slay Plant Pests, Safely
THE nibblers and chewers are about, those pesky insects that make nasty holes and cause yellow spots in plant leaves.
Gardeners everywhere usually like to get rid of these invaders as soon as possible.
But they like to do it safely.
In these days of environmental awareness, many gardeners hesitate to use just any spray, but seek the least toxic method.


The Feel of Africa Is Transplanted to Staten Island
When Anthony Idow hankers for a native Nigerian dish or fresh news from his homeland, he simply strolls over to one of the blazing grills dotting his neighborhood, where men and women in flowing tribal gowns, shirts and headdresses gather against a backdrop of leafy streets and cloistered suburban-style homes on Staten Island.
"This is the way we lead our life back home," Mr.
Idow, 30, explained as he stood on Targee Street, a commercial strip bustling with West African street vendors and music.
"We get together after work for peaceful conversations and drinks. This is just like home to us."


A Brilliant Salesman
To the Editor:
Many Israelis would agree that Benjamin Netanyahu is a charismatic spokesman and a capable public relations expert.
I never heard any Israeli -- including Likud supporters -- describe him as "a formidable intellectual," as he is defined by Conor Cruise O'Brien in his review of Mr.
Netanyahu's book "A Place Among the Nations" (May 9).


Bonnie Potash, Michael Tauber
Bonnie Lynn Potash, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvyn Potash of Plainview, L.I., was married last evening to Michael David Tauber, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur S. Tauber of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Cantor Richard Botton officiated at the Doral Arrowwood in Rye Brook, N.Y.
Mrs.
Tauber, 24, is a special education teacher at the Rusk Institute, a rehabilitation center in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is the manager of sales and operations at TFI Distributors Inc., a video production company based in New York.
Her mother, Rochelle Potash, is the customer service manager at Medi-Source Inc., a medical supply company in Syosset, L.I.


THE DEATH OF EROS
I chuckled at Allan Bloom's sniffy rants about how the excluded persist in clamoring for power, guffawed at his dunderheaded certainty over what's nature and what's culture.
I howled at his Severity-of-Rape-o-Meter (rape of Mother Teresa, awful; rape of Mary Magdalene, so much less awful).
What a wacky guy.


Hail, Yankees
To the Sports Editor:
While you continue to publish article after article about how bad the Mets are this year, have you noticed that the Yankees have an interesting, above-.500 team that actually has a shot at a division title?
Just thought I'd point it out.
BRUCE FOX Jericho, L.I.


Technology; Through TV-Tinted Glasses
STROLLING through a shopping center in Phoenix one recent Friday evening, Roberta Trengrove attracted quite a few stares with her oversized, shiny black wraparound visor.
She barely noticed.
"Oh look," she said to no one in particular.
"It's Miss Finland. Wow, look at that red dress." For an instant, Mrs.
Trengrove forgot that only she could see the televised beauty pageant.


POSTINGS: Delmonico's Hotel; Coming Full Circle
At a time when low occupancy and low room rates have made many New York hotel owners wish they could leave the business, Delmonico's Hotel, on Park Avenue and 59th Street, is getting back in.
Delmonico's, built as a 550-room hotel in 1929 and converted to a 170-unit apartment building in 1972, has spent $5 million to reinvent itself again, this time as a 130-suite hotel.
"You can still earn more on a hotel than on an apartment building," said Joseph Kaminski, the 28-year-old general manager of Delmonico's, which is owned by Elizabeth Kleinhans.


The War Against Anita Hill
To the Editor:
What I want to know is whether the eventual appearance of a carefully researched, balanced monograph on Anita Hill will be accorded a great big review, like the gullible praise song that David Brock's thimblerig attack on Ms.
Hill received.
NELL IRVIN PAINTER Princeton, N.J.


JUNE 13-19: Fear in a Can of Soda; A Wave of Tampering (Mostly With the Truth?)
It all began when an 82-year-old man in Tacoma, Wash., said he had found a needle and syringe in a can of Pepsi.
Within 10 days, dozens of other people around the country had found similar objects, including pieces of metal, in soda cans.
Or so they said.
Pepsi officials and the Food and Drug Administration were skeptical.


7 Years Later, N.F.L. Players Sign Pact
It's official.
Seven years after professional football's last collective bargaining agreement expired, it's court-aided replacement took official effect yesterday as GENE UPSHAW, the executive director of the National Football League Players Association, announced that the sweeping new seven-year agreement had been ratified by a majority of the union's members.
It had been approved by the National Football League owners on May 6.
Among other things, the agreement provides for more than $1 billion in player benefits over the seven years. (AP)


SAINT HILLARY
The only people I've heard who talk like Mrs.
Clinton are lunatics, religious nutcakes and aspiring dictators.
A "unified-field theory of life"?
The marriage of capitalism and statism?
Making the Western world anew?
And she doesn't even blink!
Give me a break.
WILLIAM B. CULLIMORE New Durham, N.H.


Courtney Bauer, C. B. Burnham
Courtney Anne Bauer, the daughter of Mrs.
Henry P. Warren of Delray Beach, Fla., and the late Dale R. Bauer, was married yesterday to Christopher Bancroft Burnham, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alexander O. Burnham Jr. of Stamford, Conn.
The Rev.
Richard Van Wely performed the ceremony at St.
Barnabas Episcopal Church in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Burnham is the Northeast regional advertising-sales manager for Modern Healthcare magazine in New York.
She graduated from the University of Vermont.
Her father was an executive vice president of MacMillan Inc., the publishing company, and the chairman of its Standard Rate and Data Service division.


Tricentennial for a Manor House
Philipsburg Manor, North Tarrytown, N.Y, June 12.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Wednesday
First-quarter G.D.P., percent change
0.9
0.8
May durable-goods orders, percent change
0.3
0.5
Thursday
Mid-June auto sales, millions, annual rate
6.8
6.8
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
344
345
May personal income, percent change
0
0.7
May personal consumption, percent change
1.0
0.4
Friday
May existing-home sales, millions, ann. rate
3.46
3.53
Monday: European Community summit meeting begins  Wednesday: Federal Reserve releases its beige book  Friday: Kim Campbell sworn in as Canadian Prime Minister


At the Village Well
To the Editor: We must reassure future travelers with children that there is an escape from dirty laundry.
"Hanging Out With the Wash" is unrealistically depressing.
When we spent three days in Florence in 1969 with four children (or was it five?) at the Hotel Roma, just across the street was a laundermat.
It was a lifesaver.
For 20 years we have owned a farmhouse in the Perigord.
It is true that until about eight years ago there were no laundermats within an hour's drive.
Now we have at least one in the very capital of the Perigord Noir (Sarlat) and one in Les Eyzies.


Don't Let the Pesticide Polluters Fool You; Clause Doesn't Work
To the Editor:
Michael Fumento (Op-Ed, June 9) calls for the removal of the Delaney Clause -- the provision of the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act that prohibits the use as a food additive of any substance known to cause cancer in humans or in laboratory animals.
His argument reflects the degree to which the Delaney Clause has become a symbol for what is wrong with the regulation of substances that may be hazardous to human health.
The most significant thing about the Delaney Clause is how little it matters.
Since the Delaney Clause became law, no food additive has been removed from the market -- or even proposed for removal -- under its provisions that would not have been the subject of action under the general food safety laws.


Streetscapes: 110-118 Riverside Drive; A Mixed Window Dressing
IT'S just the kind of thing that drives preservationists nuts: Over the last 20 years the 1929 apartment house at 110-118 Riverside Drive has gone window-wild.
With no master plan for replacements, tenants in the nonlandmark co-op have installed windows in a wild variety of colors and the place looks like a test lab for a fenestration institute.


Even a Lifer Has Rights
William McKinney, a murderer serving a life sentence in a Nevada prison, has forfeited most of his rights.
But he now has one right not automatically granted to people outside the walls.
Henceforth, his jailers may no longer indifferently subject him to the secondary smoke of a cellmate who puffs five packs of cigarettes a day.
So says the United States Supreme Court, 7 to 2, with only Justices Clarence Thomas and Antonin Scalia dissenting.
Those Justices, who happen to smoke, are normally the least inclined to find that conditions of confinement may be so bad that they constitute cruel and unusual punishment in violation of the Eighth Amendment.


Race and the American Workplace
THERE are nights Harold Thomas lies in bed, kept awake by the words that still scream through his head, words he heard for years over the paging system at the Miller Brewing Company plant in Fulton, N.Y.
A production supervisor in the packaging department, Mr.
Thomas has no idea whose voice it was, calling him: "Harold, the . . . ape, Thomas." But by early 1991, he had grown so distraught that a psychiatrist advised him to take a leave.
Upon his return almost a year later, a voice rang out over the paging system, "Welcome back, Harold, but you're still a nigger."


Oooooo, That Absolut
To the Editor:
"Advertising's Marathon Auditions" (June 6), about Michel Roux's way of granting his special blessing for magazines (to carry his Absolut vodka ads) was absolut(ely) ego.
To genuflect before that guy?
Huh?
And here I thought Coke had lost it with the "Always" campaign.
And I used to love Absolut vodka, too . . .


BEST SELLERS: June 20, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
45
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
3
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $24.) A lawyer in pursuit of his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
3
4
14
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
4
3
3
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $23.95.) A former naval officer tracks down a terrorist conspiracy headed by a vengeful woman.
5
5
10
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
6
7
131
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
7
6
7
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences when she covers a story.
8
8
7
GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Delacorte, $27.50.) Cordial relationships and terrorism between the Japanese and foreigners in Yokohama in 1862.
9
9
9
THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
10
10
8
A SEASON IN PURGATORY, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $22.) The political and social machinations of a wealthy Irish Catholic family.
11
12
2
PAPER DOLL, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) Spenser tracks the killer of an upper-crust Boston woman to her past in a small South Carolina town.
12
13
10
"J" IS FOR JUDGMENT, by Sue Grafton. (Holt, $21.95.) Kinsey Millhone investigates the case of a man who apparently committed suicide.
13
15
15
EINSTEIN'S DREAMS, by Alan Lightman. (Pantheon, $17.) Fantasies said to be dreamed by Albert Einstein in 1905, when he was a young patent clerk.
14*
14
8
CHARMS FOR THE EASY LIFE, by Kaye Gibbons. (Putnam, $19.95.) The fortunes of three indomitable North Carolina women.
15*
1
THE RED HORSEMAN, by Stephen Coonts. (Pocket, $23.) An American intelligence officer struggles to obtain control of Soviet nuclear forces.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
45
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
2
2
40
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
3
3
6
THE REAL ANITA HILL, by David Brock. (Free Press, $24.95.) A journalist's account of the relationship between the law professor and Clarence Thomas.
4
8
3
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Morrow, $20.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
5*
4
18
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians and others about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
6
6
6
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
7
7
27
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
8
1
THE FIFTIES, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $27.50.) A journalist's social, political, economic and cultural history of the 1950's.
9
5
9
THINKING OUT LOUD, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) Essays on current topics by the New York Times columnist.
10
6
REMEMBERING DENNY, by Calvin Trillin. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $19.) A memoir of a bright young man of the 50's who committed suicide two years ago.
11*
11
31
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under Government debt.
12
9
6
CULTURE OF COMPLAINT, by Robert Hughes. (New York Public Library/Oxford University, $19.95.) Essays critical of current cultural trends.
13*
9
A WORLD WAITING TO BE BORN, by M. Scott Peck. (Bantam, $22.95.) A call for people to make civility part of their lives.
14*
6
CONDUCT UNBECOMING, by Randy Shilts. (St. Martin's, $27.95.) The roles that gay men and lesbians have played in the United States armed forces.
15
1
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Beacon, $15.) A Princeton professor assays issues affecting black Americans and suggests ways for addressing them.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to, and Miscellaneous
1
1
8
A WOMAN'S WORTH, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $17.) Advice for women.
2
2
49
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf.
3
1
MERRIAM-WEBSTER'S COLLEGIATE DICTIONARY. (Merriam-Webster, $21.95.) The 10th edition.
4
4
14
BEATING THE STREET, by Peter Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Advice about investing in stocks and mutual funds.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 5, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
BALKAN GHOSTS: A Journey Through History, by Robert D. Kaplan. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) A reporter's gallery of heroes and villains who made Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Romania and the former Yugoslavia the sweethearts they are.
BEAR TRAP: Why Wall Street Doesn't Work, by Paul Gibson. (Atlantic Monthly, $22.) Mr.
Gibson, a veteran financial journalist, contends that mismanagement, inflated pay and shoddy ethics are slowly strangling Wall Street.
DAYS OF GRACE: A Memoir, by Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad. (Knopf, $24.) The reflections by the tennis star on the many roles he played: sportsman, protester against racial injustice, person with AIDS.
G.
M.
TREVELYAN: A Life in History, by David Cannadine. (Norton, $32.95.) Trevelyan (1876-1962), a Cambridge historian and Whig aristocrat, hoped to see decent liberal values established in Europe in the 20th century, but lived to see them disappear everywhere.
THE INNER SIDE OF THE WIND: Or, the Novel of Hero and Leander, by Milorad Pavic. (Knopf, $22.) A retelling of the ancient myth in which a brutal coincidence of time connects two stories set centuries apart.
THE INVENTION OF TRUTH, by Marta Morazzoni. (Knopf, $18.) An absorbing novella about artists and lookers at art; it concerns John Ruskin and 300 women working on the Bayeux Tapestry.
LENIN'S TOMB: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire, by David Remnick. (Random House, $25.) Decline and fall, observed by a Washington Post reporter in the Soviet Union, 1988-91.
LIFE'S DOMINION: An Argument About Abortion, Euthanasia, and Individual Freedom, by Ronald Dworkin. (Knopf, $23.) Mr.
Dworkin contends that the relevant choices proceed from the idea that life is sacred, and that therefore the state must not interfere.
NIGHTMARE ON WALL STREET: Salomon Brothers and the Corruption of the Marketplace, by Martin Mayer. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A history of the investment firm, with an emphasis on its transgressions in the 1980's and 1990's.
ORDINARY TIME: Cycles in Marriage, Faith, and Renewal, by Nancy Mairs. (Beacon, $20.) An account of spiritual growth and discovery by the author of "Remembering the Bone House."  THE PUGILIST AT REST: Stories, by Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $18.95.) A collection of short stories that portray prizefighters and war heroes surviving, but just barely.
SPY TRADER: Germany's Devil's Advocate and the Darkest Secrets of the Cold War, by Craig R. Whitney. (Times Books/Random House, $25.) The story of an East German lawyer who acted as middleman for the exchange of political prisoners during the cold war.
TINTIN IN THE NEW WORLD: A Romance, by Frederic Tuten. (Morrow, $22.) An American novelist introduces a French comic strip hero to the temptations of the real world.


Two in a Row? That's Simple. None in a Row? That's the Mets.
On two-game winning streaks and others:
Putting into perspective the Mets' inability to win two games in a row for more than two months now, consider that other teams have achieved this feat with striking regularity in that period.


Using Sorrel, A Lemony Accent
ONE year I planted a couple of sorrel seedlings in a corner of my garden.
We had rented the house for the summer and when we returned the following year, I was amazed to see that the entire flower bed had been overrun.
The sorrel had gone to seed and stood two feet high with leaves as big as the pages of a book.
No matter how hard I tried to cut it back, it seemed to grow up again overnight like Jack's beanstalk.
But I love sorrel, and I was delighted to have so much of it.
Sorrel has a sharp, lemony taste that is great with lamb, veal, chicken, fish and eggs.
A few raw leaves are delicious in salads, too (you can add other leaves like nasturtium, basil, lemon balm and young lettuces and dress them with nothing but lemon and olive oil).


JUNE 13-19: Ruth Bader Ginsburg; Clinton Picks a 'Healer' With Few Detractors For the Supreme Court
President Clinton's nomination of Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg for the Supreme Court may not have had the impact he had hoped to get from a high-profile politician.
But there were practical benefits to his settling on her as the first Justice picked by a Democrat in a generation.
Perhaps because it is debatable just how much she is either liberal or conservative, the selection of the Federal appeals court judge in Washington has provoked virtually no uproar from groups on either side.
Nor has there been criticism from members of the Senate Judiciary Committee, which has set confirmation hearings to begin July 20.


Wallpaper Removal Depends on the Paper
REMOVING wallpaper is always messy, but generally fairly easy.
The methods depend on the type of wallpaper and the wall or ceiling material.
The easiest to remove is so-called strippable paper.
To test removing it, try lifting the corner of a piece with a putty knife.
If the corner comes away easily, peel the paper further by pulling it parallel to the surface, not outward.
If the paper is strippable, entire sheets should be removable by this method.
Underneath may be a layer of backing paper.
That can be left on the wall as a base for new wall covering, but if it comes away in places it has to be removed like ordinary nonstrippable wallpaper.


Lesbian Wins Appeal on Vermont Adoption
The Vermont Supreme Court said Friday that a woman involved in a long-term lesbian relationship could adopt her partner's two children.
In the nation's first appellate-level ruling in such a case, the court said that "to deny the children of same-sex partners, as a class, the security of a legally recognized relationship with their second parent serves no legitimate state interest."


Sharpening the Focus and Going Global at Dresser
THE pact that Dresser Industries signed a few months ago to build gas turbines and compressors in Russia was a classic example of how John J. Murphy has reshaped the nation's most diverse supplier of energy-related equipment.
The deal required little capital from Dresser and involved a huge customer -- in this case Russia's dominant producer, transporter and distributor of natural gas, Gazprom.
And some analysts think the deal will help push Dresser's yearly revenues from Russian deals above $400 million by 1996, from about $100 million last year.


Business Diary/June 13-18
THE ECONOMY The Budget Plan, or What's Left of It, Is Off and Running


Rudolph's Legacy: Triumphs Over Pain
WILMA RUDOLPH sat in an oversized chair looking very cool, very casual.
The roses that had begun to arrive that morning in honor of her 53d birthday next Wednesday accented her natural elegance.
It was what Ed Temple, her track coach at Tennessee State, liked to call "that charisima."
"I thought I'd be able to sneak this birthday in," she said smiling.
"Everybody knows. It's really fascinating; I still get gifts and letters from people around the world."


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
109.75
106.20
127.10
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6805
1.6280
1.5750
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2743
1.2803
1.1970
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4975
1.5220
1.8585
U.S. Dollar
per British Pound
Gold
$371.00
$366.00
$340.70
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Pirates Plunder Sinking Ship
The organization and clubhouse are in turmoil.
Players are coming and going.
The manager, after waging a loud campaign that mixed intimidation with encouragement, appears to be readying himself for open warfare with his players.
And there is a personal medical drama involving a player's child that has further torn the clubhouse.
Amid it all, there have been games, and the Mets, who lose almost all of them, had another taken from them tonight.
The Pirates, dismantling the ever-fragile pitching of Frank Tanana, left the Mets in pieces again with an 8-3 triumph, their third straight of the series.


Cupless Season Yields Odd Pairs
The summer of 1993, an off year in sailing as far as the America's Cup, has created the unlikeliest of bedfellows for two coming regattas.
The pairing of Wall Street executives and high-profile America's Cup yachtsmen, including Bill Koch and Kevin Mahaney, is expected to add a new dimension to yacht racing next weekend off Newport, R.I.


Both Sides Say Trenton's Ban on Assault Rifles Has Little Effect on Crime
Although New Jersey's pioneering ban on military-style assault rifles was sold to the state as a crime-fighting measure, its impact on violence in the state, two years after it took effect, has been negligible, both sides agree, and debate over its impact is colored more by opinion than by fact.
Of the tens of thousands, and possibly hundreds of thousands, of assault weapons that state officials had said were in the hands of the public, only about 2,000 have been accounted for since their possession was outlawed, on May 30, 1991.
The stores that sold the guns do not miss the business, their owners say, and so far, no one has been sent to jail purely for possession of one of the weapons.


Corrections
An article yesterday about management changes at Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield misstated the background of Harold E. Vogt, Empire's chairman, in some copies.
He has been a board member for a decade but has not worked within the company.


Russia Says U.S. Got Sub's Atom Arms
After years of silence, Russia has acknowledged that one of the boldest American spy missions of the cold war succeeded in recovering two nuclear warheads from a Soviet submarine that had exploded and sunk in Pacific waters more than three miles deep.
It is the first time Russia has said that the West captured any of its nuclear arms.
The warheads were recovered in 1974 by an American vessel, the Glomar Explorer, a panel of Russian scientists said in a report to President Boris N. Yeltsin.


With Song, Celebrate Freedom


Q and A
Overcharge Dispute Question: I live in a rent-stabilized brownstone and have a rent dispute with the landlord.
I filed an overcharge claim with the state's Division of Housing and Community Renewal and an expedite order to process the claim has been issued.
The department, however, has told me the process will take 60 to 90 days and my landlord has told me he is going to sell the building.
He also asked me to show the apartment.


Susan Panno, David Shepard
Susan Ann Elizabeth Panno, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Francis V. Panno of Waccabuc, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Jeb Shepard, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Shepard of Larchmont, N.Y.
The Rev.
John R. Gilchrist performed the ceremony at St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church in Ridgefield, Conn.
Mrs.
Shepard is a special-events coordinator in the corporate external affairs department of the Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.


Fanning the Flames


A Teacher, Her Pupils And Lessons Learned
When school began last September, Patricia Cullen was as much a novice as the first-grade students assigned to her class at Public School 116 in Manhattan.
It was her first teaching job, their first time in grade school.
By the end of that first week, Mrs.
Cullen looked pummelled, and the wiggling, giggling children had mastered only one lesson: standing in line.
But as the school year winds to an end, it is clear that much has changed inside Room 205.


Poland's New Entrepreneurs Push the Economy Ahead
MAREK PARTALA, an energetic engineering professor who ran a high-quality carpentry workshop outside university hours, was poised to build a bigger business when Communism crumbled in Poland.
Now, after four years of steady expansion, his company has skilled workers traveling to Italy and Russia, putting up and knocking down Italian-designed high-tech exhibition halls for car shows and fashion fairs.
Other craftsmen labor in his furniture factory in rural Poland just south of here, manufacturing reproduction Beidermeirs and restoring real ones.


SAINT HILLARY
I am not worried about Mrs.
Clinton's moral judgment becoming a basis for Governmental policy.
That's hardly likely.
But I would consider the country lucky if her values became as influential in the 1990's as Ronald Reagan's were in the 1980's.
AURORA HUDSON New York, N.Y.


Tomorrow's TV: The Viewer's View/A special report.; Will They Sit by the Set, or Ride a Data Highway?
Is the world ready for the empowered couch potato?
Television viewers keep hearing that they're about to merge into a global computerized information network, one grand Communicopia.
It will supposedly enable them to watch 500 channels, browse in electronic shopping malls and libraries, send a fax to Mount Everest and maybe even learn to use the phrase "digital interactive multimedia" in a sentence.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
700 Guests for Style Setter
WHEN giving a party for 700 people, a delicate question arises.
What to do about bathrooms?
When the party is at Martha Stewart's house in East Hampton, the question becomes even more delicate.
Portable toilets simply will not do.
Ms.
Stewart is known for her mastery of home decor and proper living.
"Can you imagine Porta Potties in her rose garden?" a guest asked.


NORTHEAST NOTEBOOK: Kingston, R.I.; A Building For Nonprofits
A DOZEN nonprofit agencies now fully occupy a 38,000-square-foot office building completed last January on the University of Rhode Island campus here.
The agencies, which pay $8.16 a square foot in rent, share the costs of office equipment, utilities and other expenses and have a central conference room and a common phone bank for fund-raising to keep costs down.


Call for Moscow Aid Office Splits Wealthy Nations
The United States is pressing the Group of Seven leading industrialized nations to set up an office in Moscow to coordinate Western aid, but Britain and France oppose the idea, Western officials said this week.
The goal of the plan is to give the seven nations a more effective and aggressive role in distributing aid to Russia, said the officials, who spoke on condition of anonymity.


Athens
Even Athenians have a love-hate relationship with their city.
The same taxi driver who insists en route from the airport that there's no better place in the world is the first to curse the sprawling, smog-smothered city.
While Athens can be a disappointment, a tangle of cement and wires, congested streets with few reminders of its illustrious past, the patient, open-minded traveler can discover its charms.
The secret is to search for the city's pockets of beauty, its moments of greatness and its idiosyncrasies.
One way to do this is to stroll the neighborhoods, from the elegant suburb of Kifissia to working-class Piraeus.
Athens is still the megalo horio, the big village.
Sit at a ritzy cafe in the Kolonaki quarter: on your left is the hurdy-gurdy player who talks about the civil war as though it were yesterday; on your right, a patrician mother enjoying a frappe with her transvestite son in full gear.
Pass a designer boutique in the suburb of Maroussi; a rooster crows from the whitewashed house next door.
The nightclubs may resemble those in any other European capital, but after midnight, rock and roll, rap and hip hop give way to the wails of Greek love songs.
The young abandon their studied cool to dance the flirtatious tsifteteli -- the girls on tabletops, the boys on bended knee, clapping to the beat.


Lauren Hackworth, Stephen Petersen
Lauren Christine Hackworth, a daughter of Barbara Hackworth of San Jose, Calif., and Michael Hackworth of Saratoga, Calif., was married yesterday to Stephen Bruce Petersen, the son of Betsy Petersen of Darien, Conn., and Bruce Petersen of Savannah, Ga.
The Rev.
Theodore Iverson, a Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony at Villa Puerta Dorada, a private residence in Rutherford, Calif.
Mrs.
Petersen, 28, graduated cum laude from Santa Clara University and received a master's degree in art history from Florida State University earlier this month.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Cirrus Logic Inc., a maker of semiconductors in Fremont, Calif.


Correction
An article last Sunday about recordings by Leonard Bernstein described the Leonard Bernstein Center for the Arts in Nashville incorrectly.
It is an educational center, not the repository of his archives, which has yet to be established.


The Power of Love
She had to keep the Mercedes out of sight.
The '74 burgundy sedan with the polished wooden dashboard was the last vestige of a time when Darlene Love was Somebody, and moreover, the only transportation she had.
But she knew it would make her employers uncomfortable, so she parked it half a mile down the road and walked the rest of the way to the exclusive residence in Los Angeles where she was to report for "day work," which could earn her a fast $50.
"When you go to clean someone's house," she says, "they don't want to know that you have nice things."


Amanda Kuklin, John Derderian
Amanda B. Kuklin, a daughter of Anthony and Vivienne Kuklin of Larchmont, N.Y., was married there yesterday to John B. Derderian, a son of Robert and F. Gail Derderian of Wellesley, Mass.
Msgr.
Walter F. Kenny performed the ceremony at St.
Augustine's Church.
Mrs.
Derderian is an assistant vice president at Shawmut Bank in Boston.
She and her husband graduated from Connecticut College, she cum laude.
She was elected to Phi Beta Kappa there.
Her father is a partner in the law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison in New York.


Price Battles His Way Into Third Place
Nick Price, the compact battler from Zimbabwe now playing out of Orlando, Fla., had a good day at the United States Open when so many others did not.
Price shot par, 70, to make for a 54-hole total of 207, third-best in the field, four strokes back of the leader, Lee Janzen, and three behind Payne Stewart.
For Price the key hole was the 13th, where he sank the putt that, he said, "turned the day around for me. I was hitting the ball really well but I couldn't get it in the hole. Then I made about a 25-footer that gave me a birdie and some relief."


A Dip Into Antiquity
Mythology is not standard reference for modern pool design.
Yet here on the northern shore of Fishers Island, in a half-buried maze of mysterious stone walls, is a watering hole steeped in ancient lore.
Its architect, Michael Farewell of Ford Farewell Mills &amp; Gatsch in Princeton, N.J., wanted a pool with more drama than clubbiness -- one that expressed, he says, both a feeling of "rootedness" and a longing "to fly back to the mainland."


Violations Cited in Fireman's Death
THE State Department of Labor has cited the city of White Plains for violations in a Feb. 24 apartment house blaze that took the life of one firefighter and resulted in serious burns to three others.
The state's notice of violation and order to comply said that the firefighter, Warren Ogburn, 39, entered a South Lexington Avenue apartment building here during firefighting operations, became trapped and was unable to summon assistance using his portable radio.
The firefighter succumbed when his air supply became exhausted, according to the ruling, which cited the city's lack of written procedures covering both communications during a fire and the use of respirators.


Translating 'The Inferno'
To the Editor:
Because there can never be too many translations of "The Divine Comedy," I read with interest the article on the latest incarnation of "The Inferno" and the marathon reading that launched it ("Hell Night at the 92d Street Y," May 9).
I wish I'd been there.


The Enemy Within; Mexico's Drug Habit Is Giving It Shivers
AFTER the first car bombs exploded last year in one of the dusty capitals of Mexico's drug trade, and after traffickers started attacking one another in resort towns like Puerto Vallarta and Cancun, a strange word began to gain currency here.
People spoke of "colombianizacion." Then the gunmen of drug gangs shot a Roman Catholic Cardinal 14 times in a battle outside a busy airport last month, and the fear was no longer so abstract: Were the traffickers not starting to menace Mexican society, people asked, the way the cocaine suppliers in Colombia menace theirs?
The investigation into the killings of Juan Jesus Cardinal Posadas Ocampo, his driver and five other people in Guadalajara has again exposed a significant difference between the two countries.
The greater threat to Mexico, it would seem, is not a war against the state waged by drug lords, Colombian style.
It is that collusion with traffickers by elements of the state may run so deep, much deeper even than in Colombia, as to be beyond the Government's reach.


BILLIONS IN LOSSES SEEN IN MORTGAGES INSURED BY H.U.D.
After what its own auditors call years of neglectful management, the Department of Housing and Urban Development expects to lose as much as $11.9 billion as hundreds of apartment building owners default on their Government-insured mortgages.
Most losses, which are expected to occur in the next few years, would be borne by taxpayers through Congressional appropriations.
The troubled loans represent more than a quarter of the $43 billion in mortgages insured by the department under programs to encourage the construction of apartment buildings.


Legislators Seek to Curb Fund-Raisers
IN an effort to crack down on scams that bilk New Jersey residents out of millions of dollars a year, two State Assemblymen have introduced a bill that would completely revamp the law regulating fund raising in the state.
The bill, which was recently released from committee and awaits a vote in the full Assembly, significantly expands the state's ability to monitor fund-raising activities by requiring registration of all fund-raising organizations except for religious and educational groups.
The proposal would also give officials the power to audit the records of fund-raising organizations and to fine those that violate the law.


Michelle K. Vitulli, Robert B. Proctor
Dr.
Michelle Karen Vitulli, a veterinarian in Syracuse, was married yesterday in Ithaca, N.Y., to Robert Benjamin Proctor, a doctoral candidate in applied physics at Cornell University.
The Rev.
Richard Murphy, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at Sage Chapel on the Cornell campus.
Dr.
Vitulli, 28, graduated from Muhlenberg College.
She received a degree in veterinary medicine from Cornell.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Vitulli of Floral Park, L.I.


A Poet in the Heart of Noise
CITY POET The Life and Times of Frank O'Hara.
By Brad Gooch.
Illustrated. 532 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $30.


Adventure Trips For the Disabled
The Smithsonian Institution, in partnership with a 15-year-old organization, Wilderness Inquiry, is offering a new program of tours for travelers with and without disabilities.
Both groups are charged the same fee.
The program, called Accessible Adventures, has four camping trips this summer, all concentrating on natural history.
Trained naturalists will accompany the tours.
From July 13 to 19, for example, travelers will explore the one-million-acre Boundary Waters Canoe Area in Minnesota.
The $795 price does not include air fare to Duluth, Minn., and is based on double occupancy in hotels for the first and last nights.
Special canoes are equipped to accommodate wheelchairs.
Other adventures planned include canoeing along the Missouri River in Montana; kayaking through the Apostle Islands in Lake Superior, and canoeing on Yellowstone Lake in Yellowstone National Park.
Each trip includes about eight people; prices range from $795 to $1,395, excluding air fare.


Melissa Brooks, Robert Zakarian
Melissa Millicent Brooks, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry A. Brooks of Glen Head, L.I., was married to Robert Anthony Zakarian, the son of Elizabeth Zakarian and Jack Zakarian, both of Modesto, Calif.
The Rev.
Charles G. Newbery performed the ceremony at St.
John's of Lattingtown Episcopal Church in Locust Valley, L.I.


Jerome Kern: The Song Is Mine
To the Editor:
Lawrence O'Toole makes valid points about the lengths to which some popular composers' estates will go to insure that the music is put to "good, tasteful and interesting use." While it's true that some composers of classic American musicals "had a more casual attitude," Jerome Kern, for instance, was known to have fired singers at rehearsals before Broadway openings for changing even one note of his score.
Richard Rodgers usually approved of Frank Sinatra's liberties with his songs, but one can imagine what Kern would have thought of the crooner's swinging version of "The Song Is You" in the late 1950's.
ALEX JESCHKE Pittsford, N. Y.


Ailing Giants Slow Economy
AT the idyllic 120-acre head quarters of Reader's Digest here where employees grow vegetables and flowers in little plots during lunch hour and exercise on running trails that crisscross the estate-like grounds -- news of layoffs early this month shattered an image that this large corporation had of remaining untouched by the economic hard times.
But to regional economists, the announcement that the global publisher of magazines, books and home entertainment products was laying off 250 workers here -- about 10 percent of its work force in the United States -- came as just one more piece of hard evidence that the county continues to be bogged down by economic difficulties, even though other parts of the state and the nation are beginning to show signs of life.


SAINT HILLARY
In the last few months, we have seen Mrs.
Clinton cash out of her law practice early to avoid the tax increases liable to be enacted later this year to pay for the programs she supports.
We've watched her indulge in situational ethics when it came to defining the exact nature of her position leading the health care reform effort: not a Government employee when there were questions of nepotism; the functional equivalent of a Government employee when she wanted to hold closed-door hearings.
And we've learned that her investments, which, in May, had not yet been placed in a blind trust, include health-industry stocks.
Mrs.
Clinton, in short, does not put her money where her mouth is.
JAMES P. HANRAHAN Black Rock, Conn.


Nina Gottlieb and Mark Alan Siesel
Dr.
Nina Gottlieb, a daughter of Marcia Gottlieb and Dr.
Daniel Gottlieb of Old Bethpage, L.I., was married yesterday to Mark Alan Siesel, a son of Fred and Ruth Siesel of Hartsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi David Greenberg officiated at Crestmont Manor, a catering hall in Glen Cove, L.I.
Dr.
Gottlieb, who is keeping her name, is an instructor in environmental psychology at the Fashion Institute of Technology in New York and a consultant in environmental psychology.
She graduated from Union College in Schenectady, N.Y., and received a master's degree in psychology from Hunter College and a Ph.D. in environmental psychology from the Graduate School and University Center of the City University of New York.
Her father is a dentist in Plainview, L.I.


Vanbiesbrouck Dealt, But He's a Draft Pawn
John Vanbiesbrouck did not wait by the phone yesterday, but, in his heart, he expected it to ring.
It did.
Minutes before the 5 P.M.
National Hockey League trading deadline took effect yesterday, the Rangers traded Vanbiesbrouck to the Vancouver Canucks for future considerations.
Neither Rangers General Manager Neil Smith nor his Vancouver counterpart, Pat Quinn, would elaborate on what compensation the Rangers would receive.


Azinger and Parry Still Aching for Major Victory
Paul Azinger and Craig Parry birdied the last hole of the United States Open today and finished tied for third, five strokes behind the winner, Lee Janzen, but they were both a bit crestfallen.
"I'm disappointed because the last two days I made some great putts that just hit the edge and didn't go in," Azinger said in front of his locker, after declining a request from the United States Golf Association for an interview in the press tent.


Traci Reisner, Daniel Merenstein
Traci Jill Reisner, a daughter of Mrs.
Alvin I. Orlian of Great Neck, L.I., and the late Daniel M. Reisner, was married yesterday to Daniel Jon Merenstein, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Joel Merenstein of Pittsburgh.
Rabbis Morton Gordon and Bernard Eisenman performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Sholom in Lawrence, L.I.


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Placed Damion Easley, second baseman, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to June 19.
Recalled Rod Correia, infielder, from Vancouver of the Pacific Coast League.


Hispanic Santa Fe Loses Itself as It Lures Rich
Charmed by stunning mountain vistas and the romance of ancient cultures, tourists have been coming to Santa Fe since before Georgia O'Keefe captured the mystical New Mexico skies in her paintings in the 1920's.
But now many tourists to Santa Fe are deciding they do not want to go back home.
Instead, these affluent newcomers have been buying old adobe houses and building sprawling haciendas in the foothills of the Sangre de Cristo mountains.
But the Hispanic culture they came to embrace has shrunk before the soaring property values and taxes they bring with them.


CHRONICLE
In the play "Someone Who'll Watch Over Me," STEPHEN REA wore shorts and sneakers.
In the movie "The Crying Game," he wore the nondescript garb of an Irish Republican Army terrorist.
So it comes as a bit of a surprise to see him turn up as a fashion model in the July issue of Gentlemen's Quarterly looking dapper, even with his hangdog facial expression, in lambskin jeans that cost $1,975, a wool sports coat ($2,225) and a white cotton shirt ($275), all by Hermes, accessorized by a $395 scarf from Barneys New York.
And that's only one of four outfits in which he posed.


Aidid's Forces Still Strong, U.N. Aides in Somalia Say
Although United Nations troops destroyed the headquarters of Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid last week, the tactics used by the Somali clan leader's militia proved that it is a well-organized and effective urban guerrilla force, military officials say.
Though seriously weakened by the attack on Thursday, these United Nations officials said, such a force may continue to threaten stability here.


HBO Must Carry on Without Ashe
When HBO's Wimbledon coverage begins at 9 A.M. today, the crew will be without Arthur Ashe for the first time in 11 years.
Ashe, who died of AIDS in February, brought his customary elegance and understatement to HBO.
His was never a loud or brash voice, but an intelligent and restrained one, which mixed well with his rarely reticent colleagues, Jim Lampley and Billie Jean King.
Now, Ashe's spot will be taken by the Briton John Lloyd, whose experience as a tennis analyst is almost nil.


Editorial Notebook; Wanted: A Million Black Republicans
Black Democrats in Congress are snarling at the White House and threatening an alliance with their Republican colleagues.
Angry about the torturing of Lani Guinier, Representative Kweisi Mfume, the Maryland Democrat who is chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus, has warned President Clinton that the caucus can harm as well as help this Presidency.
That's bad news for the beleaguered White House.
But it's healthy for American politics.
Too long have blacks behaved as the chattel of the Democrats, patronized by the party and written off by Republicans.
A tryst between black Democrats and the Republicans won't change this equation.
A movement of black voters to the Republican Party most certainly would.


Enter, Summer; Meditation on A Lawn
"All theory, dear friend, is grey . . ." -- Mephistopheles, in Goethe's "Faust" The blossoms fall of course and leave All our visible world to the Most unfruitful and discursive Totally theoretic green Speaking for all that can be seen, And for what that, unseen, occurs.
What of the mellow, warm colors Trees reveal?
When they come to grieve Over their early-fallen spring Then the ripe crops of outcrying Color from which we will gather Sad knowledge of our store of loss Will have borne fruit in disbelief -- The molding, model-building leaf, The clinging and insistent moss, The broadly speculative grass On which we think of something as Something else -- their time of the year Claims to be always.
Now and here Greenness is abstractly severe: Green is as general as grey And the theoretical three Grey Fates who yet in this late day, Rational and silent and warm, Reign in practice in their sere Unflowered, fruitless theory Are gowned as in the uniform Of General June's green everywhere.


Dance in Review
Route 66 Dance Company  Dia Center for the Arts
Ninotchka Bennahum and Suki John founded the Route 66 Dance Company with the idea of fusing ballet and modern, flamenco and Afro-Cuban styles to create what they call a cross-cultural language of dance.
The company performed on Friday night in a program that suggested that such fusion can vitiate dance.


Tax Woes for Strawberry?
Los Angeles Dodgers outfielder Darryl Strawberry is under investigation by the Internal Revenue Service for failing to report thousands of dollars he earned off the field, The Daily News reported Sunday.
Strawberry told The News he's not aware of the probe and is innocent.


Term Limits Have Support of People Out of Office
IF proposed eight-year term limits were already in effect, the New York City Council President, most of the borough presidents and nearly half the Council members would probably be disqualified from seeking re-election this year.
Which is why a putatively populist crusade that could limit the discretion of elected officials and voters alike is supported largely by people who have been unable to win even one term or who have already held their jobs longer than the proposed limits would allow.


Mail by the Millions Deluges The Clintons, Even the Cat
Bill Clinton has not reinvented government yet, but he has certainly revived one Washington institution: the United States Postal Service.
Since taking office, the President; his wife, Hillary, their daughter, Chelsea, and their cat, Socks, have received more mail than any other first family in history during the first five months: 3.5 million pieces, more than the Bushes received all of last year.


Norway Honors Grieg, Who Made Its Folk Tunes Art
Edvard Grieg (though he died in 1907) turned 150 on Tuesday night.
And while the Norwegian Government has sponsored celebrations all over the world, the epicenter of the Grieg-quake was here in the city where he was born, where he lived much of his life and where he died.
Like Mozart at the kitschy height of the Herbert von Karajan era in Salzburg, Austria, with composer likenesses in every shop window, Grieg has been omnipresent during the 40th annual Bergen International Festival, which this year ran from June 2 to a gala Grieg concert on Tuesday night in the Grieg Hall, the city's concert facility.
The gala, which took place in the presence of King Harald V, the "Royal Patron of the Grieg 150th Anniversary Celebrations," was telecast live to six countries and will be seen in taped and edited versions in many more.


The Dinosaur Society Wants a Bite
The Dinosaur Society, seeing all the box-office and marketing spinoff money that "Jurassic Park" is generating, wants a share.
The group was founded less than two years ago by Don Lessem, a science journalist and dinosaur enthusiast in Newton, Mass., after he realized that the 50 or so dinosaur paleontologists around the world shared no more than $1 million in total research money.
He hoped to persuade toy makers and other marketers who make millions of dollars on dinosaur products to work with the society, both to create accurate and educational products and to funnel some profits to the scientists.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  THREAT TO BOLIVIA'S FOREST  The attention focused on the destrucTion of the Brazilian rain forest has overshadowed a similar problem in other countries, including Bolivia, where it is almost as severe.
A1  U.N.
REVIEWING PEACE ROLE  The fighting between United Nations soldiers and a faction chief in Somalia and the failure of international troops as a buffer in Bosnia are forcing the organization to examine its role as a global peacekeeper.
A6


Frances Chan, Richard Allen
Frances Chan, a lawyer with the Internal Revenue Service in New York, was married yesterday to Richard Allen, the president of American Corporate Benefits Inc., an employee-benefits consulting company in New York.
Justice Kristen Booth Glen of New York State Supreme Court officiated in her chambers in New York.
Ms.
Chan, who is keeping her name, graduated from Smith College.
She received a master's degree in management from the New School for Social Research and a law degree from New York Law School.
She is a daughter of T. How Chan and Frank Chan, both of New York.


Teacher's Showing of Anti-Abortion Film in Class Stirs Outcry
A teacher's decision to show an anti-abortion film to seventh-grade students has outraged some parents in this northern Westchester County community, igniting a debate about how public schools should address politically sensitive issues.
The Somers Central School District is weighing disciplinary action against the teacher, William Wienecke, who put aside his Civil War lectures on June 4 to show students in three social studies classes a documentary film with an anti-abortion message, including images of aborted and dismembered fetuses.
The teacher did not offer an opposing viewpoint, said students in the classes.


Ms. Zacharia, Mr. Paretzky
Karen Zacharia, a daughter of Don Zacharia and the late Judy Zacharia, was married yesterday to Raymond Paretzky, a son of Cicely Paretzky of Queens and the late Rabbi Martin L. Paretzky.
Rabbi Irwin Kula officiated in Scarsdale, N.Y., at the home of the bride's father and stepmother, Christina Zacharia.
Ms.
Zacharia, who is keeping her name, is an associate in the Washington law firm of Williams &amp; Connolly.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from Stanford University.
Her father is a novelist and short story writer and the owner of Zachys Wine and Liquor Store in Scarsdale.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Muster Makes Short Work of Gustafsson  Top-seeded Thomas Muster of Austria defeated Sweden's Magnus Gustafsson yesterday in Genoa, Italy, to capture the $300,000 IP Cup, his second consecutive tournament title.
Muster took 1 hour 45 minutes to defeat the third-seeded Swede, 7-6 (7-3), 6-4.
Gustafsson nearly won the first set, breaking Muster and gaining five set points, four of which he lost on errors.
Muster then held on to win the tiebreaker, 7-3.
Muster applied steady pressure in the second set, winning on his second match point.
The Austrian won the Florence ATP Tour event on June 13. (AP) AUTO RACING  Peugeot Troika Wins 24 Hours of Le Mans  Defending champion Peugeot swept the top three places in the prestigious 24-hour Le Mans endurance race yesterday in France, holding off a fading challenge by Toyota, whose powerhouse racers were plagued by mishaps and structural problems.
Toyota was fourth with one of its TS010 cars.
Thousands of racing fans swarmed around the finish area where the Peugeot 905, piloted by Australian Geoff Brabham, took the checkered flag under a beating sun at 4 P.M. (local time), 24 hours after taking off in the grueling annual race. (AP) Martin On Empty; Rudd in Winner's Circle: Mark Martin's empty gas tank was the difference as Ricky Rudd inherited the lead nine laps from the finish and went on to victory in the Miller Genuine Draft 400 at Michigan International Speedway in Brooklyn, Mich.
Martin led for 141 of the 200 laps but knew he was in trouble after making a green-flag pit stop with 55 laps to go.
He came out of that pit-stop shuffle on top, but knowing that his Ford Thunderbird, despite being easily the fastest car on the track, could not make it to the end without one last splash of gas.
Meanwhile, Rudd, who announced Saturday he will field his own Winston Cup team next season, was able to stretch his final stop to lap 150 and was nearly certain he could go the distance.
Steve Hmiel, Martin's crew chief, told his driver over the radio to pit on lap 190, but changed his mind, telling him to take one more lap.
It turned out to be a mistake as Martin ran out of gas on the backstretch and had to coast to the pits. (AP) GOLF  Rodriguez Triumphs by Two Strokes  Chi Chi Rodriguez, winner of only one tournament the past two seasons, shot a seven-under-par 65 yesterday to win the inaugural Burnet Senior Classic in Coon Rapids, Minn., by two strokes over Bob Murphy and Jim Colbert.
Rodriguez, second on the career Senior PGA Tour money list, birdied four consecutive holes -- 8 through 11 -- to take the lead for good at the Bunker Hills Golf Course.
He then parred the next six holes before wrapping up his only title of 1993 with a birdie on 18. (AP) Green Repels Sheehan for Victory: Tammie Green held off defending champion Patty Sheehan to win the Ladies Professional Golf Association Rochester International by one stroke.
Green's two-under-par 70 in the final round was a far cry from her career-best 63 Saturday, but it gave her a 72-hole total of 276, her third L.P.G.A. victory and the $75,000 winner's check.
She had four birdies and two bogeys in the final round that was interrupted by a half-hour rain delay in the afternoon. (AP) SOCCER  Mexico Ties Argentina in America Cup  Mexico dominated defending champion Argentina but managed only a 1-1 tie in a Group C in an America Cup game yesterday in Guayaquil, Ecuador yesterday.
David Patino put the Mexicans ahead in the 15th minute and Oscar Ruggeri tied in the 28th.
Argentine goalkeeper Sergio Goycoechea made several good saves in denying Mexico the deciding goal.
Argentina leads Group C with 3 points and is in good position to move into the quarterfinals.
Mexico, with 1 point, will need a good result Wednesday against Bolivia in order to advance.
Colombia, which beat Mexico, 2-1, in the first game, tied Bolivia, 1-1, in a late game. (AP) China Defeats Iraq in World Cup Qualifier: China beat Iraq, 2-1, and Jordan took a 4-0 first half lead en route to a 5-0 victory over Pakistan yesterday in Beijing in the World Cup Asian Zone Group A qualifying tournament.
Despite its loss, Iraq will move on to the second round of the Asian Zone qualifying tournament by virtue of its 6-1-1 record.
China was next at 6-2-0. (AP) Real Madrid Loss Means Title for Barcelona: In a stunning repetition of last season's dramatic finale, Tenerife shocked Real Madrid, 2-0, yesterday to hand F.C.
Barcelona its third consecutive championship of the Spanish league.
Bulgarian striker Hristo Stoichkov snapped out of his slump to lead Barcelona to a 1-0 victory over Real Sociedad.
Argentine forward Oscar Alberto Dertycia, meanwhile, scored Tenerife's first goal to send it on its way to victory over Real Madrid.
The stunning conclusion marked the second season in a row in which Real Madrid entered the final week of the season with a 1-point lead in the standing only to lose to Tenerife and see the title taken from its grasp. (AP) BOXING  Norris Knockdown Gave His Corner a Scare  The official record of Saturday night's super-welterweight championship fight will show that Terry Norris retained his World Boxing Council title by defeating Australian Troy Waters.
He won when Waters failed to answer the bell for the fourth round.
What the record won't convey is that Norris's camp suffered some nightmarish moments when Waters knocked Norris to the canvas in the second round.
The knockdown stunned Norris; his manager, Joe Sayatovich and the 11,646 fans at the Sports Arena.
Norris had knocked down Waters in the opening round and then did so again in the third, with a crisp right to the head.
When the badly cut Waters was unable to answer the bell for the fourth round, the fight was over.
Until Saturday night, Norris had only been knocked down once in his career; in 1989 in a loss to Julian Jackson.
Since that defeat, Norris has run off 14 straight victories to improve his record to 35-3 with 20 knockouts.


Review/Music; Jazz at the White House (Home of a Serious Fan)
It had to happen, and when it did, it wasn't nearly as bad as it could have been.
After President Clinton gave his final remarks tonight at the White House jazz festival, the saxophonist Illinois Jacquet handed him a saxophone, and off the band went into Miles Davis's blues waltz, "All Blues." Happy to say, the President (who in his early career as a saxophonist had committed Mr. Jacquet's landmark improvisation on "Flying Home" to memory), didn't equivocate, change his mind or buckle to pressure, though he did look a bit uncomfortable.
Then he unfurled a nicely formed improvisation that wasn't half bad, at least before it fizzled into silence.
Deep in the dark recesses of the Presidential mind is clearly the knowledge, albeit a bit rusty, of what it takes to be an improvising musician.
"Well, tunes in 3/4 time have a built-in rhythmic excitement," President Clinton said afterwards, casually.
"You just have to ride them."


Big Tobacco Watching A Small-Claims Court
A decision in small-claims court is hardly the kind to create ripples throughout a major industry.
But some legal experts are predicting that a ruling in Mercer Island, Wash., in favor of a man suing the Philip Morris Companies to recover the costs of quitting smoking, could create all kinds of problems for cigarette manufacturers.
Alfred J. Deskiewicz Jr., a 50-year-old design engineer from Kirkland, Wash., near Seattle, has asked the court to award him the $1,153.54 it cost him to consult a doctor, buy nicotine patches and join a health club.
In arguments before Judge Linda K. Jacke on June 7, he contended that he had never been warned by Philip Morris that the Marlboro cigarettes he smoked for more than 30 years were addictive.


Unrepresentative Press
To the Editor:
In "Mr. Clinton Picks a Justice" (editorial, June 15), you criticize President Clinton for his "intemperate response" to a reporter's question at a news conference following his nomination of Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg to the Supreme Court.
The reporter queried Mr.
Clinton about the zigzag quality of his decision making.
The criticism of the President was misplaced.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity offerings are expected this week:
Aames Financial Corp., Los Angeles, 2.2 million common shares. Oppenheimer &amp; Co.
ABT Building Products Corp., Troy, Mich., an initial public offering of 2.8 million common shares.
Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.


New Math Test in New York Schools Penalizes Poor Readers
To the Editor:
In the hullabaloo over the results of the new math test in New York City public schools, no one has mentioned the major change in the test.
It is now a reading test, consisting solely of 50 verbal problems to be done in less than 50 minutes.
The math has not changed at all, but the children have to wade through a sea of language before they get to the math.
Children who read poorly or slowly may never get to the math at all.
At my school, where the first language for most students is not English, our math scores used to be double our reading scores.
Now they are just about the same.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Press; The Newspaper Industry Is At A Crossroad: Does It Take the High-Tech Highway Or Go Back to Basics?
THE newspaper industry right now is like the kid who is asked what he wants to do when he grows up.
"Make money," he says.
The newspaper industry has been a grown-up for a long time.
But as a mature business in a rough economy, it is finding it difficult to find paths to continued growth.
And, as in any business, there is one thing newspaper companies know they have to do: Make money.


For Better or Worse, Devils Trade Billington
The Devils figured that a goaltender who made the All-Star Game and had a winning record last season is more likely to be selected in the expansion draft than someone who lost 46 games.
That was the reason Lou Lamoriello, the president and general manager of the Devils, traded Craig Billington to Ottawa yesterday along with Troy Mallette and a fourth-round draft choice for Peter Sidorkiewicz.


Stolen Car Involved In a Fatal Accident
A 15-year-old boy, joy riding with two friends in a stolen car, rammed head-on into another vehicle yesterday, killing a 61-year-old woman and injuring her daughter, the police said.
The woman, Marie Bernard, died immediately, the police said.
Her 20-year-old daughter, Yasmine November, who was driving their 1986 Chevrolet, was treated at Harlem Hospital Center and released.


In Light of 'Jurassic,' Amber Glows
With "Jurassic Park" on its way to megahit status at movie theater box offices and megahype conditions in the world of licensed spinoff products, some jewelers and museum store operators are looking forward to a surge in amber sales.
The soft gem, which is actually fossilized tree sap rather than a mineral like an emerald or ruby, has been traded and worn as jewelry for thousands of years.
But it is still relatively unknown outside the Northern European countries around the Baltic Sea, where the largest deposits of gem-quality amber, ranging from 30 to 70 million years old, are found.


'True Love Waits' for Some Teen-Agers
"It's awesome to be a virgin," said David Medford, who has just taken a pledge of sexual abstinence until marriage.
"I want to give that as a gift to my wife. I want it to be special, not something I do just to fit in."
Mr.
Medford, who is 17, and hundreds of other teen-agers here and around the country have recently signed pledges of purity as part of an abstinence program developed by the Southern Baptist Convention, church officials say.


Boy, 6, Is Fatally Struck By Livery Cab in Bronx
A 6-year-old boy who witnesses said darted into a Bronx street Saturday afternoon was struck and killed by a livery cab whose unlicensed driver halted 100 feet away, leaped out and fled on foot, the police reported yesterday.
The driver later turned himself in and said he fled because he feared a crowd at the scene.
But witnesses gave conflicting accounts -- one saying there was no crowd, and another saying one might have been gathering -- and the police charged him with leaving the scene and driving without a license.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  None  Wednesday  Durable Goods . . .
May G.D.P. . . . 1st Qtr.
Thursday Personal Income . . .
May  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Existing-Home Sales . . .
May


Clinton's Sailing Isn't Smooth, But It's Sailing
FIVE months into the Clinton Administration its pattern of governing is now starting to emerge.
The best way to capture it is to compare this Administration to the previous one.
The Bush Administration on domestic affairs was like a boat that was perfectly trimmed, fore and aft, with the captain dressed to the nines.
But it never left the dock.
The Clinton Administration, it is now becoming clear, is like a boat headed out to sea, dragging its anchor, with half the passengers seasick and several of the crew having fallen overboard.
There's constant trouble in the mate's mess, and the captain is navigating by the stars, having long ago lost his charts.


Alexander E. Squadrilli, 86, Dies; Headed Agencies to Aid Refugees
Alexander E. Squadrilli, who helped millions of victims of war and natural disaster as the head of American and international refugee and relief programs, died on Friday at a hospital in Norwalk, Conn.
He was 86 and lived in Stamford.
The cause of death was a stroke and its complications, his family said.


Differences Are Narrowed at U.N. Talks on Rights
Despite pessimism among Western countries about the prospects for the world human rights conference, the first in 25 years, the 168 nations meeting here have agreed that their final declaration should affirm the universal nature of United Nations human rights standards, saying they apply equally to all peoples regardless of racial, cultural and religious traditions or their level of economic development.
This means the United States and its allies have turned back a challenge from a powerful group of mainly Asian countries led by China, who wanted the conference to declare that freedom, fairness and justice mean different things in different parts of the world.


Military's Zeal Decried in Sodomy Case
In a case that has drawn little public notice but has sent ripples through the Air Force hierarchy, an officer has been convicted of sodomy and another faces similar charges based solely on a gay civilian man's claim that they had sex with him.
The two officers, members of an elite transportation unit here, deny that they are homosexual and that they ever had sex with the man.
The officers, Capt.
Troy Carlyle and Capt.
Luther Turner, say they are victims of a spurned friend.


A Ballet Competition Tries To Quell Competitive Urges
Ballet competitions abound around the world, from Moscow and Tokyo to Varna, Bulgaria, and Jackson, Miss.
At all of them, young dancers compete and judges present medals to the winners.
The fourth New York International Ballet Competition is a bit like that.
Yet it is also different in a special way.


Allison Forester, Jeffrey Wintner
Allison Stacey Forester, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Barry J. Forester of Livingston, N.J., was married yesterday to Jeffrey M. Wintner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerald Wintner of Randolph, N.J.
Rabbi Albert Raab performed the ceremony at the Brooklake Country Club in Florham Park, N.J.
The bride, 29, is to become an associate at the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling in July.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, she magna cum laude and he summa cum laude.
Both were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


Czech Capitalism Gets Stock Market
Having placed ownership of many of its industries in private hands, the Czech Republic is about to plunge into the nitty-gritty of capitalism, complete with a stock market, boardroom battles and struggles for corporate survival.
Beginning this week, investors will be trading shares for the first time on a widespread basis on the new Prague Stock Exchange.
Big investment funds that have sprung up to manage the shareholdings are starting to flex their muscles by demanding seats on newly constituted corporate boards and demanding job reductions and other cost-cutting measures.


John P. O'Byrne, 66, Retired Educator, Dies
John P. O'Byrne, a longtime principal of the Bay Terrace School, Public School 53, on Staten Island, who also taught education at two colleges, died on Friday at Monmouth Medical Center in Long Branch, N.J.
He was 66 and lived in West Long Branch, N.J.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, said his son, Charles J. O'Byrne, S.J., a Jesuit scholastic who is the assistant to the president of St.
Peter's College in Jersey City, N.J.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  THREAT TO BOLIVIA'S FOREST  The attention focused on the destrucTion of the Brazilian rain forest has overshadowed a similar problem in other countries, including Bolivia, where it is almost as severe.
A1  U.N.
REVIEWING PEACE ROLE  The fighting between United Nations soldiers and a faction chief in Somalia and the failure of international troops as a buffer in Bosnia are forcing the organization to examine its role as a global peacekeeper.
A6


CHRONICLE
Over the years, LEONARD and EVELYN LAUDER have been identified with countless worthy causes in the arts (he is president of the Whitney Museum), in health (she took the lead in a fund that built the Evelyn H. Lauder Breast Center at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center) and in the life of children (they renovated three city playgrounds).
The other day they were recognized as "Philanthropists of the Year" by the Greater New York Chapter of the National Society of Fund Raising Executives.
They received their award at a luncheon for 1,700 people from 22 states at the Jacob Javits Convention Center.


A Plan to Use Businesses To Help Catch Tax Cheats
The Internal Revenue Service has long suspected that lots of service businesses -- taxi fleets, print shops, plumbers -- are hiding income from the Government.
But it has never had the resources to prove it.
Now the Clinton Administration, ever in search of revenue, has hit on a way to find out: deputize every company in America to track the money down.


Dance in Review
New York City Ballet  New York State Theater
Nikolaj Hubbe, from the Royal Danish Ballet, and Igor Zelensky, from the Kirov Ballet in Russia, have been adapting to the New York City ballet at their own pace since joining it last fall, and their debuts during the current Balanchine Celebration have evoked particular interest.


Talking Sense to Ukraine
Ukraine is a sovereign state and will be treated like one by the United States.
On that point Secretary of Defense Les Aspin left no doubt during his recent visit to Kiev.
But as nationalists pressure Ukraine to keep its nuclear arms, doubts rise about what sort of sovereign state it intends to become -- one that lives up to its international commitments, or a nuclear outlaw that provokes a scramble for security in the region.
Washington can coax Kiev into making the right choice, but only if it adopts a new and comprehensive political strategy.


Debra Helfand and Jonah Klein
Debra Chana Helfand, a daughter of Sheldon and Helen Helfand of Valley Stream, L.I., was married yesterday to Jonah Mitchell Klein, the son of Judith Pringle of New York and Richard Klein of Ithaca, N.Y.
Rabbi Stuart M. Geller performed the ceremony at Fox Hollow, a catering hall in Woodbury, L.I.
Ms.
Helfand, 25, is keeping her name.
She is an editor in the office of publications at Columbia University, from which she received a master's degree in English.
She graduated summa cum laude from Cornell University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is a lieutenant in Brooklyn with the New York City Police Department.
Her mother is a senior library clerk at the Hewlett-Woodmere Public Library in Woodmere, L.I.


Dance in REview
'D Train' Manhattan Class Company and Fay Simpson Dance Theater Manhattan Class Company Theater 120 West 28th Street Chelsea Through July 1
Thanks to a skillful mixing of media, "D Train" is as hard-boiled as a gangster movie and as feverish as an Expressionist painting.
A collaboration between the Manhattan Class Company, a theater group, and the Fay Simpson Dance Theater, the production at the Class Company's studio playhouse plunges ahead with all the force of the subway train after which it is titled.


Wickman Is Buoyed By That Sinker Feeling As the Yankees Sweep
The baseball was accepted with humility.
It was retrieved by Bob Wickman at the end of the game, the first complete game of his career, an 8-0 victory over Minnesota that finished a four-game sweep of the Twins.
He plans to send the ball to his father in Wisconsin.
For the sender, the significance ends there.
"I don't care about complete games," Wickman said.


Corrections
An article in some editions of Business Day on Thursday, about the Infinity Broadcasting Corporation's agreement to buy KRTH-FM in Los Angeles, misstated the background.
Infinity will be the second broadcasting company in Los Angeles to take advantage of new Federal ownership rules that permit one party to own up to four radio stations in a metropolitan area.


Sniping Is Growing At The U.N. Over Weakness In Peacekeeping
The fighting between United Nations forces and a warlord in Somalia and the failure of international troops to be an effective buffer in Bosnia are forcing many to rethink the organization's vastly expanded role as a global peacekeeper.
Diplomats here have publicly complained of amateurism in the peacekeeping operations, with the United States representative, Madeleine K. Albright, asserting recently that "ill-equipped and often unprepared troops" are often sent into the field.


U.S. Team Has Speed To Burn in Germany
The team selected here to represent the United States at the World Track and Field Championships in Stuttgart, Germany, Aug. 13-22, is a relatively strong one, but there are some weak spots.
That is the opinion of both the men's and women's head coaches, who have spent the last five days watching athletes run, jump and throw their way onto the team through competition in the USA/Mobil championships.


Janzen Wins U.S. Open; Bulls Continue Their Championship Seasons


FIGHTING IN BOSNIA IS SAID TO RESUME
Fighting erupted in at least a half dozen places across Bosnia today, the third day of a cease-fire, and Bosnian Croat troop movements portended new hostilities in the central part of the republic, United Nations officials said.
Sarajevo radio reported that Bosnian Serbs continued to attack Muslim defenses around the eastern Bosnian enclave of Gorazde and that Bosnian Croat artillery had shelled the southern towns of Jablanica and Konjic.


Linda Schenker, Abraham Davis
Linda Schenker and Abraham Davis were married yesterday at their home in Ridgewood, N.J.
Rabbi Selig Salkowitz officiated.
The bride is a daughter of the late Harry Haber and the late Ruth Haber Franco.
Mr.
Davis is a son of the late Isadore and Sarah Davis.
The bride is the manager of customer relations and telecommunications for Safilo USA, a manufacturer and distributor of optical frames in Fairfield, N.J.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.


Wimbledon '93: The Tired, the Sick, the Injured Masses
Is this Wimbledon or Lourdes?
The famous grass courts, coaxed along by daily mistings, appear healthy enough to face a two-week pounding from the finest sneakers technology has to offer.
But the owners of all this expensive footwear don't seem nearly as spry as the surface they're about to attack today when tennis' most prestigious Grand Slam tournament reinvents itself for another two-week run at the All England Club.


M. C. Bradbrook, 84, Shakespeare Scholar
Muriel Clara Bradbrook, a leading British authority on Shakespeare who taught at Girton College at Cambridge University, died on June 11 in Cambridge.
She was 84 and lived there.
Professor Bradbrook, who wrote as M. C. Bradbrook, was the first woman to become a professor of English at Cambridge.
She held her professorship from 1965 to 1976 and was the Mistress of Girton from 1968 to 1976.


Masao Kotani, 87, Theoretical Physicist
Masao Kotani, a theoretical physicist who was a former president of Tokyo Science University, died on June 6 at the National Cancer Center in Tokyo.
He was 87 and lived in Tokyo.
The cause of death was heart failure, the Kyodo News Service reported.


Better 'Urp' Than 'Boom!'
Some tanks leak, but the one with the biggest potential for disaster is Tank 101-SY, which holds 1.14 million gallons and every 100 days or so burps hydrogen gas, gas that at times is so concentrated it can support a fire.
With delays in emptying the tanks and solidifying their contents, this tank seems destined to burp for years longer.
But engineers recently installed a computerized monitoring system, designed by Los Alamos National Laboratory, and describe the tank as the most heavily watched in the world.


Officials to Meet With Union Today in Walkout by Staff at Homeless Center
Social-service officials in New York City are to meet this morning with a union representing workers at a center that places homeless people in shelters in an effort to end a staff walkout over safety concerns.
The center, at 78 Catherine Street in lower Manhattan, has been closed since Friday, when a caseworker was assaulted by a homeless woman.
Over the weekend, the city bused homeless people to another placement office in the Bronx.


Finding a Trend Amid the Calm
With the Treasury market apparently safely back in its tight trading range after recent reassuring news on inflation, traders and portfolio managers are wondering how to play the market.
Not too many money managers want to bet right now that yields, either long or short, will move sharply lower soon.


Vladivostok Journal; A New Capitalist Goes Foreign Shopping for Profit
With their easy banter, upscale clothes and shared bottles of imported vodka, the large group of young Russians on the eight-hour Moscow-to-Vladivostok flight were obviously people who did this often.
Halfway through the overnight flight, when most of his group had dozed off, Roman, the leader, agreed to explain who they were and what they did.
It was a variation on a story often heard among Russian entrepreneurs trying to break out of the encrusted mold of socialism.


Christopher St. Rebounds As Thriving 'Gay Mecca'
Three years ago, times were tough on what has been called America's Gay Main Street.
Along with the rest of New York City, the six-block-long mecca for homosexuals struggled to cope with the recession, inflated rents and the drug trade, which increased crime.
But Christopher Street in Greenwich Village had special problems, too: AIDS, which took its toll on the area's business owners and their clientele, and an upsurge in violence against homosexuals.
Its longtime free-wheeling image drew drunken late-night crowds.
More shops were vacant than anyone could remember, nightclubs languished and a vibrant street scene turned almost somber.


Bills and Notes on Treasury Schedule
The Treasury's schedule of financings this week begins with today's regular weekly auction of three- and six-month bills.
On Tuesday, there will be an auction of two-year notes, followed on Wednesday by an auction of five-year notes.
An auction of one-year bills will be on Friday.
Traders said that by the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate was 3.04 percent on the outstanding three-month bill and 3.16 percent on the six-month bill.
The rate on a one-year bill was 3.35 percent.
In when-issued trading, the two-year note was traded at a price to yield 4.18 percent and the five-year note at 5.22 percent.


Health Agency Investigates Airplanes and TB Infections
Concerned that ventilation systems for airline cabins may contribute to the spread of contagious diseases, Federal health officials are investigating whether some passengers with tuberculosis have infected fellow passengers on long flights.
The Government is seeking to determine whether the recirculation of air in the cabins of airliners would allow the transmission of tuberculosis, a bacterial disease that is spread through the air by patients in the active stage of the disease.
The disease caused three million deaths worldwide last year and infected eight million more people.
Health officials say that worldwide 1 person in 3 is infected, although in the vast majority of those cases the disease is latent and cannot be transmitted.


New Math Test in New York Schools Penalizes Poor Readers; A Better Comparison
To the Editor:
Your June 9 report on a decline in math scores in New York City public schools misrepresents the substantial achievements of the students.
Since 1990, we have been upgrading our mathematics program to meet the higher standards developed by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics.
Those standards include reform of math testing.


Beating Is Suspected in Death of Woman
Firefighters, responding to a report of a fire in a Brooklyn apartment yesterday, discovered a 51-year-old woman, who had apparently been beaten to death, and her 45-year-old boyfriend, who had severe head wounds, police and fire officials said.
The woman, Pam Gibbons Hobbes, was found lying on the floor in a kitchen hallway of her smoky fifth-floor apartment at 61 Martense Street near Bedford Avenue in Flatbush, said a Fire Department spokesman, Francis McCabe.
The man, Stanley Ziarno, who shared the apartment with Ms.
Hobbes, was found lying on the floor of the bedroom.


Islanders Get Hextall And Deal Fitzpatrick
When the Islanders won the Stanley Cup in four consecutive seasons from 1980 through 1983, one of the big reasons was the play of Billy Smith.
Smith was a combative netminder who didn't mind taking the occasional penalty by challenging opposing forwards who, he felt, took territorial or physical liberties near his crease.
In a major trade yesterday, the Islanders got another goalie in the Smith mold.
He is Ron Hextall, a veteran acquired from the Quebec Nordiques in exchange for goalie Mark Fitzpatrick and a swap of first-round draft picks.


End to Lobbying Deduction Is a Bad Idea
To the Editor:
President Clinton's proposal to disallow the deduction for lobbying expenses of businesses, recently passed by the House of Representatives, should be rejected.


British Air Joins Chase In Card Deal
In a move to strengthen its growing presence in the United States, British Airways has joined with the Chase Manhattan Bank to issue a joint Visa credit card that will earn users frequent-flier miles on international and domestic United States flights.
Most major United States airlines have similar affinity cards with banks, for which card owners typically pay an annual fee of $50 and accrue one frequent-flier mile for every dollar charged.
This is the first such arrangement between a big American bank and a large foreign airline.


Review/Rock; Lollapalooza, Tattoos and All
Purple hair!
Pierced lips!
Tattoos!
Souvenir T-shirts that cost $28!
They were all on display in the audience for the Lollapalooza Festival, the third annual version of the alternative-rock showcase and package tour, which got under way on Friday afternoon at Thunderbird Stadium here.
Primus, Alice in Chains, Dinosaur Jr., Fishbone and Arrested Development are the major names in a lineup that also includes seven other bands.
But the audience is also an attraction, as fans in their teens and 20's look at themselves and test their self-image as a community.
Lollapalooza is becoming a habit: spring break for the alienated.
In Chicago, a July 3 Lollapalooza show sold out before performers had been named.
For anti-mainstream rockers, the festival combines stadium dates with some underground credibility.
Audiences outside big cities can see headliners they've heard of and opening acts they may have heard about, without the age restrictions and late hours of rock clubs.


Family Fitness With a Smile


Janzen: Lucky and Good, Good And Lucky
On a tense, suffocating day that seemed too oppressive for great golf, Lee Janzen saved his absolute best for last today to win the 93d United States Open at the Baltusrol Golf Club.
Just when the 28-year-old Janzen had fallen into a tie with Payne Stewart with six holes to play and seemed ready to melt from the pressure and humidity, he responded like a champion.


Rainy Weather Delays Launching of Endeavour
Deteriorating weather and minor but nagging problems kept the space shuttle Endeavour on its launching pad today as the space agency tried to mount a mission to retrieve a European science laboratory from space.
The shuttle and its six-member crew are to try again on Monday, with a liftoff scheduled for 9:07 A.M., Eastern daylight time, which is at the beginning of a 71-minute launching window.
The period in which the launching may occur is relatively short because Endeavour's takeoff must be coordinated with the orbital position of the European satellite.


Cable Showdown Looms Over Network Payments
What if cable subscribers turned on their televisions and none of the networks were there?
This is a question that broadcasters and cable operators have begun asking themselves with growing seriousness -- and, in many cases, alarm -- as they prepare for life this fall under new Federal legislation.
For the first time since the 1950's, broadcasters are allowed to demand payment from cable systems that carry their signals.
But the cable systems are not required to pay; they can eliminate the signals instead.
As a result, a war of nerves is looming between the two industries.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Addenda; Thompson Is Winner In California Review
The California Trade and Commerce Agency said Friday that it had awarded the estimated $4.5 million account of its Office of Tourism and Economic Development to J. Walter Thompson San Francisco after a review.
For a time, it had seemed the assignment would be held up by a protest from another participant in the review.
Della Bousquet, chief of the trade and commerce agency's contract, grant and loan office in Sacramento, Calif., said that after announcing Thompson San Francisco had been awarded the account, Kresser/Craig in Santa Monica, Calif., a semifinalist in the review, protested but later changed its mind.


U.S. IS CRITICIZED ON BURMESE POLICY
The Clinton Administration is coming under growing criticism from human rights groups for its policy toward the military junta in Myanmar, formerly Burma, which they say is one of the most repressive governments in the world.
The groups say they are concerned that the Administration, out of deference to several of Myanmar's neighbors, mainly Thailand, is continuing restrictive policies toward Burmese refugees that were adopted in the Bush Administration.
Some of the groups are also concerned over the Administration's support for an $18 million grant that was approved by a United Nations Development Program on Friday.


Haitians Protest Vatican's Recognition of Regime in Haiti


A Tokyo Pol, Once Out, Is Back Leading a Revolt
Six months ago, Ichiro Ozawa's political fortunes had ebbed so low that when accused of seeking intervention by organized crime in a prime ministerial race, he was reduced to defending himself by saying he had been at a key meeting where the plan was discussed, but only to serve drinks and empty ashtrays.
A political cartoon subsequently depicted him as a waiter in a bar fetching drinks for a gangster, who said to a friend, "Did you see who that was?"


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A Mail Campaign Helps Saab Find, And Keep, Its Customers.
CARS can't be delivered through the mail, but it appears that car buyers can.
Saab Cars U.S.A., the importer of luxury automobiles from Sweden, has undertaken an ambitious program to use direct-response media to sell models like the 9000 CS and CSE sports sedans to American drivers.


Evelyn C. Rubin and Milton Houpt
Dr.
Evelyn Cappell Rubin, a child psychologist in Riverdale, the Bronx, was married yesterday to Dr.
Milton Houpt, the chairman of the department of pediatric dentistry at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey in Newark.
Rabbi Shmuel Golden officiated at the bridegroom's home in Englewood, N.J.
Dr.
Rubin-Houpt, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Cappell of New York, graduated from Barnard College and received a doctorate in psychology from Columbia University.


Arrest in Slaying of Cabby
A Brooklyn man was arrested last night in the fatal shooting of a gypsy-cab driver during a robbery yesterday morning, the police said.
Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman, identified the man as Clifton Davis, 31.
The driver, Cilimon St.
Louis of Crown Heights, was shot once in the chest after he picked up a man in Crown Heights about 6 A.M., the police said.
Mr.
St.
Louis was at least the 20th cabdriver shot this year.


Trial Explores Murky Lines of Authority at Bank
When Federal and state banking regulators met on April 23, 1981, at the Federal Reserve Board headquarters to consider an application from a group of Middle Eastern investors to take over a bank holding company in Washington, they wanted to know who would run the bank for its absentee owners.
The management issue was also very much on the minds of Clark M. Clifford and Robert A. Altman, the Washington lawyers representing the investors.


Bridge
A top-ranked American women's team completed a highly successful Chinese tour earlier this month, competing in Beijing, Shanghai and Hongzhu.
The high point, for Kathie Wei, Lisa Berkowitz, Lynn Deas, Beth Palmer, Carol Sanders and Betty Ann Kennedy, was a victory in the Beijing International Invitation tournament.
The field of 24 teams included open squads from Hong Kong, other parts of China and the Far East, and one other American team.
They also won a televised exhibition match against the national women's team of China.
Wei and Berkowitz recently formed a partnership that is working well.
On the diagramed deal in the Beijing event they sat East and West, and punished a slightly unwary overcaller.
North assumed that he could bid two clubs as a passed hand, but the sequel showed him the error of his ways.


Local Investment Helps the Economy
To the Editor:
The Treasury Department should be applauded for looking at whether or not money market mutual funds and other financial service institutions should be covered by the Community Reinvestment Act, whose rationale is that financial institutions have an obligation to reinvest part of their funds in the communities from which their capital is drawn (Business Day, June 9).
After all, money market funds offer deposit and checking services similar to those of banks, but money market fund operators do not incur the overhead of branch offices and full banking services.
But several impressions you create should be corrected.


A Battle Royal Is Brewing Among the Palace Tattlers
How much more information can the public realistically absorb about Princess Diana's tearful tantrums, Prince Charles's odd disassociation from reality and Fergie's topless tryst with her toe-sucking boyfriend?
That is the question being asked by five publishers who have put out books about the British royal family within the last month, flooding a market that once seemed practically bottomless.
The books range from "Diana vs. Charles: Royal Blood Feud," a quick-hit, scandal-filled account by the British journalist James Whitaker, to "The Rise and Fall of the House of Windsor," a wry and relatively sober discussion of the future of the monarchy by A. N. Wilson that actually uses footnotes.


New Math Test in New York Schools Penalizes Poor Readers; Learning by Chess
To the Editor:
Despite the declining math results in New York City public schools (news article, June 9), chess in the schools, a program aimed at student development in District 9 in the Bronx, is showing results.


Parents Mourn Child Killed in Bronx Accident


Enter, Summer; Solstice
It's Monday morning.
A man blearily tastes his coffee and props the newspaper for a look.
The main headline announces a date of seasonal significance.
The man's head snaps up.
He gapes into the room.
He turns immediately into a mass of ice cream.
His wife comes through the door.
She rushes up to the great melting bulk of pralines and cream, formerly her husband.
She covers her mouth in disbelieving horror.
Her eye falls on the newspaper headline.
She sways and manages a little squeal before toppling over -- as a huge, buttered corn-on-the-cob.
The household's two teenagers contribute a colorful bikini top, and an autographed baseball, to this monstrous tableau.


Books of The Times; Living Downwind With Nowhere to Hide
American Ground Zero  The Secret Nuclear War  By Carole Gallagher  Illustrated. 427 pages.
MIT Press. $39.95.
As you look at Carole Gallagher's powerful pictures and read her angry words in "American Ground Zero: The Secret Nuclear War," you may be reminded of James Agee's "Let Us Now Praise Famous Men," with Walker Evans's photographs of poor tenant farmers in the rural South during the Depression.
But there's a big difference: the faces in the Agee-Evans book are lined with hunger and despair while the faces and bodies in Ms.
Gallagher's book reflect animosity and irreparable nuclear wounds.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Fire Wall Total Arts Festival  Irving Plaza 17 Irving Place Gramercy Park Through Sunday
The band had no name, and the piece had no title.
Performance Space 122's Fire Wall Total Arts Festival opened last Monday night with two hours of free-form improvisation.
Craig Harris, the trombonist and composer, assembled an eclectic all-star group that included the trumpeter Ahmed Abdullah, the alto saxophonist Arthur Blythe, the tenor saxophonist Chico Freeman, the bassist Jamaladeen Tacuma, the guitarists Elliot Sharp and Kelvyn Bell, the drummer Tony Lewis and the performance artist Laurie Carlos.


Nancy Friedman and Michael Zinn
Nancy Allison Friedman, a doctoral candidate in clinical psychology at Rutgers University, was married yesterday to Michael Alan Zinn, an investment adviser in New York.
Rabbi Lewis Bornstein officiated at the home of the bride's parents in Moorestown, N.J.
Ms.
Friedman, 26, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard University.
She is a daughter of Judge and Mrs.
Victor Friedman.
Her father is a judge on the New Jersey Superior Court in Mount Holly, N.J.
Her mother, Sally Friedman, is an editor at New Jersey Woman Magazine, a monthly in Bergenfield, N.J.


No Headline
"There is no awe in the letters. They just write 'Dear Bill and Hillary.' In the old days, if a letter came in addressed that way we automatically assumed that it was from a personal friend of the President's and we set it aside. But not now; they all think they're his friend." -- LILLIE BELL, who has been answering White House mail for 24 years.  [ A14:1. ]


A Swim, a Run, a Bike Ride and a Bump in the Road
It looked as if the thick clouds would shield the athletes from the heat at the Danskin Women's Triathlon this morning.
But while the light rain provided some respite from the sun, it made conditions troubling to most of the 800 competitors and disastrous to Michellie Jones, causing the 1992 World Triathlon champion to slip off her bike and dash her hopes of winning.
As soon as Karen Smyers of Lincoln, Mass., crossed the finish line with a winning time of 1 hour 2 minutes 48 seconds and received congratulations, she said, "It's not a good way to win." She was concerned about her friend.
Back Wheel Slips in Rain
Jones, an Australian who now lives in San Diego, completed the first leg of the race with a strong 750-meter swim and trailed only Alexandra Laws of Australia.
Just as the athletes finished the swim, a steady rain began to make the bike route slick.
Laws got a good start, but Jones struggled almost immediately.


Legislature Is Deadlocked On Banking Deregulation
With just over a week left before current banking laws expire, the State Legislature is deadlocked over legislation that consumer groups say will provide important protections to bank customers and that the banking industry says will determine whether thousands of banking jobs stay in the state.
At stake are laws dating from 1980 that have deregulated the financial industry, allowing banking companies almost complete freedom in setting interest rates on credit cards and most types of loans.


New Age of Fund Raising for Catholic Schools
Brother Anthony Iazzetti's latest excursion into the world of raising money for his school in the north Bronx was far removed from the candy sales and raffles that have long been a staple of Catholic fund-raising drives.
To be exact, it was 2,786 miles away in Los Angeles.
As the president of Mount Saint Michael Academy, he recently traveled to the West Coast to meet with a select handful of alumni who he hoped would become major contributors to the school's $6 million capital campaign.
He had already done his research, thanks in part to a computerized data bank that provided him with details about the lives and careers of the school's alumni.


Circuit Rider Trying to Save That Old-Time Main Street
Richard Hersey is a modern-day circuit rider, going from village to village in the Catskill Mountains in an experimental program to revive the economic health of the Main Streets.
His official title is "Main Street Coordinator/Circuit Rider," but he describes himself as a catalyst, cheerleader, consultant and go-between for five communities trying to overcome the neglect and deterioration of their basic shopping streets.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Addenda; Accounts
*
Ringer Corp., Eden Prairie, Minn., to Bozell Minneapolis, to handle the account of the manufacturer of organically based lawn-care products, previously at Sietsema-K &amp; H, Minneapolis.
Billings were not disclosed.


A Basket Gives Bulls Some Poetic Justice
Let history note that Michael Jordan had a supporting cast after all.
Let this latest championship be remembered for one poetic verse of climactic team play.
Let that play be shown again and again, and its executors linked in partnership, in making the Chicago Bulls' case for greatness.
Score it for the firm of Jordan, Pippen, Grant and Paxson.


At Old A-Plant, One Sure Thing Is the Volatility
On a windswept patch of desert plateau here, a barbed-wire fence surrounds the hole where workers are supposed to be building a factory to solve what could be the most serious environmental problem in the country.
The plant would take radioactive and explosive wastes from nuclear-bomb production out of leaking tanks and immobilize them in glass, which is relatively inert and hence better than liquid for such storage.
But the plant is being delayed, so for now all the fence does is collect tumbleweed.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about a meeting between President Clinton and King Hussein of Jordan misstated the King's medical condition.
He is in the United States for a follow-up examination; his treatment for cancer was last year.


Yankees Are Playing Like Bronx Bombers Again
Two rocket homers.
Four doubles.
Thirteen hits.
All from one team.
Eight of 10 non-pitchers got at least one hit.
It was like T-ball -- at least for the Yankees -- where everyone gets at least one shot, just to be fair, just for the fun.
Sure, Bob Wickman was the starting pitcher and had a great game.
But the offense drove in eight runs against the Minnesota Twins, and that cannot be ignored.
Neither can certain individuals who have been especially productive lately.


Abandoned Filipinos Sue U.S. Over Child Support
Next to her son James, what Lucia Villegas Hill prizes most may be a handful of documents identifying his father as an American sailor at the United States Navy base that shut down here last year.
"He's so far away now," she said, handing over a crinkled 1975 marriage certificate and a faded photograph of a man whose features bear some resemblance to her son's.
It has been years since Mrs.
Hill's husband wrote or sent money, and she clings to a scrap of yellow paper with his last known address and phone number, in Port Orchard, Wash.


Empire's Cooked Books
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield has a record of atrocious performance: huge losses, poor customer service, rigid management.
But last week the charges turned even uglier.
The Times revealed that Empire provided state authorities false financial data that buttressed its lobbying campaign to win a bailout from Albany.
Empire has launched an internal investigation and will replace its top managers with an outside team.
Those are welcome, but incomplete steps.
Questions remain about fraud, state oversight and state law governing Empire's practices.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Swell  CBGB
Two guitars, bass and drums -- the archetypal rock-band lineup -- gets a slight twist with Swell, a band from San Francisco that performed on Wednesday night.
David Freel strums an acoustic guitar, while John Dettman usually plays electric slide-guitar lines.
Mr.
Freel's vocals are talky and deadpan; songs often use only two or three chords.


Essay; Stop the Roller Coaster
We have to cut out the business of pulling Bill Clinton up by the roots every week to see how he's doing.
"Another Failed Presidency"; "Incredible Shrinking President"; "What Went Wrong?" America went to the pollsters and delivered a ringing vote of no confidence; if this were Japan, we'd be holding new elections.


Disclosures About Empire Imperil Relief
New York State lawmakers who approved several measures in recent years to bolster the finances of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield say they now feel betrayed and outraged by the recent disclosures that the state's largest health insurer may have lied to them.
As a result, a bill that Empire Blue Cross supports and that leaders in the Assembly say is vital to prevent a substantial increase in premiums for tens of thousands of the state's sickest citizens appears to be losing momentum.


Suzanne Rosenthal, Ryan Brackley
Suzanne Michelle Rosenthal, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stuart A. Rosenthal of New York, was married yesterday to Ryan Walter Brackley, a son of Albert and Pat Brackley of Belle Harbor, Queens.
The bride's uncle Louis R. Rosenthal, a former Kings County Criminal Court judge, performed the ceremony at the James Burden Mansion in New York.
Mrs.
Brackley, 25, is a second-year student at Brooklyn Law School, from which her husband received a law degree.
She graduated from Columbia University.
Her mother, Barbara L. Rosenthal, is the president of B. L. R. Computer Consultants in New City, N.Y.
Her father is an ophthalmologist in Garnerville and Nanuet, N.Y.


Watson Recalls His Chip Shot
Tom Watson remembered. So did golf's historians.
Lee Janzen's chip shot into the cup on the 16th hole today assured him of victory at the United States Open and brought back a memory of another chip shot in another Open, 11 years ago.


Perry Weiss, Jonathan Leviss
Perry Sondra Weiss, who plans to join the New York City Office of Management and Budget as a health-care budget analyst in August, and Jonathan Adam Leviss, a third-year medical student at New York University, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Donald Rosoff officiated at the Charles Hotel in Cambridge, Mass.
Mrs.
Leviss, 23, and her husband, 24, graduated from Tufts University, she magna cum laude, he cum laude.
The bride is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael S. Weiss of Sudbury, Mass.
Her father is the administrator of the department of medicine at the University of Massachusetts Medical Center in Worcester.


One Play To Haunt Barkley's Summer
Charles Barkley did not have his usual panache tonight.
His voice was barely audible, his eyes only made contact with the rug and he mentioned he might not be able to sleep until July.
He has time to play 72 holes of golf Monday, and he was sick about it.
He had preached, ever since his Phoenix Suns fell behind the Chicago Bulls two games to none, that basketball is "not life or death, it's just a job." But he was about to take his job home with him.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Addenda; Contest Is Next In Coffee Caper
Just when you thought every possible angle for exploiting the flirtatious Taster's Choice couple had been exhausted, the instant-coffee maker and its agency, McCann-Erickson New York, are sponsoring a consumer essay contest.
"What's brewing for our couple?" is the headline on newspaper advertisements from the Nestle Beverage Company explaining the competition; contestants are asked to submit essays of 250 words or less, describing what the next step in the serial advertising campaign should be.
Entries will be judged on creativity, romantic appeal, writing skill and, of course, flattering references to Taster's Choice.
A grand-prize winner will win a trip for two to Paris, scene of the seventh, and most recent, spot in the series.


Review/Television; Mandela Walks a Tightrope Between Reality and Hope
Nelson Mandela's visit last year to the West African countries of Ghana, the Ivory Coast and Senegal was an expression of the pan-African spirit he has championed throughout his long career.
But, as tonight's report on his trip, "The Last Mile: Mandela, Africa and Democracy," notes, the sort of democracy Mr.
Mandela says he favors has not been much in evidence on his continent.
Colorful ceremonies and entertainments are interspersed with fragments of an interview with Mr.
Mandela, who blames the repression and corruption in many African countries on colonial powers that did nothing to prepare people to govern themselves.
Yet he says repeatedly that he sees "a definite movement away from authoritarian views to multi-party government."


World Economies


METRO DIGEST
NEW AGE OF FUND RAISING FOR CATHOLICS
Brother Anthony Iazzetti's latest excursion into the world of raising money for his school in the north Bronx is far removed from the candy sales and raffles that have long been a staple of Roman Catholic fund-raising drives.
To be exact, it's 2,786 miles away in Los Angeles.
As the president of Mount Saint Michael Academy, he recently traveled to the West Coast to meet with a select handful of alumni who he hoped would become major contributors to the school's $6 million capital campaign.
Although such efforts are not unusual for private colleges or universities, a growing number of Catholic high schools, and some grammar schools, have had to turn to an array of aggressive and sophisticated fund-raising techniques.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  MEETING SCHEDULED IN WALKOUT
In an effort to end a staff walkout over safety concerns, social service officials are to meet with a union representing workers at a center that places homeless people in shelters.
The center, at 78 Catherine Street in lower Manhattan, has been closed since Friday when a caseworker was assaulted by a homeless woman.
The center usually serves about 75 families a day and is supposed to be open 24 hours a day.
B2.


Can We Make an Honest Man of the C.I.A.?
To the Editor:
Re "C.I.A. Funny Businesses" (editorial, June 8): Perhaps less well known than the case of Erwin Rautenberg is that of Robert Maxwell, a former bank officer.
In the mid-1980's, Mr.
Maxwell handled letters of credit at First National Bank of Maryland for a Central Intelligence Agency proprietary company.


Market Place; Sluggish European Sales Affect the Big 3 in Different Ways
UNFORTUNATELY for investors in American auto stocks, the budding automotive recovery in the United States has been undercut somewhat by a prostrate European market.
The General Motors Corporation and the Ford Motor Company depend heavily on earnings from Europe, while the Chrysler Corporation has little manufacturing there and minimal exports.
Not surprisingly, the stocks of G.M. and Ford have been penalized by the European market, while the strongly performing Chrysler shares have not.


Robin A. Shisler, Nolan D. Curtis
Robin Anne Shisler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Myron R. Shisler of Jenks, Okla., was married yesterday to Nolan David Curtis, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nolen D. Curtis of Niagara Falls, N.Y.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard, a Unitarian Universalist minister, officiated at the Belvedere Castle in Central Park.
Mrs.
Curtis, 39, is the director of contractual relations for the concert division of the Nederlander theater organization in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Buffalo.
Her father retired as the principal engineer for the Town of Cheektowaga, N.Y.


A Sourpuss Steps Down
Seth Greenberg had come to the courtroom of Judge Benjamin Wm.
Mehlman this morning to plead his case, and it was not going well.
Seems that on the evening of June 11, the village police, responding to a complaint that people were speaking loudly inside the house Mr.
Greenberg was renting at 535 Bayberry Walk, issued him a summons for "shouting and yelling."
And now, Judge Mehlman was uttering the words that had fallen so heavily on so many ears over the years in this wary seaside community on Fire Island known better for its bylaws than its beaches.
"I find you guilty," he said.


Bolivia's Rain Forest Falls to Relentless Exploiters
Almost daily here in Bolivia's dense Amazon jungle, above the sound of the rushing river, the squawking of macaws and the scolding of monkeys, the Mojeno Indians hear the buzz of chain saws slicing through six-foot-thick mahogany trees.
Heavy machinery growls as it cuts 15-foot-wide paths through the forest and drags the majestic logs to collection sites where trucks take them to sawmills.
"We see the trails of the cutters all the time, almost wherever we go in the forest," said Esekiel Justiniano.
He estimated that as many as 40 chain-saw gangs were cutting mahogany on the land given his tribe and three others by the Bolivian Government last year.
The loggers are licensed to cut mahogany trees, but not on the Indians' territory.


PatentsSome Scientists Are Cool to His Idea, But an Inventor Aims for a Breakthrough: a Heatless Transition
EVERY year or so, personal computers grow more powerful as manufacturers pack millions of additional transistors into each new integrated circuit.
But along with power, the extra transistors generate heat that has to be cooled by stronger fans.
More powerful computers, like mainframes and supercomputers, need to be kept in climate-controlled rooms.
Dr.
Raphael Tsu, a physicist at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte, received a patent this month for what could be breakthrough technology -- a transistor that generates no heat.
If it succeeds, it could eliminate cumbersome fans.
But the science behind it is so new that some computer specialists and other scientists are questioning whether it can work.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Clinton Administration wants businesses to report money they spend on services to the I.R.S. in an effort to help the Government track down tax cheats.
Business groups say it would be a waste of time.  [ Page A1. ]
A growing number of Catholic schools have turned to an array of aggressive and sophisticated fund-raising techniques.
Through a combination of cultivating alumni, writing proposals to corporations and foundations and marketing their institutions to prospective students and donors, they are fighting for survival in ways that were virtually unheard of a decade ago.  [ A1. ]


James Parsons, 81, A Black Trailblazer As a Federal Judge
James Benton Parsons, a Federal judge for the Northern District of Illinois since 1961, died Saturday in Chicago.
He was 81.
Judge Parsons died after a long illness, The Associated Press reported.


Mother Jones Tries to Reinvent Itself
Named after Mary Harris Jones, a militant union organizer and socialist who died in 1930 at the age of 100, Mother Jones magazine never had any doubts about its identity.
Since its start-up in 1976, in the wake of Vietnam and Watergate, Mother Jones has proudly called itself radical, muckraking and counterculture.
But what on earth is the role of an alternative magazine today?


Land Claim By Indians Is a Tactic In Casino Bid
Last November, when a tribe of fewer than 100 Indians filed a lawsuit staking a claim to the land that downtown Bridgeport stands on, many people laughed.
Given the city's financial problems, some people joked that the Indians should just take it, while others wondered in jest whether Indians hadn't suffered enough.
The laughter stopped this month when lawyers for the tribe, the Golden Hill Paugussetts, announced they were expanding their land claims to include four Bridgeport suburbs -- casting a cloud over $10 billion in Fairfield County real estate.
"I think we've gone from joke to nightmare," said Bernard Wishnia, the tribe's main lawyer.


Dividend Meetings


PART OF THE UFFIZI IS BEING REOPENED
Alberto Ronchey, Italy's Minister of Cultural Affairs, said it brought to mind a speech by Winston Churchill: never, he half-quoted, had so few done so much for so many as had the staff of the Uffizi gallery in getting the museum ready to reopen today.
In a similar vein, Timothy Sean Kindle, a 26-year-old American with a backpack, thought it was "just awesome" to stand before Botticelli's "Birth of Venus" and see "something timeless like that."


U.C.L.A. Presents 4 Medals at Graduation
The University of California at Los Angeles held its 74th commencement exercises last weekend, presenting its highest award, the U.C.L.A. medal, to Elizabeth Glaser, president of the Pediatric AIDS Foundation; the author Carlos Fuentes; the actor James Earl Jones, and Dr.
Donald J. Cram, winner of the 1987 Nobel Prize in chemistry.
Ms.
Glaser, Mr.
Fuentes and Dr.
Cram received their medals in ceremonies at the College of Letters and Sciences.
Mr.
Jones received his at the commencement for the School of Theater, Film and Television.


Review/Dance; Femme Fatale Romances Her Prey In an Unusual Balanchine Work
Kinky ballet or ultimate metaphor for the human condition?
"Variations Pour une Porte et un Soupir," which the New York City Ballet revived superbly on Friday night as part of the Balanchine Celebration, raises questions that it barely seeks to answer.
One of George Balanchine's most striking ballets, it is also among his strangest.
The scenery by Rouben Ter-Arutunian is the ballerina's costume.
When Maria Calegari steps forward toward Jeffrey Edwards, writhing on the floor before her at the New York State Theater, she wears a giant black cape that begins to billow behind her.
With relentless inevitability, the cloud of silk fills the stage, its changing shape controlled by the invisible stage hands who pull and release its five points of attachment.


Can We Make an Honest Man of the C.I.A.?
To the Editor:
"C.I.A. Funny Businesses" (editorial, June 8) shines light on dark places in discussing the plight of Erwin Rautenberg, owner of a Los Angeles air-freight company that first became a subsidiary of the Central Intelligence Agency and was later abandoned, leaving him holding the bag for huge debts.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Clannad  Beacon Theater
It is an amusing paradox that Clannad, an Irish folk band with a reputation for integrity, should have achieved its biggest success with a television commercial.


Chicago Scores Its Biggest 3 of the Season
The Chicago Bulls have done it -- again and again and again.
And by winning their third consecutive championship in dramatic fashion, they have established a place for themselves in basketball history.
With John Paxson making a game-winning 3-pointer and Horace Grant making a game-saving defensive play, the Bulls outlasted the Phoenix Suns, 99-98, in Game 6 of the National Basketball Association finals.


U.S. OPEN GOLF: Sports of The Times; 'Whatever You Want To Do'
AS they approached the 16th green at Baltusrol yesterday, Payne Stewart, his ball on the putting surface about 40 feet from the cup, looked over to where Lee Janzen was surveying his chip shot from the rough, about 30 feet from the hole.
"What would you like to do?" Stewart asked.


Tax Increases Considered By Republicans, Dole Says
Planning to offer an alternative to President Clinton's budget package when it comes before the Senate on Wednesday, Republican senators are considering a proposal that would include some tax increases, Senator Bob Dole, the Republican leader, said today.
Mr.
Dole suggested that he might support a package with some tax increases and sizable spending cuts as part of a broad effort to reduce the Federal budget deficit.
But he hastily added that he was only "speaking for myself," not as the party's leading elected spokesman.


Abroad at Home; The Price of Weakness
When I asked Cyrus Vance how he was feeling, I meant it as a telephone formality.
But his answer was about Bosnia.
"Sad," he said.
President Clinton had just signaled that he might accept a three-way partition of Bosnia, allowing Serbs to keep the fruits of their aggression.
In light of all that had happened, I asked, was that now the best that could be done?


Dance in Review
'In a Dark Time'  Compagnie Ljada The Kitchen
Once "In a Dark Time" got going, it had nowhere to go.


Douglas Lavin and Lisa Greenwald
Lisa Greenwald, a daughter of Beverly and Michael Greenwald of New York, was married yesterday to Douglas B. Lavin, a son of Carl and Dr.
Audrey Lavin of Canton, Ohio.
Rabbi Sue Ann Wasserman performed the ceremony at Columbia University's faculty house.
Ms.
Greenwald, 29, is keeping her name.
She is a doctoral candidate in European history at Emory University.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, from which she also received a master's degree in comparative women's history.


Clinton Reported to Have A Brother He Never Met
President Clinton has a half-brother he has apparently never met, The Washington Post reported today.
Birth records show that Mr.
Clinton's natural father, William Jefferson Blythe, who died several weeks before Mr.
Clinton's birth, was also the father of a son by another woman in the 1930's.


PULSE: Parks and Recreation
Attendance at state parks fell in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut last year, and parks officials blame an unusually rainy summer.
Nevertheless, New York's state parks attracted more than 59 million visitors in 1992.
And that, as Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, a former minor league ballplayer, likes to point out, was more people than attended all major league baseball games that season.
The previous year, visitors to New York's parks had set a record of more than 63 million.
Last year Niagara Falls surpassed Jones Beach as most popular of the Empire State's parks.
New York offers 260,000 acres of state parks, as well as more than 6 million acres of state forests in the Adirondacks and Catskills.
New Jersey's park system comprises 305,000 acres of state parks, forests, natural areas and historic sites, while Connecticut features roughly 173,000 acres of land in these categories.


The Yankee Organization Has an Organizer
Buck Showalter, the manager of the Yankees, sat at his desk one day last week, a good six hours before game time, juggling.
Juggling phone calls, lineup cards, coaches' inquiries, trying to track down elusive game film, line up scouts and make plans for a roster move necessitated by the return from the disabled list of Mike Witt, that evening's starting pitcher.


Apple Computer, Faltering, Strives to Refocus
Apple Computer's horizon is rich with crystalline visions of hand-held gadgets that are smart enough to read handwriting, machines that recognize speech, work stations with the power of supercomputers and boxes atop televisions that would transform the sets into computers.
But in the here and now, Apple suddenly seems to have lost its focus.
With sales from its future products at least months if not years away, the company has seen market share and profit margins shrink for its line of personal computers.
And the company, which in the hard times of the past had slashed its work force, might be on the verge of layoffs again.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Addenda; Boston Account Dropped by Mullen
Mullen Advertising, Wenham, Mass., has resigned the United States Trust Company account of the UST Corporation of Boston, citing a decline in advertising spending and changes in management at the bank.
Mullen had handled the account since 1979.


In Poll, Whitman and Florio Within 5 Points of Each Other
The first public opinion poll since the gubernatorial primary shows Gov.
Jim Florio with a five-point lead over his Republican rival, Christine Todd Whitman, and the outcome of the November election hinging on the nine percent of the electorate that is still undecided.
The poll, conducted by The Star-Ledger of Newark and the Eagleton Institute of Politics at Rutgers University, found that if the election were held now, Mr.
Florio would receive 48 percent of the vote and Mrs.
Whitman would receive 43 percent.


INSIDE
A Tribal Claim to Bridgeport
No one is laughing anymore at the claim by the Golden Hill Paugussetts Indians to Bridgeport and four of its suburbs, which has cast a cloud over $10 billion in real estate.
Page B1.
Abandoned Filipinos Sue U.S.
A $68 million lawsuit contends that the U.S. should educate and provide medical care for Amerasian children left behind when a U.S. naval base closed in the Philippines.
Page A3.
Part of Uffizi Reopens
One section of Italy's greatest repository of Renaissance art reopened, 24 days after a bomb that killed five caused havoc along the museum's western wing.
Page A9.


CLINTON AIDES SEE PROBLEM WITH VOW TO LIMIT WELFARE
Although President Clinton last week renewed his pledge to "end welfare as we know it," aides drafting his plan acknowledge that the effort could be expensive and might even force him to scale back action nationwide.
The centerpiece of Mr.
Clinton's plan is his pledge to impose a two-year limit on welfare benefits.
It was one of his most popular campaign themes and holds a special allure for the centrist and conservative legislators he is now courting, since it sounds like a tough-talking, economizing move.


Anna Kissin, James Freedman
Anna Kissin, the daughter of Dr.
Yury and Natalie Kissin of East Brunswick, N.J., was married yesterday to James Simon Freedman, the son of Jennifer and Edward Freedman of London.
Rabbi Ephraim Mirvis performed the ceremony at the Western Marble Arch Synagogue in London.
The bride is a marketing manager at the American Express Travel Related Services Company Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Yale University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a research associate with the Mobil Chemical Company in Edison, N.J.


No Relief, No Consolation for Saberhagen
The radar gun read 97.
The scoreboard read 2-1.
It seemed that straightforward for the Mets and Bret Saberhagen.
But this is the season spent in nonstop and out-of-control reverse.
Nothing is straightforward.
Nothing is simple.
And there just aren't any triumphs.
Tonight, in the latest of what the club almost nightly terms its worst defeat of the season, Saberhagen and John Franco undid all that had been so magnificently put together over eight innings.
The Pirates drove Saberhagen from the game in the ninth and then outwaited and outfought the club's closer to score a pair of runs and win, 3-2.
Green's Gamble
Saberhagen, who had humiliated the Pirates for eight innings, scorching the plate's corners and reducing a handful of Pittsburgh bats to shards of wood around the batter's box, took the mound to start the ninth.
It was his night.
It would, the Mets trusted, end with his majesty.


Columbia Ponders The Fate Of 'Hero'
A producer at Columbia Pictures didn't show up for work today because, he said, the atmosphere was just too poisonous.
At breakfast this morning at a Beverly Hills hotel, an agent glanced down at her shredded wheat and whispered, "There are a lot of depressed people at Columbia." By lunch time, the questions all over town were: Who's to blame?
Who's the fall guy?
Although it's far too early to call "Last Action Hero" a flop, Columbia's super-hyped, super-expensive Arnold Schwarzenegger adventure fantasy seemed, to most Hollywood executives, the summer's financial disappointment, grossing only $15.3 million in its first weekend.
In contrast, Steven Spielberg's dinosaur adventure, "Jurassic Park," grossed a record $50.1 million in its first weekend and $38.5 million this past weekend, its second.


Trenton Authorizes a $15.4 Billion Spending Plan
The Legislature today passed a $15.4 billion budget for fiscal year 1994 that includes a $150 million reserve fund that has become the focal point of election year debate.
The budget also includes $25 million in anticipated revenue from a retaliatory commuter tax on New Yorkers, which a decision today by the United States Supreme Court guaranteed can be legally collected.


Review/Fashion; Resort Wear That Can Lead a Double Life
The name changes from continent to continent as well as from company to company.
Europeans call it the cruise season, Americans prefer resort, and often add holiday as well.
But whatever the designation, it describes new clothes that will be arriving in the stores starting in October, after fall styles have been picked over and before spring designs have appeared.
Some are for party-going, some for playing and an increasing number can be worn to work.


WTD Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Auerbach on Mend From Heart Surgery
The Boston Celtics' president, RED AUERBACH, was progressing satisfactorily at Massachusetts General Hospital yesterday, three days after undergoing heart bypass surgery.


Are Gene-Altered Plants an Ecological Threat? Test Is Devised
GENETICALLY engineered crops may eventually bring about an agricultural revolution, but they continue to provoke spirited argument about their potential effects on natural ecosystems.
Environmentalists fear the transgenic plants could run rampant, crowding out wild plant species at a time when many are already threatened with extinction.
Some agricultural experts disagree, pointing out that crops have long been altered through classic breeding techniques with no such consequences.
But proving either case has been difficult.


Well, at Least He Didn't Spit
Knoxville Smokies Manager GARTH IORG and pitcher TRAVIS BAPTIST were ejected from a 3-2 Southern League loss to Chattanooga.
What was their sin?
Did they curse the umpires?
Kick dirt on the plate?
Chase a heckler in the stands?
None of the above.
Baptist was chewing tobacco in the dugout on Sunday.
Iorg was chased for not stopping him.


A Battle Between Cities May Scuttle Navy Base
With its tiny fleet of rusty shrimp boats, screeching sea gulls and wind-blown resort homes, this small community on the muddy tidal flats of the Texas coast seems an unlikely battlefield in the bureaucratic wars over shrinking dollars for the military.
But as a result of voting by the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission beginning this week, the brand-new $440 million Naval Station Ingleside nearby may be ordered closed, victim of a sophisticated lobbying campaign in a tug-of-war whose stakes are thousands of jobs.


Bridge
It was well known that Lee Hazen, who died early last year, was a superb card player.
But there is some evidence that his wife, Sylvia, who died early this month, was also a star, although she did not take part in tournaments.
She was the prototype of a character named Sylvia who appeared in many of the syndicated columns of the late B. J. Becker, and she always emerged as the heroine.
Luck often played a part, but on the diagramed deal, sitting West, she was operating on a sound principle: If the opponent obviously wants you to do something, do something else.


Boys and Girls Clubs' Celebrity TV Spot
The Boys and Girls Clubs of America and its agency, Lintas New York, are introducing a television campaign that features an unusual use of a celebrity spokesman.
In a touching 60-second commercial, the Academy Award-winning actor Denzel Washington is far more involved than the typical star lending his or her name to a cause.
As he recalls the positive impact that the club and its staff had on him during his childhood in Mount Vernon, N.Y., his flashbacks are intercut with the adult Mr.
Washington riding on a bus filled with children.
The spot ends as Billy Thomas, the former director of Mr.
Washington's club, boards the bus and glimpses his former charge grown up.


Political Memo; Shades of Perot: Parties Go For the Grass Roots
Sometimes loudly, sometimes quietly, Republicans and Democrats are grousing about Ross Perot at every turn.
But they are not reluctant to imitate him.
Six months after Mr.
Perot proclaimed the formation of his own grass-roots organization, the Republican Party announced today that it was doing the same thing, and that its group would use the same kind of public opinion surveys the Perot group does.
Not to be left out, the Democratic Party is establishing its own group that may even have a toll-free telephone number, a la Perot.


Cradle of Russian Revolution a Hotbed of Disgust
On any given day, the various strands of St.
Petersburg's myriad Communist, nationalist, even fascist movements come together by the wooden fence that surrounds an old merchants' emporium, Gostini Dvor, on Nevsky Prospekt in the heart of the old city.
There, young nationalists and aging Communists mingle peacefully beneath wall art that features handwritten quotes from Lenin or more current idols of the ultra-patriots, behind tables stacked with copies of Pravda, the old Communist Party daily, or newer publications like Russian Order, Russian Cause, To the Ax and Nationalist, each trying to outdo the others in proving that this or that member of President Boris N. Yeltsin's Government is Jewish, a paid agent of the C.I.A., or both.


Best and Worst of Times In Tale of 2 Crazy Eddies
DAVID M. LANE felt compelled to come to Room 5A in the Federal District Courthouse here for the trial of Eddie Antar, and for a glimpse into the lost world of Crazy Eddie Inc.
"I was drawn to come and lay eyes on him again," Mr. Lane said.
Mr.
Antar, as his lawyers seem doomed to repeat forever, is not Crazy Eddie.
That was a corporation, an idea, a persona that blasted its way under the skin of millions of residents of the New York region in the 1970's and 1980's through the arm-waving, eye-bulging television antics of the pitchman Jerry Carroll.
The consumer electronics chain, 42 stores at its peak, all clustered in and around New York City, crashed into bankruptcy in 1987, and finally liquidation in 1990.


Suns Begin Looking For the Missing Piece
Charles Barkley's summer vacation began with -- what else? -- a television commercial.
Literally 100 minutes after the Chicago Bulls had wiped their hands of the Phoenix Suns on Sunday night, Barkley parked himself in front of a rolling camera and said, "I'm still going to Disney World."
Then this morning, Jerry Colangelo's summer vacation began with -- what else? -- a scan of the free-agent list.
Perhaps only a stubborn rebounder or defender away from a National Basketball Association title, Colangelo, the Suns' chief executive officer, has all but guaranteed one key acquisition.
The Nets' Chris Dudley, an unrestricted free agent and a wall-banger at forward and center, seems to be a prime candidate.


Reviews/Jazz Festival; Making People Scream: Illinois Jacquet and Band
From his first hard-toned and heavy notes, rife with the blues and redolent of so much history, Illinois Jacquet had the audience.
Leading his big band at Damrosch Park on Sunday afternoon as part of the JVC Jazz Festival, Mr.
Jacquet opened his solo and the crowd, sun-baked and happy, let out a collective sigh.
For the rest of the concert, Mr.
Jacquet (pronounced jah-KETT) had people going.
His improvisations, completely assured rhythmically, made people scream.
His blues playing, direct and raw, had them standing.
And just the simple strength of his tone, coarse and authoritative, made everything he played seem declarative, as if he were preaching a sermon.


Greenville Journal; Where Moose Is Monarch of All Who Survey It
To get to Greenville (pop. 1,900), just follow Route 15 north, said the car rental agent at the airport in Bangor.
Handing over the keys and a map, he warned, "Watch out for large animals." It was dusk.
He meant moose.
Seventy-five miles down the road, in Monson, the cashier at Page's General Store said Greenville was 14 miles ahead.
"Watch out for moose," she said.
"They'll kill you if they come through your windshield."


'Jurassic Park' Won't Turn Kids Against Science; Not That Spock
To the Editor:
"Evil Science Runs Amok -- Again!" by Carol Muske Dukes (Op-Ed, June 10) decries the portrayal that science and its personnel have endured by the mass media.


Surgery for Blackman, Rivers
Two Knick guards underwent surgery last week, Rolando Blackman on Saturday for a herniated disk in his lower back and Doc Rivers a day earlier for torn ligaments in his right hand.
The Knicks are hoping Blackman will be ready when training camp opens in October and expect Rivers to be fit.
Blackman's surgery was more serious, particularly for a player 34 years old.
He played the entire season with a herniated disk and had his worst season, averaging 9.7 points during the regular season, and just 4.2 points during the playoffs.
But Dr.
Norman Scott, the Knicks' team physician, said there was reason to be optimistic that Blackman would return to form next season.


Material Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Lee Schaenen Is Dead; Opera Official Was 67
Lee Schaenen, a conductor who directed the Lyric Opera of Chicago Center for American Artists from 1974 to 1991, died on Thursday at his home in Sanibel, Fla.
He was 67 years old.
Danny Newman, the public relations director of the Lyric Opera, said the cause of death was cancer.


Norman Cohn, Builder In Chicago, Dies at 80
Norman Cohn, a Chicago builder and developer who was active in the fight against multiple sclerosis for many years, died last Tuesday at Highland Park Hospital in suburban Chicago.
A lifelong resident of Chicago, he was 80 years old.
He died after a long illness, his family said.


Gottschalks Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Sports of The Times; Two Months At Home With Jordan
IT feels like we've been guests in Michael Jordan's house for two solid months.
Watched him rise in the morning and go off to work.
Looked in his closets and under his rugs.
Shared his smile and made him scowl.
Marveled at his highs and psychoanalyzed his lows.
We spent so much quality time with Jordan that he often seemed like he just wanted to be left alone.
Three consecutive springs as host to the National Basketball Association playoffs might even make a reticent soul of Charles Barkley.
One spring has Barkley contemplating, however whimsically, quitting the game.


Review/Television; A Family Battles Incest's Taint, and the Dangers of a Lie
One for the My-How-Times-Change Department.
Back in 1984, "Something About Amelia," a television movie starring Ted Danson and Glenn Close, created a stir and drew hefty ratings as it very carefully explored what was then the explosive subject of incest.
Now, after Donahue, Oprah, Geraldo and other talk-show hosts have tramped through the same subject for years, incest is something of a television staple.
The latest example, a television-film import from Canada, can be seen tonight at 9 on Channel 2.
Written by Nancy Isaak and directed by Jorge Montesi, "Liar, Liar" begins as a portrait of the close-knit Farrow family whose only disruptive member appears to be an 11-year-old daughter named Kelley (Vanessa King).
A spirited girl, she has a reputation for exaggerating and making up stories.
Her dad, Gil (Art Hindle), an unemployed shipbuilder, swerves between disciplining Kelley harshly for various infractions and assuring her that she is, as his favorite song puts it, "my special angel."


HIGH COURT BACKS POLICY OF HALTING HAITIAN REFUGEES
The Supreme Court today upheld the Bush and Clinton Administrations' policy of intercepting fleeing Haitians at sea and returning them to Haiti without asylum hearings.
The 8-to-1 decision, written by Justice John Paul Stevens with a dissent by Justice Harry A. Blackmun, concluded that the policy was permitted under Federal immigration law and an international treaty to which the United States is a party.


Classical Music in Review
'L'Elisir d'Amore'  Metropolitan Opera in Prospect Park
Opera in the park is startling enough, but bel canto on a Brooklyn ball field: that's entertainment.
"L'Elisir d'Amore" is one of two concert productions that the Met is taking to various parks around the New York area; Beautiful Prospect Park was the host on Wednesday night.
The sun set over the darkening woods; candles glowed among picnic spreads; dogs pricked up their ears; policemen grumbled about missing the Suns-Bulls game; a nearby group of soccer-playing youths looked on in bewilderment ("What are they doing over there?").
Amid all this the first strains of Donizetti sounded a bit unreal, but the music seemed to stretch itself and fill the space.


Pope Endorses Bishops' Attempts To Rid Clergy of Child Molesters
In his first public statement on a problem that has shaken the Catholic Church in the United States, Pope John Paul II has told American bishops that he will help them use existing church law as far as possible to remove child molesters from the ranks of the priesthood.
In a letter released yesterday in Rome and Washington, the Pope told the bishops that he fully shared their sorrow and concern for the young victims "so seriously hurt by these misdeeds."  [ Excerpts, page A14. ]  And he said a committee of experts from the Vatican and the National Conference of Catholic Bishops would study how to apply church law, known as canon law, to the situation.
Shift in Attitudes
Six American cardinals recently traveled to Rome and asked the Pope directly for his help, several individuals familiar with the workings of the American church reported.
The cardinals, they said, acted en masse after previous visits to Vatican officials by Anthony Cardinal Bevilacqua of Philadelphia did not produce any sign that church law might be adjusted or streamlined so that American bishops could act more swiftly and decisively against molesting priests.


Royal Crown Names 5 Agencies
The Royal Crown Cola Company of Miami Beach has identified five New York agencies that it has been considering in a review for its account, which is estimated at $8 million to $10 million.


Blount Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


RESULTS PLUS
BOXING  Griman Stops Ioka and Retains Title  David Griman of Venezuela stopped Hiroki Ioka of Japan at 2 minutes 38 seconds of the eighth round yesterday to retain his World Boxing Association flyweight title.
Referee Manuel Rodriguez of Colombia stopped the scheduled 12-round bout, held in Osaka, Japan, when Griman forced Ioka to the ropes and punished him with a barrage of rights and lefts.
Griman, 26, was making his first defense of the title that he won from fellow Venezuelan Aquiles Guzman.
He improved to 18-1 with 11 knockouts.
Ioka, 24, dropped to 22-4-1.
Both fighters weighed the class limit of 112 pounds. (AP) SOCCER  U.S.
Women Get an Indoor Victory  Joy Fawcett's two first-half goals propelled the United States' women's soccer team to a 3-0 victory over Canada last night on the new grass field in the Silverdome in Pontiac, Mich.
This was the first women's international soccer game played on an indoor grass field.
The Silverdome is one of the venues for the 1994 World Cup, and the grass has been temporarily installed as a dry run for the Cup.
The United States women, the defending world champions, have won six straight games and are 7-3 for 1993.
It was their second victory over Canada in nine days, following a 7-0 rout in Cincinnati. (AP)


Uncovered Short Sales Set Records on Two Exchanges
The number of shares sold short and not yet covered rose to record levels on the New York Stock Exchange and American Stock Exchange in the latest monthly period, providing a signal of increased pessimism amid a rising market.
The Big Board said that the short position for trades surpassed one billion in the monthly period that ended on June 15.
The 1.04 billion shares sold short was 4.6 percent higher than in the previous month, and exceeded the record set in December by 3 percent.


Q&amp;A
A Cooling Fan
Q.  Do fans actually make a room cooler?
A.
They can, but their main influence on rendering a stifling room bearable is probably on the individual perspiring body in the room, said Dr.
David Goodstein, vice provost and professor of physics and applied physics at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena, Calif.


Mexican G.M. Jobs Shift to U.S.
The General Motors Corporation said today that it would move some of the production of its Chevrolet Cavalier subcompact car from Mexico to Lansing, Mich., next year.
The move will create up to 1,000 jobs at G.M.'s Lansing assembly complex that will be filled, at least partly, by laid-off workers.


Ftorek's Name Is Scratched In Devils' Coaching Derby
EAST RUTHERFORD, N.J., June 21
Lou Lamoriello, the president and general manager of the Devils, promised today that the team would name its new head coach sometime next week, following Saturday's amateur draft.
It will not be Robbie Ftorek, who was considered the front-runner for the job vacated by the departure of Herb Brooks three weeks ago.
Ftorek will remain coach of the Devils' top affiliate at Albany because Lamoriello believes he is the ideal person to develop the young players in the Devils' system.


Continental Homes Holding Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Times Co. to Buy Its Shares, Spending Up to $100 Million
The New York Times Company, its stock price sinking since it agreed to buy The Boston Globe, said yesterday that it would spend as much as $100 million to repurchase its shares.
Executives of the Times Company said the stock had fallen to a level that made a buyback an attractive investment.
"We believe that the company's current stock price does not reflect the underlying value of the company's assets or of its earnings," Lance R. Primis, the company's president, said in a statement.


It's Paint and Rollers Before Belly Flops and Underwater Adventures


Topics of The Times; Early Autumn
Yesterday was the official start of summer.
But for millions of Americans who shop by catalogue, there's already a nip of autumn in the mail.
Never mind the beach weather, the long hours of daylight or that the Fourth of July is still two weeks away.
A number of leading mail-order companies have begun sending out the first of their fall catalogues.


Editors' Note
A brief article by Bloomberg Business News in Business Day on June 8 about the Worthen Banking Corporation of Little Rock, Ark., reported that the company made $59.5 million in loans to its principal shareholders, officers and directors in 1992.
The article also noted in the first sentence that Worthen was under investigation by the Federal Reserve for possible violations of banking law.
In fairness, the article should not have linked the investigation to the loans.


Trainees for Youth Service Corps Start With a 'Boot Camp'


If He Runs, D'Amato Has His Platform
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato said today that he would decide this fall whether to run for governor next year.
But he told a luncheon meeting here that if he were elected, he would sell the World Trade Center, the New York City airports and the state's Offtrack Betting system.
He also said he would support the death penalty and require able-bodied welfare recipients to accept public-service jobs.


Albany, Not City Hall, Holds Purse Strings for Transit Upgrade
To the Editor:
"Find Money for the M.T.A." (editorial, June 12) faults the New York City administration for not bearing its share of the cost of improvements on subways and buses.


Isolation and Internal Unrest Trouble Iran
When Interior Minister Abdollah Nouri, seated in an ornate room with lacy curtains and a panoramic view of Teheran, was asked a few days ago about the killings of Iranian dissidents abroad, he condemned the dead rather than the living.
"How many terrorist activities and explosions inside Iran have these people confessed to?" the Minister asked, referring to such opposition leaders as Mohammed Hussein Nagdi, a former Ambassador to Italy, who was gunned down in Rome.


U.S. Investigates Pact on Bond Trade Prices
The Justice Department is investigating trading practices in the Treasury securities market to see if a 1991 agreement among major securities firms that they would trade bonds among themselves in increments no smaller than 1/64 of a point is an unfair restraint of trade.
The Public Securities Association, a trade organization representing Treasury dealers and the brokers they use to trade with each other, yesterday confirmed the Justice Department investigation.


Classical Music in Review
New Jersey Symphony  Carnegie Hall
A positive side to America's musical establishment is the relative absence of chauvinism in its ranks.
While the hiring of an American soprano at the English National Opera continues to provoke patriotic wrath from high musical places in Britain, the Leonard Bernstein American Conductors Program seemed happy to put two young foreign-born conductors in front of the New Jersey Symphony on Thursday night.
Fabio Mechetti from Brazil conducted "Medea's Meditation and Dance of Vengeance," by Barber, and excerpts from Prokofiev's "Romeo and Juliet." Alasdair Neale, a transplanted Briton, led the Ravel "Rapsodie Espagnole" and "Till Eulenspiegel's Merry Pranks," by Richard Strauss.


No Headline
"There aren't many places in the world where you can find cheap labor, a skilled work force and a good location. We can take advantage of all that here." -- VOLKHARD KOHLER, an executive at a Czech automobile plant.  [ D6:1. ]


The Unknown Devil
The temporary hold on health-care change has been greeted with relief by many health-care professionals who prefer the devil they know to the one they don't.
More surprising, perhaps, is that the postponement is also generating relief among some economists who worry that reform would take too big a slice out of the economy at a time when it could ill afford it.
Whatever form the final proposal takes, a fresh start on the way care is delivered and financed is bound to set off wrenching structural changes and job cuts in an economy already reeling from industrial retrenchment.
And it is likely to slow the development of technology that generates billions of dollars in exports.


Gencor Industries reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Gooden Sits, Young Starts
Dwight Gooden, after complaining of stiffness in his right shoulder, will be held out of his scheduled start against the Montreal Expos tonight at Shea Stadium.
He will be replaced by Anthony Young, which will give that right-hander a head start on what might be history as he attempts to end his streak of 22 straight decisions without a victory.
Gooden, who was rocked for six runs in three innings last Thursday night in Pittsburgh, was examined by Dr.
David Dines yesterday.
The discomfort was officially termed minor, a designation that has come to mean increasingly little over the years with the Mets.
Gooden will be examined again today.


Meridian National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Review/Theater; 'Camelot' Returns With Goulet as King
As the first Broadway musical by Alan Jay Lerner and Frederick Loewe after "My Fair Lady," "Camelot" was as highly anticipated as a coronation.
At the time, the advance sale was the largest in Broadway history.
The 1960 musical, which turned out to be the last Lerner and Loewe theatrical collaboration, has grown in stature over the years, primarily because of its superb score.
Drawing upon themes from T. H. White's "Once and Future King," the score combined a lyrical simplicity with a lush romanticism, beautifully captured in numbers like "I Loved You Once in Silence" and "If Ever I Would Leave You." These ballads sung by Guenevere and Lancelot are among the most memorable in the Lerner-Loewe catalogue.
King Arthur supplies the wit, with songs like "I Wonder What the King Is Doing Tonight." Subsequently, the title song joined Arthurian legend with American political mythology.


Alan J. Gould, 95, Editor and Innovator At Associated Press
Alan J. Gould, who retired as executive editor of The Associated Press in 1963 after 41 years with the news service, died yesterday at Indian River Memorial Hospital in Vero Beach, Fla., where he was living in retirement.
A Florida resident since 1975, he was 95.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


For Some Scientists, Less Money Is Just as Good
For the first time in modern memory, leaders in science have suggested that science does not need an increase in Federal funds to keep the United States ahead in the world's quest for knowledge.
They even suggest that some fields might need to take less money to allow others to expand.
A committee of the National Academy of Sciences, the Institute of Medicine and the National Academy of Engineeringreleased a report today saying it is time for scientists to give ratings to the nation's progress in various fields of science, with an eye to determining just how much money society should spend on science, and in which fields.


Let Sleeping Subs Lie
To the Editor:
"Apathy Above, Terror Below" by Igor Spassky (Op-Ed, June 3) is sensationalizing and wrong to argue for raising the submarine Komsomolets.


I.O.C. Plans Arbitration Procedures for Athletes
The International Olympic Committee moved closer yesterday to setting up an arbitration system to keep disgruntled athletes from filing lawsuits and took the first steps toward getting federations to standardize penalties on athletes who use banned substances.
In a joint meeting in Lausanne, Switzerland, the I.O.C. executive board and the council of the Association of Summer Olympic International Federations recommended uniform penalties and rules governing use of performance-enhancing drugs.
Federations would risk being kicked out of Olympic competition unless they agreed to comply -- assuming they are able to agree on such things as testing procedures and penalties in the first place.


Washington at Work; Long-Running Culture War Opens New Front: an Arts Nomination
It rarely rises to the prominence of the great struggles over taxes or abortion, but the culture war continues along the border of academia and politics.
It is bitter, long-running and intense, and Sheldon Hackney has found himself in the thick of it.
Mr.
Hackney, the president of the University of Pennsylvania, was nominated by President Clinton last week to be chairman of the National Endowment for the Humanities.
On paper, his confirmation would seem routine, even preordained: A career marked by steady advancement in higher education; important and vocal friends from Mike Wallace, the journalist, to C. Vann Woodward, the historian; and intriguing Southern roots.
His in-laws, Virginia and Clifford Durr, were renowned Alabama liberals who helped bail out Rosa Parks.
His wife, Lucy Durr Hackney, is a children's advocate and a friend of Hillary Rodham Clinton.


Foreign Press Can Beat Japanese System
To the Editor:
"Japan Opens Door Wider to the Foreign Press" (news article, June 11) reports that Japan's newspaper editors will allow foreign journalists to join the exclusive press clubs, which control access to Government briefings.
This is welcome news.


Corrections
A chart grouping in Business Day yesterday with an article about Apple Computer Inc. included an erroneous label for two pie charts.
The charts, showing market share percentages for personal computer sales by Apple, Compaq Computer and International Business Machines, were for only one month apiece -- April 1992 and April 1993 -- and not the first four months of each year.


AMC Entertainment Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 1


Books of The Times; The Trade in Spies: Not All Black or White
Spy Trader  Germany's Devil's Advocate and the Darkest Secrets of the Cold War  By Craig R. Whitney  Illustrated. 375 pages.
Times Books. $25.
The cold war gave the world not just heroes and villains, but also a gray supporting cast of spies, middlemen and mercenaries who lived and operated in the shadows.
Of these, few are as intriguing as Wolfgang Vogel, the mysterious East German lawyer who, during the three decades the Berlin wall stood, quietly brokered the clandestine exchange of spies and the ransom of some 30,000 political prisoners from East Germany and the Soviet bloc.
This unsavory business netted the Communists billions of dollars and made Mr.
Vogel one of the richest and most influential private citizens behind what was once called the Iron Curtain.


Service for Walter Wood
A memorial service for Walter A. Wood, explorer and geographer, will be held at 11 A.M. on Thursday at St.
James Episcopal Church, 865 Madison Avenue at 71st Street.
Dr.
Wood, past president of the American Geographical Society and the Explorers Club, died on May 18 at a hospital in West Palm Beach, Fla., at the age of 85.


Denials on a Sale Of Chiat/Day
An Omnicom Group spokesman yesterday dismissed reports that the agency holding company was a leading candidate to acquire Chiat/Day Inc. as "pure speculation."
Lou Tripodi, the Omnicom spokesman in New York, played down the reports this week in trade publications that Bruce Crawford, Omnicom's president and chief executive, was eagerly pursuing Chiat/Day.
"Bruce talks to everybody," he said.


Clinton's Lost Half-Brother? To Neighbors, He's Just Leon
The sound of an incessantly ringing telephone inside Henry Leon Ritzenthaler's empty house pierced the afternoon stillness today in the piney woods here in the foothills of the Sierra Nevada.
Mr.
Ritzenthaler, known around here as Leon, says he is President Clinton's half-brother, and today he was on his way to New York City and the circuit of national television appearances that are the automatic badge of celebrity these days.


Japan's Governing Party Splinters Again as 10 Legislators Leave
Japan's governing Liberal Democratic Party continued to splinter today, as a group of 10 young legislators broke off to form yet another new party that further reduces the chances that Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa's Government will be able to hold onto power.
The defection would in ordinary times pose little threat to the Liberal Democrats.
But another 35 to 40 party members, who led the rebellion that forced a no-confidence vote against Mr.
Miyazawa through Parliament on Friday, is expected to announce later this week that it is also forming a rival party.
Those defections mean that the Liberal Democrats have lost their majority in the powerful lower house of Parliament, and to retain power would have to defeat the splinter groups in next month's election.


James Beecher Stuart, Kinney Shoe Head, 83
James Beecher Stuart, former president of the Kinney Shoe Corporation and a director of the F. W. Woolworth Company, died on Saturday at the Medical Center of Princeton.
He was 83 and lived in Hightstown, N.J., after being a longtime resident of Short Hills, N.J.
The cause was heart failure, said a spokeswoman for the Glackin/Saul Funeral Home in Hightstown.


Patriots' Running Back Out of Hospital
New England Patriots running back LEONARD RUSSELL was released from Massachusetts General Hospital, three days after he was hospitalized with stab wounds in the chest.
Russell, 23, was stabbed early Friday after getting into an argument outside a nightclub.
The police said yesterday they have identified a suspect but still haven't made any arrests.


Casinos' Unkept Promise Turns 15; Atlantic City Wants to Stop Being Gambling's Bad Example
With casinos spreading across the country like stacks of chips at a hot roulette table, two things are clear as this aging resort celebrates the 15th anniversary of legal gambling here.
First, Atlantic City has demonstrated the money to be made in casinos and other games of chance.


Bonilla Rediscovers Sweet Swing Amid Pain of a Lost Season
Evidently, for the Mets to win a game, Bobby Bonilla must make it his own.
Bonilla is turning on everything at the plate.
Almost always these days, it is with purpose.
Absolutely always, it is with power.
Bonilla, who can drive in runs even when he swings off balance, found his sweetest rhythm in the fifth inning last night at Shea Stadium.
The switch-hitter's two-run homer into the loge seats in left lifted the Mets to an 8-3 victory over the Montreal Expos.
The homer, Bonilla's 18th of the season, accounted for his third and fourth runs batted in on the night and ended the club's losing streak at six.


U.S. MAY LET HANOI GET I.M.F. FUNDING
President Clinton's senior foreign policy advisers have concluded that the Administration should no longer attempt to block loans to Hanoi from the International Monetary Fund, senior Administration officials said tonight.
The recommendation could presage an easing of the relationship between the United States and Vietnam.
In a meeting last week, members of the National Security Council decided to recommend to the President that the United States raise no objections to a plan by France and Japan to pay more than $140 million in arrears that Hanoi owes to the fund.
Such an action would free the monetary fund to approve new lending to Vietnam during its next board meeting in July.


McHale to Work for Wolves On, Off Court
Retired Boston Celtics star KEVIN McHALE will return to Minnesota to work with the Timberwolves and add commentary to game broadcasts.


CHRONICLE
There is some pretty impressive artwork hanging on the walls in United States embassies abroad, and now in the residence of MADELEINE K. ALBRIGHT, American delegate to the United Nations, at the Waldorf Towers as well.
Tonight she's giving a party at her official residence there to celebrate the Friends of Art and Preservation in Embassies foundation and the 21 artists whose works have been donated to a new collection for her walls.
They include Willem De Kooning, Jasper Johns, Ellsworth Kelly, Roy Lichtenstein, Claes Oldenburg and Frank Stella.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield officials acknowledged they paid claims without any attempt to determine whether they had already been paid or were fraudulent.  [ A1. ]
General Motors will move some production of Chevrolet Cavaliers from Mexico to Michigan next year, creating up to 1,000 jobs that will be filled partly by laid-off workers.  [ D1. ]


INSIDE
10 More Quit Japan's Party
Members of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party formed another new party, further weakening the Government of Kiichi Miyazawa.
Page A6.
Costly Delays on Health Care
Most economists agree that delaying curbs on escalating medical costs will be even more expensive than the Clinton health-care plan.
Page D1.
Easing Stand on Aid to Hanoi
Aides to President Clinton are urging him to end his opposition to plan to bring Vietnam back into the International Monetary Fund.
Page A9.
China's Controversial Dam
It will create a lake 350 miles long and save millions from flooding.
Or it may simply create the world's largest mud pie.
Science Times, page C1.
Studio's Jitters Over 'Hero'
"Last Action Hero" took in a relatively low $15.3 million its first weekend, and Columbia Pictures executives are on the spot.
Page C13.


Nike Stock Off on Lower Growth Outlook
Shares in Nike Inc. took a beating today after the athletic shoe manufacturer's disclosure late Friday that it expects 1994 fiscal year earnings to be well below Wall Street estimates.
Nike's shares fell $4.125 today to close at $57.875 on the New York Stock Exchange.
Nike made its announcement late Friday after the stock market close.
In after-hours trading on Friday, the stock plunged $5, to $62.


Tuscarora Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Gore's View On Biotech
Vice President Al Gore met here today with a dozen executives from the biotechnology industry to reassure them of the Administration's commitment to protect United States leadership in what he called "a vitally important American-dominated industry."
Speaking to executives from Genentech Inc., Chiron Inc. and other companies, the Vice President said: "We will offer a comprehensive health-care reform plan that preserves the free-market incentives essential to continued American leadership in biotechnology. It is the biotechnology industry that holds the greatest promise for finding effective treatment and cures for the world's most dreaded diseases."


Scrutiny Isn't Half Of What Borking Is
To the Editor:
Among the terms In "Eponymy on the Potomac" (column, June 15), Russell Baker defines "to Bork," verb, as the "act of scrutinizing to death a nominee for high public office" after Robert Bork, "whose record was examined so minutely by the Senate Judiciary Committee that the rest of the Senate, assuming there must be something wrong with anyone who needed that much scrutiny, refused to confirm him."
We all know words change their meaning over time, but please, Mr. Baker, not that fast!


In Search of a Safer Land


James Parsons, 81, A Black Trailblazer As a Federal Judge
James Benton Parsons, a Federal judge for the Northern District of Illinois since 1961, died on Saturday in Chicago.
He was 81.
Judge Parsons died after a long illness, The Associated Press reported.


On My Mind; Clinton, Iraq And Iran
In the winter and spring of 1993, the Clinton Administration quietly worked out an important new policy toward the two countries that could involve the United States again in Mideastern war.
Since Europe was busy boxing Mr.
Clinton's ears about not taking over its job on Bosnia, and the American press and public were out getting a haircut, the Administration managed to squeeze in some useful thinking on Iran and Iraq without being belabored for it.


U.S. GIVES MEXICO ABDUCTION PLEDGE
The Clinton Administration has promised Mexico that it will not engage in any cross-border kidnapping of Mexican citizens while an agreement between the two countries banning the practice is being negotiated, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said today.
At a news conference with Fernando Solana Morales, Mexico's Secretary of Foreign Relations, Mr.
Christopher said the two countries had begun negotiations on the issue.


Civil War Uniform Factory Goes Up in Smoke


Topics of The Times; Birds With Attitude
They first noticed something amiss when a bird whizzed by their heads about three weeks ago, so close it nearly touched them.
Now every time they venture onto their Manhattan rooftop, they're dive-bombed.
It's gotten so bad that when a neighbor goes out onto his terrace one floor below, he's attacked too.
The birds are aggressively defending their space, not to mention the next generation.
They've built a nest, and turned the rooftop into forbidden territory, making it impossible to tend the plants, pick the few struggling roses, enjoy the water-tower view.
They've even intimidated the cat, an old, deaf calico that just wants to stretch in the sun.


Werner Enterprises (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


It's a Nanometer in Diameter, and Now It Can Be Made in Bulk
JAPANESE and American research teams have discovered two different ways to make bulk quantities of carbon "nanotubes," microscopic tubes with walls whose standard thickness is only a single atom.
The techniques may herald major advances in ultrastrong materials, microscopic electronic circuits and many other technologies.
Since nanotubes can now be produced by the pound, these peculiar carbon structures will be available for the first time for experiments by legions of chemists, physicists, materials scientists and engineers.


CUNY Overhaul Assailed
A plan to overhaul academic programs throughout the City University of New York was denounced yesterday by dozens of faculty members, students, artists and intellectuals as an effort to destroy the university's attempts to provide a broad-based education for poor students.
The criticism was made at a public hearing of the university's board at the Hunter College School of Social Work.


Make Room at Top: Janzen Doesn't Figure to Tail Off
For all the richness of the Baltusrol Golf Club's storied past, its seventh United States Open filled the golf horizon with thoughts of the future.
That was because the winner, Lee Janzen, showed the kind of poise, ability and mettle that seems built to last.
Although there is nothing about his game or personality that is outwardly spectacular, the performance of the 28-year-old who makes his home in Kissimmee, Fla., left a strong impression that he is an Open champion who won't fade away.


Clarcor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 29


Brendle's Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Dinosaurs' Doom Tied To Several Impacts
A NEW report suggests that the celestial body that may have wiped out dinosaurs 65 million years ago was not a single mass but a swarm of separate objects.
The suggestion comes even as some 20 large cometary fragments rush through space toward a predicted collision with Jupiter next year, seeming to give the new report a cosmic boost.
The idea that a doomsday rock did in the dinosaurs was first proposed in 1980 by Dr.
Walter Alvarez, a geologist at the University of California at Berkeley.
He and his colleagues had found unusually large amounts of the rare metal iridium in sediments laid down about the time the dinosaurs died out, at the end of the Cretaceous period.
They proposed that the iridium came from a cosmic catastrophe.


Mixed Diagnosis
Health-care stocks, once eagerly sought, are drawing mixed reviews these days because of uncertainty over the final form of President Clinton's health-care program.
The Standard &amp; Poor's health-care index of seven industry issues is down 15 percent from the end of 1992 but off its low of 300.24 in February.


Dateline, Toronto: A Big Moment for Key, A Big Test for Yanks
The image that most baseball fans have of Jimmy Key occurred last October when he ambled off the mound at the Skydome in Toronto, raised his cap to the fans and looked as if he might cry.
Key had just pitched wondrously against Atlanta in Game 4 of the World Series and departed with a 2-1 lead in the eighth inning.
Why so emotional?
The usually placid Key was emotional that night because he knew the inevitable was chasing him.
The Blue Jays won Game 4 and then captured the Series in Atlanta in Game 6 as Key notched another victory, this time in relief.
But Key enjoyed the thrill of Toronto's first World Series title for only a few weeks before he was searching for a new employer as a free agent.
The Uniform Now Says Yanks
On the walk to the dugout eight months ago, Key probably sensed that he had pitched his final game in Toronto.
Nine years of baseball memories in the same city were condensed into seconds.
His eyes turned glassy.
He has not returned there since.


In a Czech Plant, VW Shows How to Succeed in the East
As Western companies spend less time searching Eastern Europe for new deals and more time scrambling to make existing investments pan out, Volkswagen A.G.'s acquisition of the Skoda automobile plant here suggests that with a clear strategy, attention to detail and some political support, the region can be profitable for the determined.
With high-profile investments like the General Electric Company's acquisition of Tungsram, the Hungarian light-bulb maker, and Phibro Energy's involvement in the Russian oil industry floundering, Volkswagen after two years is already turning a modest operating profit building Skoda cars.
Gains From Cheap Labor
The German auto maker's plans to invest nearly $5 billion in Skoda by the end of the decade make the deal the largest firm corporate commitment in the former Soviet bloc.
VW is capitalizing on low labor costs to build low-priced cars not just for the Czech Republic but for export to Germany, Britain, Greece, Turkey and other nations.


12 Indicted on Charges of Smuggling Aliens
The captain and the 10-member crew of the Golden Venture, the ship that ran aground off Queens two weeks ago with nearly 300 illegal Chinese immigrants aboard, were indicted yesterday on conspiracy and smuggling charges.
A 12th man who the authorities said acted as an enforcer for the organizers of the ill-fated voyage was also charged with trying to sneak the would-be immigrants into the United States, according to the indictment brought by Zachary W. Carter, United States Attorney in Brooklyn.


Betty Carter and Gerry Mulligan in a Retrospective Mood
The jazz world has recently lost so many musical giants that the JVC Jazz Festival's opening-night concert at Carnegie Hall on Friday had an inevitably elegiac flavor.
After a jocular Bill Cosby introduced the concert's two stars, Betty Carter and Gerry Mulligan, the mood quickly turned soberly retrospective.
Ms.
Carter opened her set with a probing rendition of "You're Mine, You," an eerie proclamation of sexual possessiveness offered in tribute to Sarah Vaughan, who once recorded it.
Mr.
Mulligan and his group played individual compositions in memory of Miles Davis, Dizzy Gillespie, Stan Getz and Zoot Sims.
"It's kind of hard to realize we did the first summer festival at Newport 40 years ago," Mr.
Mulligan, who is 66, observed wistfully near the end of his set.
"I was the new kid on the block."


Empire Blue Cross Says It Paid Claims Without Checking Them
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield routinely paid claims from doctors, hospitals and pharmacies without any attempt to determine whether the claims had already been paid or might be fraudulent, company officials acknowledged yesterday.
The officials decided that it was cheaper simply to pay the claims than to program their computers to check them.
A memorandum, prepared in February by the head of internal audits for Empire, made an urgent appeal to change and upgrade the computer system.
Empire provided the memorandum yesterday in response to a request from The New York Times.


Commuter Tax Is Left Intact By High Court
New York State's method of taxing nonresidents, which has prompted protests from commuters from neighboring states, was allowed to stand yesterday by the United States Supreme Court.
Hours after the Court declined to hear a challenge to New York's tax method, the New Jersey Senate approved a bill that would impose the same tax technique on workers who commute to jobs in that state from elsewhere.
Some Senate members said that they were explicitly retaliating against New York.  [ Page B5. ]


Executive Changes
BOWATER INC., Darien, Conn., appointed Robert C. Lancaster senior vice president and chief financial officer.
CONAGRA DIVERSIFIED PRODUCTS COS., Edina, Minn., a unit of Conagra Inc., named James Watkins president and chief operating officer.


New York City School Board Selects 10 Finalists in Search for Chancellor
The top 10 candidates to succeed New York City Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez are the current school superintendents in Detroit, San Francisco, Washington and Fairfax County, Va.; two senior aides to Mr.
Fernandez; New York's deputy education commissioner; Connecticut's former Education Commissioner; a foundation director, and the chief executive of a California software company.
The list of finalists, whose names were provided by several members of the New York City Board of Education, is made up of five blacks, three Hispanic people and two whites.


Join New Talks, Europeans Urge Bosnia
Rejecting new appeals from President Clinton and the Bosnian Government for a lifting of the international arms embargo on its forces, European Community governments today urged Bosnia's Muslim President, Alija Izetbegovic, to join new peace negotiations with Serbia and Croatia in Geneva this week.
The European governments insisted that they remained committed to preservation of a single state in Bosnia and Herzegovina and that they would not press the Bosnian Muslims into accepting a peace settlement of which they disapproved.
But Mr.
Izetbegovic was left in little doubt that the community has abandoned the so-called Vance-Owen peace plan and now considers the Serbian-Croatian plan that calls for the partition of Bosnia as the focus of future negotiations.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article about a renewal of fighting in Bosnia and Herzegovina was omitted from some copies yesterday, and an outdated article, from the previous day, appeared under its headline.
Readers wishing copies of the correct article, carrying the dateline "June 20," may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Money Manager's 'Reality Check'
Robert A. G. Monks, the shareholder activist who shook up the Eastman Kodak Company and Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, is finding that the public pension funds he led into battle are now forsaking him in his new role as a money manager.
Nearly two years ago, Mr.
Monks decided that investors could make money from shareholder activism -- the belief that aggressive shareholders can unlock hidden corporate values.
So he started a fund named the Lens Fund to test that concept, hoping to raise around $400 million to buy stakes in troubled companies in which management changes could be sought -- and a company's stock price increased. 'Relationship Investing'
The concept gained the moniker "relationship investing," and Mr.
Monks flew around the country calling on more than 60 pension funds to put their money where his mouth was.
But so far, he has not raised a dime.
And in a stunning blow, his closest ally in many of his celebrated corporate battles, the California Public Employees Retirement System, an investment behemoth with more than $70 billion in assets, turned Mr.
Monks down just last week.


Rights Groups Fault Decision, As Do Haitians
Calling the ruling "shameful" and "abhorrent," human rights advocates and Haitians living here responded with consternation today to the Supreme Court's endorsement of the Clinton Administration's policy of forcing Haitian refugees intercepted in international waters to return to their homeland.
"This is a crime," said Max Pierre, an electronics engineer who came to Miami from Haiti as an illegal immigrant but is now an American citizen.
"How can you send people back to a place where whole families are being killed and there is no justice? This goes against the democratic spirit of the American people."


Reining In School Custodians
For too long, New York City school custodians have wielded power and privilege far out of proportion to their numbers -- and beyond the scope of any sensible labor-management pact.
Now the State Assembly has tried to cut them down to size.
The Senate needs to follow suit.
Custodians function as both city employees and independent contractors.
Each of the 900 custodians administers an annual allowance, based on the size of the school, for supplies, equipment and salaries for the custodial staff.


10 Years of Service Observed


The Atlanta Olympics Remake a Mascot, the Better to Sell the Games.
WHEN Whatizit, a mysterious character resembling a blue amoeba with bulging eyes and purple sneakers, was introduced last year as the smiling mascot of the 1996 Summer Olympics in Atlanta, the reaction was swift and biting.
Many shocked sports marketers wondered what Whatizit was and could find no connection between the computer-generated oddity and Atlanta.
Whatizit seemed an unworthy successor to Cobi, the simply drawn, popular, chubby canine mascot of the 1992 Summer Olympics in Barcelona, Spain.


National Health Labs To Buy Rival
In a significant consolidation of the blood-testing industry, National Health Laboratories Inc. said today that it had agreed to acquire the Damon Corporation in a transaction valued at $260 million in cash and stock.
The merger would make National Health, based in La Jolla, Calif., the nation's second-largest diagnostic testing company, with $1.2 billion in annual revenues, industry analysts said.
SmithKline Beecham is the country's largest provider of such testing, with $1.5 billion in revenues.


Observer; It's A Pandemic
Mr.
W.C.T. of Otisville, N.Y., has a grievance against "names." They don't answer his letters.
He has sent me a letter complaining about it.
What Mr.
W.C.T. means by "names" is that small group of Americans who do all the talking, or writing, or performing, or bossing.
Then there are "ordinary" people, meaning people who get the epistolary cold shoulder from the "names." Or as Mr.
W.C.T. puts it:


Earl Sarkis Dulgarian; Bookseller, 70
Earl Sarkis Dulgarian, the owner of an off-campus bookstore and a movie theater, both catering to students and faculty of Brown University, died Thursday at his home in Cranston, R.I.
He was 70 years old.
The cause was lung cancer, his family said.


Car Bombs Kill 7 and Injure 20 in Madrid


BF Realty Holdings Ltd. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Tottenville Runner A True Iron Horse
Peter Westbrook, a five-time Olympic fencer, will be the guest speaker at the Public Schools Athletic League Iron Horse Awards dinner tonight at the Downtown Athletic Club.
Kevin Jermyn of Tottenville High School on Staten Island, the Iron Horse winner in all three track categories (indoor, outdoor and cross- country), will be among the 14 top senior male athletes in 16 sports at regular four-year schools honored.


Dinkins and Giuliani Go to Legislature
Mayor David N. Dinkins and his Republican opponent, Rudolph W. Giuliani, brought their mayoral campaigns to Albany today, shadowing each other through the State Capitol as they lobbied legislators to maintain existing rent regulations on New York City apartments.
Legislators, legislative aides and lobbyists said that Mr.
Giuliani, by making his own trip here, was acknowledging that the issue could play badly for him if the State Senate, which is controlled by his party, insists on weakening protections for an estimated two million tenants.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Ervin Staub; Studying the Pivotal Role of Bystanders
IT was the summer of 1944, and 6-year-old Ervin Staub and his family, like other Jews in Budapest, were being set apart from their neighbors by laws imposed by the Nazis.
Food was strictly rationed, and Ervin's 13-year-old cousin Eva, desperate to get a loaf of bread for her family, was waiting in a long bakery line after the curfew for Jews and without the yellow Star of David she was supposed to wear.
"Someone pointed her out as a Jew, and three young thugs tried to take her away," said Dr.
Staub, now a psychologist at the University of Massachusetts, who vividly recalls the incident.
"But she ran into our house to hide, and my aunt yelled at the thugs with such defiance that she scared them away."


French-Fry War: Israel vs. McDonald's
Here in Israel's potato-growing country, making his way among machines that cleaned, sliced, packaged and froze the new crop, Shai Hermesh talked with some bitterness about the enemy.
He did not mean destructive insects, or capricious weather, or even Palestinian terrorists from the Gaza Strip, a few miles west.


Cooper Development Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Scientists Decipher Mysterious Process Of Signaling in Cells
A PATIENT with kidney failure has just received a transplant.
Within seconds sentinel cells of the immune system approach it, touching it to determine if it is friend or foe.
If these white blood cells determine that the kidney is a foreign body, a signal passes through them, telling them to grow and divide and to secrete a hormone to recruit other cells to the area.
Thus is started an attack that if not defused, will culminate in the body's rejection of the new organ.
So how does it happen?
How can a chemical contact on the outside of a cell be translated into a signal to DNA, the genetic material deep inside the cell, to divide and make new hormones?


Trottier Leaving Again
Bryan Trottier's return to the Islanders as an executive appears to be over.
The team has called a news conference today on Long Island and is expected to announce that Trottier will return to the Pittsburgh Penguins, this time possibly for a playing comeback or for a management position.
Trottier, who broke in with the Islanders in 1975, played 15 seasons in New York before joining the Penguins in 1991 for two more years.
After announcing his retirment last summer, he rejoined the Islanders as a vice president.


Sandy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Echlin Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


'Falsettos' to Close
"Falsettos," a musical by William Finn and James Lapine and directed by Mr.
Lapine, is to close after the Sunday matinee at the Golden Theater, 252 West 45th Street, Manhattan.
The matinee on Sunday will be the 487th regular performance; it had 23 previews.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11  PLAN FOR EX-EAST BLOC'S A-PLANTS  A report says that 25 of the most dangerous nuclear reactors in six former Soviet bloc nations could soon be closed down and replaced by gas-fired power plants, but that they oppose such a plan.
A1  WHICH IS THE REAL IRAN?
To many neighbors of Iran and to the West, Iran is a menace.
But to the Shiite Muslim clerics who rule the country, it is misunderstood.
A1


MGI Properties reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


The Bulls Belong Past and Future
With three consecutive championships and a young nucleus capable of winning more titles, the Chicago Bulls are secure about their place in history.
Countering arguments that they do not measure up to some of the all-time great National Basketball Association teams, the Bulls feel their accomplishments speak for themselves.
In an era of free agency and multimillion-dollar contracts, the Bulls have remained hungry, determined and unified.
When they were challenged this season -- by the Knicks, by the Phoenix Suns and by off-court distractions -- the Bulls responded by winning.
The route to a third title was more difficult than Chicago expected, which made this year's playoff run more impressive -- and more satisfying.


FUJITSU MAKES ITS SECOND SUPERCOMPUTER SALE IN U.S.
Fujitsu America Inc. said yesterday that it had made its second United States supercomputer sale to Timeslice Technology Inc., a Houston-based service center that offers computer simulation to the oil and gas industry.
In February the computer maker sold its first supercomputer to Geco-Prakla, a service center subsidiary of the Schlumberger Oilfield Services Group.


Banker's Note Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


Failure Group Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Review/Jazz Festival; Lena Horne and the Stuff of Legend
Lena Horne gave a performance at Avery Fisher Hall on Sunday evening that should become legend.
She was the top-billed musician in the JVC Jazz Festival's tribute to Billy Strayhorn, and she reduced the audience to shivers with the story of how she met the composer and arranger who was Duke Ellington's musical right arm.
Then, in rivetingly energized performances of several Strayhorn songs topped off with a fiery rendition of "Stormy Weather," she brought the audience to its feet.
It was an accomplishment that few performers could have carried off at any age, let alone at 75.
Her first meeting with Strayhorn was in 1942 in California, she recalled.
She was sitting in a theater feeling lonely when she was approached by "a beautiful brown boy in big horn-rimmed glasses, who looked like a lovely brown owl." He had been sent over by Ellington to see if she wanted something from the refreshment stand.


INSURERS MAY FACE GREATER SCRUTINY
To increase competition in the market for medical care, White House officials are recommending that the health-insurance industry be stripped of its longstanding immunity from Federal antitrust law.
The proposal reflects the concern of Administration officials and consumer advocates who fear that a handful of big insurance companies may soon dominate the industry, especially if Congress approves the plan Mr.
Clinton is developing to overhaul the nation's health-care system.


NORTHWEST AIRLINES AND ITS PILOTS FAIL TO REACH ACCORD
Talks over the weekend between Northwest Airlines and its pilots' union ended without agreement, and no further talks were scheduled yesterday.
The talks were the latest step in the bid by the Minneapolis-based carrier to win wage-and-benefit concessions from its workers and restructure its debt.
The airline, which is saddled with heavy debt from a leveraged buyout, had signaled that it would file for bankruptcy protection unless it could win $886 million worth of concessions from its employees.
The airline and the pilots disagree over details, including the size of the equity stake the employees would be granted in return for their givebacks, sources close to the talks said.
The company had offered a 30 percent stake.


American Healthcorp Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Quality Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Classical Music in Review
American Composers Orchestra  Carnegie Hall
Bringing musical cultures together is a process much on the minds of classical music presenters.
Wednesday's audience for a concert by the American Composers Orchestra -- many of its number were delegates at this week's American Symphony Orchestra League convention -- got a close look at one elegant and surprisingly simple way of reconciling the often irreconcilable.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices to Decide if Ash Is a Hazardous Waste
In a case that could help determine the economics of municipal waste disposal, the Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether the ash left from the burning of municipal solid waste must be treated as hazardous waste, requiring special treatment that could increase the cost of disposal by as much as 10 times.
The issue has been one of the more disputed aspects of Federal environmental policy in recent years.
It has split the lower Federal courts and has produced an agonizing series of policy changes within the Environmental Protection Agency, which issued a policy statement last fall stating that the ash should be exempted from hazardous waste regulation.


A New Serve, but the Same Old Agassi
Wimbledon, that green-and-purple bastion of tradition, got under way today with nothing less than a travesty overhead: a dose of summer-solstice sunshine that refused to depart until 10 P.M. and wreaked no havoc with the opening-day schedule.
But decorum ruled under the royal eyes on Centre Court this afternoon when defending champion Andre Agassi successfully negotiated his first-round match in straight sets.
Agassi's dicey drama with right wrist tendinitis had provoked speculation he might become the first defender to suffer a first-round falter since Charlie Pasarell dethroned Manuel Santana in 1967.


Patterns
A Two-Story Basement
Bargain-hunter alert: Filene's Basement is coming to Manhattan.
The Boston-based chain of discount fashion stores started work last week on a 33,000-square-foot store with two selling floors, at 2222 Broadway, on the corner of 79th Street.
Nov. 5 is the planned opening date.
Finding a location on the Upper West Side near Zabar's, Conran's and Barnes &amp; Noble was a key factor in the plan, said Samuel J. Gerson, the chairman and chief executive of Filene's Basement.
"This is the heart and soul of fashion retailing," he said.
"We've wanted to be a part of this for a long time. People here know name-brand and designer labels inside out."


Joe Louis Gets His 29 Worth
The United States Postal Service today will offer its first homage to a professional boxer with a 29-cent stamp featuring Joe Louis.
The Postal Service and its predecessor, the Post Office Department, has issued 102 stamps and postal cards on sports themes since 1932.
But the vast majority have been generic designs, including 67 just for the Olympics; only 14 notable sports figures have been honored.


State Is Seeking to Disband Town's Private Police Force
New Jersey state lawyers plan to go to court on Tuesday to try to force tiny Sussex Borough to disband its uniformed security force, which looks like a regular police department but, by law, cannot function like one.
Robert T. Winter, the director of the State Division of Criminal Justice, said the municipality's security guards have no more enforcement powers than "everyday citizens" and could pose a danger to themselves or the public if they try to act as police officers.


Amid Talk About a Sale, Tambrands Stock Soars
Amid rumors that Tambrands might be for sale, the company's stock rose sharply yesterday to close at $46.25, up $6.125, the next trading day after dropping to $40.125 on Friday.
Yet if the 15 percent rise was based on expectations of a rosier future for the beleaguered manufacturer of Tampax, optimism might be premature.
A person close to the company's management said that while a director might have acknowledged the possibility that Tambrands might be sold -- in a casual conversation with a large investor -- the board had made no decision to pursue a sale.


CHRONICLE
There's a new job -- and a new fashion scene -- for ANNIE FLANDERS, the founder and former editor of Details magazine.
Ms.
Flanders will be shaping coverage of California fashion and life style for Buzz magazine, a monthly publication about Los Angeles.
She has been named consultant for a new section of the magazine, L.A.
Style, itself formerly a magazine, which Buzz acquired from American Express.
"I want to pay attention to the fashion and garment business in Los Angeles, which doesn't have a high profile anywhere but is the second-largest business in L.A., larger even than show business," Ms.
Flanders said yesterday from Shokan, N.Y., while traveling. (What's bigger? Aeronautics, she said).


Time Is Sought on Olympia
Cyrus R. Vance, the former Secretary of State, asked a Federal bankruptcy judge yesterday for still more time to negotiate an agreement in the dispute over control of the United States holdings of the bankrupt Canadian real estate giant Olympia &amp; York.


Clinton Looks to Conference Panel to Restore Budget to His Liking
President Clinton and his top aides spent the day whipping up citizen support for his five-year, $500 billion budget package, but not entirely out of fear about its chances in the Senate.
To the contrary, Democrats are confident that the Senate will pass the plan after it is introduced on Wednesday.
They are less certain about their prospects in the legislative conference that follows, which promises to be a drawn-out effort to fuse the Senate's bill and the more liberal version that the House passed last month.


Minority Firm to Manage Offering
The New York City Water Finance Authority has selected a minority-owned securities firm, W. R. Lazard, Laidlaw &amp; Mead, to handle today's $375 million offering of notes due next April.
The selection of W. R. Lazard marks the first time that a minority-owned firm has been the lead manager in New York financing of this size since 1987, when city officials began insisting that those firms be made part of the underwriting groups.


Defense in Bombing Challenges Evidence
A lawyer for one of the prime suspects in the World Trade Center bombing contends in court papers that the Federal Bureau of Investigation relied on an agent's "deliberately or recklessly false" sworn statement to search a storage locker where explosive chemicals were found.
Providing a first look at some of the main defense strategies in the case, the lawyer, Robert E. Precht, argued that the F.B.I. ignored information that electromagmetic devices, wiring, manuals and tools seized from a Jersey City apartment of Mohammed A. Salameh had actually been claimed as teaching materials by an electrical engineering professor.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
2.91
3.85
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.04
3.67
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.15
3.16
3.77
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.54
5.57
6.81
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
7.77
6.80
7.83
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.73
7.75
8.76
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.80
5.82
6.54
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Denny's Parent Hires Officer
The Flagstar Companies, a fast-food restaurant company whose Denny's chain has recently been hit by lawsuits accusing it of racial discrimination, has named a black executive vice president for human resources.
Norman J. Hill, who now holds a similar position with Perkins Family Restaurants, based in Memphis, will oversee the employees of more than 2,200 Denny's, Hardee's and Quincy's restaurants owned by Flagstar, based in Spartanburg, formerly known as TW Services.


By Design; The Men's Look
A lot of women are not inclined to float through summer wearing flower-print granny dresses.
They like a crisper image.
For them, shopping in a men's store is a plus.
There they find well-made merchandise with a sporty, tailored edge and a slightly oversized scale that is so desirable.
The only trick is to translate the sizes.
Interestingly enough, a spokeswoman for Paul Stuart, the men's haberdashery at Madison Avenue and 45th Street, said one of every four customers there was a woman.
This summer many of them are buying striped cotton dress shirts with French cuffs, for $110.
Then they buy cuff links for $6 a pair.


Regional Party in Northern Italy And Ex-Communists Gain in Vote
The insurgent Northern League tightened its hold in northern Italy today with the release of final results from nationwide mayoral elections that confirmed voters' rejection of the scandal-ridden parties that had led this country since World War II.
But the ex-Communist Democratic Party of the Left also benefited from the traditional parties' disgrace, seeing its fortunes and its standing as a national party rise after years of decline.


Rostropovich and Johns Win Awards
The painter Jasper Johns and the cellist and conductor Mstislav Rostropovich are among the five winners of the 1993 Japanese Praemium Imperiale awards for lifetime achievement in the arts.
The prize winners were announced yesterday in Berlin by Helmut Schmidt, the former West German Chancellor.
Each winner is to receive $138,000.
The others named are the French choreographer Maurice Bejart, the Swiss sculptor Max Bill and the Japanese architect Kenzo Tange.


Study on Soviet-Era A-Plants Says Replacement Is Feasible
A confidential report on nuclear energy in the former Soviet bloc says it would be economically feasible to close 25 of the most dangerous nuclear reactors during the next few years and replace them with gas-fired power plants.
But the report says the former Communist countries oppose such a plan and want to keep their nuclear plants going as long as possible, a choice that could prove more dangerous and costlier for the West.


The Thrill of a Superfast Deskpro
THE INTEL CORPORATION's new Pentium microprocessor has been employed primarily in the class of floor-standing personal computers called servers, which act as hubs for networks of lesser PC's.
For those of us who do not have Novell networks installed in the den or in the spare bedroom that we have converted into a home office, some companies are setting aside a few of their precious Pentium chips for use in conventional desktop computers.
One of the first of these fire-breathing PC's, the Compaq Computer Corporation's Deskpro 5/60M, arrived in my office recently.
It came with a 20-inch Compaq QVision monitor, and it was stuffed with more than half a gigabyte of hard disk storage, 16 megabytes of system memory and a CD-ROM drive, which I used to install the OS/2 version 2.1 operating system.


Transactions
Baseball  National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Signed Gamalier Castro and Daniel Gil, pitchers; Brett McCabe and Kevin Orie, infielders; and Vee Hightower and John Sauer, outfielders.
International Baseball Association
IBA CONGRESS -- Elected Aldo Notraui as president; Richard Case as secretary general; Mark Marquess to the technical commission; Neil Lantz to the legal commission; and Warren Turner to the youth commission.


Stop &amp; Shop Cos.  reports earnings for 16wks to May 27


Designatronics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


China Breaks Ground for World's Largest Dam
THE bulldozers are scooping out the yellow earth along the Yangtze River in preparation for the world's largest hydroelectric project, a dam that will create a lake 350 miles long, fuel China's industrial revolution and save millions of people from the constant threat of flooding.
Or perhaps the project will simply create the world's most colossal mud pie.


Housing Agency Says Federal Aid Is Not at Risk
New York City Housing Authority officials yesterday adamantly denied a report charging that more than a billion dollars in Federal aid was at risk because the agency's spending plan was behind schedule.
A report in yesterday's issue of New York Newsday said that within the last decade the amount of unspent capital funds available to the city had risen beyond $1.1 billion.
The Newsday report cited as its source a Department of Housing and Urban Development performance review sent to Sally Hernandez-Pinero, chairwoman of the Housing Authority, last month.


Cooper Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Touchstone Applied Science Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Biospecifics Tech reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Islanders Did Best in the Great Goalie Sweepstakes
By getting goalie Ron Hextall from Quebec before the pre-expansion trading deadline, the Islanders may have made the best acquisition in a flurry of trades leading up to this week's double draft.
But it is the Nordiques, for the third consecutive season, who command the most attention as the league gathers this week -- coincidentally, in the Nordiques' home town -- for several days of dealings.


Blue-Chip Issues Edge Up in Dull Trading
Blue-chip stocks rose moderately yesterday in lackluster trading.
But the broader market was mixed, displaying pockets of strength, as investors moved cautiously.
The Dow Jones industrial average rose 16.05 points, to 3,510.82, with volume on the New York Stock Exchange at 223.7 million shares, down from the 300.5 million shares traded on Friday.


The Economics of a Sports Cliche
Pat Riley couldn't coach the New York Knicks past the Chicago Bulls in the National Basketball Association playoffs this year, but in an ironic twist, he will benefit from the Bulls' third straight N.B.A. title.
With their 99-to-98 victory over the Phoenix Suns on Sunday night, the Bulls earned the right to capitalize on a new merchandising wrinkle: the "three-peat" and "3-peat" trademarks.
Those phrases were registered by Mr.
Riley in 1989 when the Los Angeles Lakers, his former team, were thwarted in their quest for three straight titles. (An optimist, Mr. Riley also registered "four-ward.")


New York City Census Profile Shows Stark Changes in Decade
Even as real income rose in all but three of New York's neighborhoods in the 1980's, one of the city's poorest places -- Hunts Point in the Bronx -- grew poorer by 30 percent.
On Staten Island, the most suburban borough, the number of foreign-born people increased four times faster than in the city as a whole.
And the number of New Yorkers with college degrees increased more than 44 percent.
Fleshing out a stark profile, a new portrait of New York City drawn from the 1990 census reveals broad demographic changes along with striking contrasts in neighborhoods that have reinvented themselves to accommodate newcomers.


Japan: How Clean a Break?
Politicians continue to defect from Japan's Liberal Democratic Party in the wake of last Friday's no-confidence vote in Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa.
Some of these are honest reformers, outraged at the Liberal Democrats' failure to meet the public demand for a cleaner system.
Others are opportunists, betting on political realignment as the quickest ticket to the rewards of high office.
It's high drama -- the fracturing of a system of one-party rule that delivered remarkable economic growth and endured for almost 40 years.
But beneath the choreographed rituals of Japanese party politics lie even more dramatic changes in public opinion.
A new generation of urban Japanese, raised in affluence, is now turning against big-money politics while it seeks a better balance between producer and consumer interests in Japanese life.


Elizabeth White, 94, An Environmentalist
Elizabeth Moffat White, an environmentalist and former trustee of the Wildfowl Trust of North America, died on Thursday at the Anne Arundel Hospital in Annapolis, Md.
She was 94 and lived in Chester, Md., and New York City.
She died after a heart attack, said her son-in-law, W. Tapley Bennett Jr., president of the Atlantic Treaty Association, a private group that supports the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, and a former Ambassador.


METRO DIGEST
EMPIRE SAYS IT DID NOT VERIFY ALL CLAIMS
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield has routinely paid claims from doctors, hospitals and pharmacies without any attempt to determine whether the claims had already been paid or were fraudulent, company officials acknowledged.
A1.
NEW YORK'S COMMUTER TAX LEFT TO STAND
New York State's method of setting tax rates for nonresidents was allowed to stand by the United States Supreme Court.
A1.
The New Jersey Legislature passed a $15.4 billion budget for fiscal 1994 that includes $25 million in anticipated revenue from a retaliatory commuter tax on New Yorkers.
B5.
NEW YORK CITY  DEFENSE IN BOMB CASE CALLS EVIDENCE FALSE
A lawyer defending one of the prime suspects in the World Trade Center bombing contends in court papers that the Federal Bureau of Investigation relied on an agent's "deliberately or recklessly false" sworn statement to search a storage locker.
B3.
SCHOOLS CHANCELLOR FINALISTS NAMED
The top 10 candidates to succeed schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez include the current superintendents in Detroit, San Francisco, Washington and Fairfax County, Va., two senior aides to Mr.
Fernandez, New York's deputy education commissioner, Connecticut's former Education Commissioner, a foundation head and the chief executive officer of a California software company.
B3.
INDICTMENTS IN SMUGGLING OF IMMIGRANTS
The captain and a 10-member crew of the Golden Venture, the ship that ran aground off Queens two weeks ago with nearly 300 illegal Chinese immigrants aboard, were indicted yesterday on conspiracy and smuggling charges.
B2.
REVIEW MISREAD, HOUSING OFFICIALS SAY
New York City housing officials adamantly denied a report charging that more than a billion dollars in Federal aid was at risk because the agency's spending plan was behind schedule.
B2.
DINKINS AND GIULIANI GO TO LEGISLATURE
Mayor Dinkins and his Republican opponent, Rudolph W. Giuliani, took their mayoral campaigns to Albany, shadowing each other through the State Capitol as they lobbied legislators to maintain existing rent regulations on New York City apartments.
B3.
REGION  IF D'AMATO WERE GOVERNOR
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, saying he would decide this fall whether to run for governor next year, told a luncheon meeting in Jericho, L.I., that if he were elected, he would sell the World Trade Center, the New York City airports and the state's Offtrack Betting system.
B4.
PRIVATE POLICE FACE COURT CHALLENGE
New Jersey state lawyers plan to go to court to try to force tiny Sussex Borough to disband its uniformed security force.
B4.
APPEALS COURT RULES AGAINST KILLER
A New Jersey appeals court upheld the conviction of John List for the murders of his mother, wife and three children in their home in Westfield, N.J.
B4.
Chronicle B4  Our Towns by Kirk Johnson B5


The Courage to Reform Rent Controls
With one bold move, the State Senate's majority leader can force a confrontation on New York City's destructive rent regulations.
The leader, Ralph Marino, can couple a two-year extension of New York's rent laws with legislation gradually removing controls on luxury apartments.
That would force Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin to let the laws expire or adopt luxury decontrol.
Mr.
Marino supports luxury decontrol, as do some other Republican senators from New York City.
But two key Senators -- Roy Goodman of Manhattan and Frank Padavan of Queens -- do not.
Neither, disappointingly, does Rudolph Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor.
Given that lineup, it will be difficult for Mr.
Marino to take a stand.
But it would be worth it to New York City.


Groundbreaking Ceremony Held for New Home of Bronx Library


Filadelfia Journal; The Godly Make Paraguay's 'Green Hell' Bloom
At a seasonal water hole north of here, a cowboy recently came across a stand of ancient bottle trees, so called because their pear-shaped trunks were believed to contain water.
In the shade of the thorn-covered trees, he found rotting cartridge belts and rusting canteens, reminders of 5,000 Bolivian soldiers who gathered at the water hole, only to die of thirst.


'Jurassic Park' Won't Turn Kids Against Science
To the Editor:
I believe that "Evil Science Runs Amok -- Again!" by Carol Muske Dukes (Op-Ed, June 10) misses the point in arguing that from "Frankenstein" to "Jurassic Park" popular entertainments have made us fearful of science.


Univar Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Market Place; If Oil Prices Head Down This Summer, Oil Stocks May Follow.
STOCKS of many major oil companies have lost a little ground since trading at or near their all-time highs in April and May.
And if the discord at OPEC's Geneva meeting two weeks ago sends oil prices down this summer, as many analysts expect, the oil stocks will also head lower.
Kuwait rejected urgings by the 11 other OPEC members at the meeting to limit its daily production to 1.6 million barrels, and will raise its production instead to two million barrels by July 1 on the way to what the Persian Gulf emirate hopes will be 3.5 million barrels by 1995.


Is Ash a Hazard?
The Supreme Court will decide whether ash from municipal incinerators is hazardous waste needing special, costly, treatment.
Page A19.


Fox Film President Resigns To Head Start-Up Company
The 20th Century Fox Film Corporation said today that its president and chief operating officer, Strauss Zelnick, was stepping down to become president and chief executive of Crystal Dynamics Inc., a Silicon Valley start-up company involved in electronic game technology.
Mr.
Zelnick, a 35-year-old executive who is considered a movie-industry wunderkind, is part of a growing number of top studio executives leaving Hollywood to enter the emerging field of interactive entertainment.
Electronic games that provide users with a more realistic experience through advanced visuals and sound are at the forefront of this new field.


Police Drama Under Fire for Sex and Violence
Though it will not be broadcast until September, a new ABC television series, "N.Y.P.D. Blue," has become the target of the latest campaign by a Mississippi minister to compel the broadcast networks to censor material he finds offensive.
As has been the case before, the Rev.
Donald Wildmon of Tupelo, Miss., is campaigning against material he has not seen.
But Steven Bochco, the creator and executive producer of "N.Y.P.D. Blue," all but gave notice that his latest series would raise hackles when he publicly predicted it would be the first "R rated" show on network television.


Intake Center For Homeless To Be Closed
New York City's Human Resources Commissioner decided yesterday to close permanently a center in downtown Manhattan that places homeless people in shelters, three days after a caseworker was assaulted by a homeless woman there, administration officials said.
But the move appeared to prompt a new crisis in the city's troublesome battle to shelter people who have nowhere to stay.
The center, at 78 Catherine Street, has been closed since Friday when staff members walked outafter the attack, saying that the center had become too dangerous and uncontrolled, in part because of over-crowding.
With the Catherine Street center closed, the city started sending the families to another center in the Bronx, and last night about 100 families appeared at the door,, double the usual number.
Yesterday's decision means that families will continue to be sent there, despite the overcrowded conditions.


U.S. Tax Court Rejects I.R.S. Rule on Hedges
The United States Tax Court, rejecting an argument by the Internal Revenue Service, has ruled that businesses can write off against their ordinary income the losses that they sometimes incur when they engage in financial hedges, a widely used way of locking in commodity prices.
The court's decision last week, in a case involving the Federal National Mortgage Corporation, known as Fannie Mae, is expected to go a long way toward resolving uncertainties that have troubled the futures industry and its customers for years.


4th Endeavour Flight Pursues European Satellite
The space shuttle Endeavour and its crew of six bolted into the sky in a hail of fire and smoke today on a mission to retrieve an orbiting European science laboratory and to practice space-walking techniques.
After lifting off at 9:07 A.M., about 22 seconds late after an unidentified small aircraft appeared to intrude into restricted airspace near the Kennedy Space Center, the Endeavour pierced a cloud bank and began a three-day orbital chase to track and catch the satellite.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Pennsylvania Power and Light Co., Allentown, Pa., is offering $125 million of 6 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2000 at 99.83 to yield 6.03 percent.
The noncallable issue through First Boston Corp. is rated A by Duff &amp; Phelps. *
Southwestern Bell Corp., San Antonio, is offering $250 million of 7 percent debentures at 98.75 to yield 7.113 percent.
The noncallable debentures through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co. are rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and Duff &amp; Phelps.


2 Bombs Kill 7 in Madrid; Basques Are Suspected
Two car bombs exploded in downtown Madrid this morning, killing 7 people and wounding more than 20, the authorities said.
Although no one claimed responsibility, the authorities suspect the Basque terrorist organization E.T.A., which has killed more than 750 people in its 25-year campaign for independence for three northern provinces.


Home Depot Narrows Review
Home Depot said yesterday that it had selected three agencies to compete for the creative portion of its account, previously handled by Admarketing in Los Angeles.
Billings were estimated at $40 million to $50 million.


Chess
Sixty years ago an aggressive player like the world champion, Alexander Alekhine, steered away from symmetrical positions because he believed they were conducive to draws.
If the opponent has everything I have, how can I claim to have any advantage and justify playing to win?
But nowadays there are ways to combat the sterility of symmetry.
For one thing, today's players are ingenious in finding moves that cannot be copied and, in fact, few games continue for very long if Black can maintain an arid balance of position.
White's advantage of moving first is the key to avoiding symmetry.


From Tumult, New Visions Of Japan Inc.
For four decades, Japan Inc. has been supported by a triad consisting of a single political party, a powerful bureaucracy and wealthy business organizations.
Now, one leg of the stool, the ruling Liberal Democratic Party, is on the verge of splintering and perhaps losing power, ending a period of political stability widely believed to have been conducive to business growth.
Reflecting the concern about this, the Tokyo stock market today suffered its sharpest drop this year, with the Nikkei average plummeting 592.11 points, or 3 percent, to 19,212.43.
Yen Is Also Weaker
The Japanese yen was also pounded in Tokyo trading today, closing at 110.48 yen to the dollar, about 3 yen weaker than it closed on Friday, before legislators approved a no-confidence vote against Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa that will almost certainly drive him from office.


Kate Reid Memorial
A memorial service for the actress Kate Reid is to be held next Tuesday at 11 A.M. at St.
Clement's Church Theater, 423 West 46th Street, Clinton.
It will include readings, performances and reminiscences about Ms.
Reid, who died on March 27 at the age of 63.


White Sox Sign Former Quarterback
A former University of Washington quarterback, BILLY JOE HOBERT, drafted by teams in two professional sports, signed yesterday with the Chicago White Sox.
Hobert, an outfielder, was picked by the White Sox in the 16th round of this month's draft.
He is expected to soon join Chicago's team in Sarasota in the Gulf Coast League.


Didn't Anyone Watch the Mets?
NBC is assured of breaking the ratings record for the National Basketball Association finals with its 21.8 overnight rating and 40 share for Sunday's Game 6 of the Bulls-Suns series.
An overnight rating is drawn from 29 markets equaling 50.7 percent of the nation's television households.
Heading into Sunday, the average national rating for the first five games of the finals was 17.5/32.
Thus, even if the Game 6 rating falls modestly, NBC is certain to beat the finals record of 15.9/32 set in 1987, when the Lakers beat the Celtics.


Excerpts From High Court Decision Upholding Policy on Haitian Refugees
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's decision today upholding the Bush and Clinton Administrations' policy of intercepting Haitian refugees at sea and returning them to Haiti.
The vote in Sale v.
Haitian Centers Council was 8 to 1.
Justice John Paul Stevens wrote the majority opinion, and Justice Harry A. Blackmun wrote the dissent.
FROM THE DECISION By Justice Stevens
The President has directed the Coast Guard to intercept vessels illegally transporting passengers from Haiti to the United States and to return those passengers to Haiti without first determining whether they may qualify as refugees.
The question presented in this case is whether such forced repatriation, "authorized to be undertaken only beyond the territorial sea of the United States," violates Sections 243(h)(1) of the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 (I.N.A. or Act).
We hold that neither Sections 243(h) nor Article 33 of the United Nations Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees applies to action taken by the Coast Guard on the high seas.
. . .
Aliens residing illegally in the United States are subject to deportation after a formal hearing.
Aliens arriving at the border, or those who are temporarily paroled into the country, are subject to an exclusion hearing, the less formal process by which they, too, may eventually be removed from the United States.
In either a deportation or exclusion proceeding the alien may seek asylum as a political refugee for whom removal to a particular country may threaten his life or freedom.
Requests that the Attorney General grant asylum or withhold deportation to a particular country are typically, but not necessarily, advanced as parallel claims in either a deportation or an exclusion proceeding.


Rite-Aid Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


'Jurassic Park' Won't Turn Kids Against Science; Biotechnology's Uses
To the Editor:
You ask, "Should We Revive The Dinosaurs?" (editorial, June 13).
Aw, I don't know.
Maybe we can get those "arrogant, unscrupulous and unthinking scientists" that Steven Spielberg portrays so well in "Jurassic Park" to concentrate instead on unicorns or pigs with wings.


Cigarette Antitrust Suit Is Rejected
The Supreme Court ruled today that an aggressive price war waged by the Brown &amp; Williamson Tobacco Corporation against its chief competitor in the fast-growing market for generic cigarettes in the mid-1980's did not violate Federal antitrust law.
The 6-to-3 decision affirmed a Federal appeals court's ruling -- while rejecting nearly all of that court's reasoning -- in a high-profile antitrust case that produced a $148.8 million verdict against Brown &amp; Williamson after a 115-day jury trial in 1989.
A Federal District Court in North Carolina later set that verdict aside and dismissed the case.


Help on Screen for Dad Or a Parent-in-Waiting
WHEN the contractions start coming five minutes apart, it is time to turn on the computer.
Actually, the program B.A.B.Y. (Birth and Baby Years) spans a much longer period, from before conception through birth and into the early months of infanthood.
It covers medical and nutritional information; illustrated guides to ovulation, conception and birth itself, and even a list of possible names.


The Pope On Scandal: Excerpts
Following are excerpts from Pope John Paul II's June 11 letter to the Roman Catholic bishops of the United States, as supplied by the United States Catholic Conference.
The emphasis is in the original.
Venerable and Dear Brother Bishops of the United States:


G.M. UNIT AND AMDAHL IN SOFTWARE MARKETING VENTURE
The Amdahl Corporation and Electronic Data Systems, the computer services unit of the General Motors Corporation, announced yesterday the formation of the Antares Alliance Group, a joint venture to market business software tools that make it easier to move complex application programs from giant mainframe computers to networks of desktop machines.
Antares will sell the Amdahl Huron applications development, production and maintenance system and the E.D.S.
Incase software development product through resellers and original equipment manufacturers.
The companies said they would also combine their software laboratories into the new venture to build integrated versions of the software.


Applied Power Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


COMPANY NEWS
ALBANK FINANCIAL CORP., Albany, said it planned to buy back up to 708,549 shares, or 5 percent of its outstanding common stock, in the next six months.
BDM INTERNATIONAL INC., McLean, Va., has agreed to invest about $21.3 million to acquire a majority interest in IABG, a German military contractor.


Best Buy Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Enzo Biochem Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Nets Get Benjamin In Swap For Bowie
The Nets traded center Sam Bowie to the Los Angeles Lakers yesterday in exchange for 7-foot center Benoit Benjamin and a future second-round draft pick, the beginning of a number of personnel moves as the team adjusts to life without Drazen Petrovic and probably Chris Dudley.
Petrovic, a guard, was killed in an automobile accident in Germany two weeks ago.
Dudley, a backup center, is chasing big bucks in the free-agent market.
General Manager Willis Reed said that the trade was made as sort of a possible cushion in case Dudley, an unrestricted free agent who has drawn tremendous interest around the league, will not be back with New Jersey.


Morehouse Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Lebert Lombardo, 88, Co-Founder of Band
Lebert J. Lombardo, a brother of Guy Lombardo who played the trumpet in his band, the Royal Canadians, died on Wednesday at Lee County Memorial Hospital in Fort Myers, Fla.
He was 88 and lived on Sanibel Island, Fla.
The cause was emphysema, said his brother-in-law Kenneth A. Gardner, known as Kenny, who sang with the band for many years.


Second Term for Coopers &amp; Lybrand Chairman?
In the final leg of his three-year stint at the top of Coopers &amp; Lybrand, Eugene M. Freedman is setting the stage to extend his stay, some people inside the big accounting firm contend.
Mr.
Freedman says he has not "even thought about it," and is totally focused on improving the business, but that he might think about it in the next six to nine months.
He does volunteer that he has "got a lot of hell left to raise."


Summer In Tuscany, And the Salad Is Bountiful
TUSCANY in summer is a verdant kaleidoscope, a conjugation of the color green that overwhelms the sunbaked dirt and talks back to the relentlessly cheerful blue sky.
Landscape conquers heat-induced languor in these hills.
And at the table, a similar diversity tugs at the edges of appetite.
Antipasti and the endless variety of salads that are served here for lunch and dinner flirt with summer's hunger, tease its need to be awakened by something cold, beguile it with intense and unpredictable flavors and taunt it with coquettishly small servings.
Taste is aroused. But the waistline is protected.


Tobacco Groups Sue to Void Rule On Danger in Secondhand Smoke
Leading forces of the tobacco industry sued the Federal Government yesterday to overturn its declaration that secondhand tobacco smoke causes cancer.
Groups representing tobacco growers and distributors, as well as the country's two leading cigarette makers, Philip Morris Companies Inc. and the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, asked a Federal District Court in Greensboro, N.C., to nullify the designation of smoke from other people's cigarettes as a carcinogen, a classification made by the Environmental Protection Agency last January.


U.S. Case Looks Weaker in Idaho Siege
When Randy Weaver surrendered last August after an 11-day siege at his mountaintop cabin in northern Idaho, Federal officials said they had captured a neo-Nazi fugitive who had plotted an armed confrontation with the authorities.
But now, after a two-month trial and six days of jury deliberations, the Government's image of Mr.
Weaver as a political extremist bent on armed conflict has been eclipsed by courtroom revelations.
Federal authorities have been sanctioned by the judge for withholding evidence, and the Government's case against Mr.
Weaver has been contradicted by its own witnesses.


Fried Potatoes, No Guilt
FRYING is not something usually encouraged in a column about healthful eating.
But a small amount of oil in a good nonstick pan will brown potatoes very nicely.
Sauteed potatoes add a wonderful contrasting taste and texture to a fish braised in a tomato-olive sauce, and by doing all of the cooking in one pan, the effect is similar to that of a more time-consuming baked dish.


INSIDE
U.S. Seeks to Bar Sale Of Russian Rocket Fuel
As concerns grow over Moscow's military exports to the third world, the United States is trying to block the shipment of Russian rocket fuel ingredients to Libya, officials said.
The shipment is the latest in a string of Russian exports that are a major worry for President Clinton.
Page A8.
Foreign Aid's Many Fans
Foreign aid bills still have enough supporters to sail through Congress, despite legislators' recent focus on domestic affairs.
Page A19.
Criminal Inquiry Into Empire
The Manhattan District Attorney is investigating Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield and has issued subpoenas for company documents.
Page B1.
Stabbing Outside a School
A 17-year-old student was stabbed and critically injured outside a Queens high school known for its high academic standing.
Page B1.


Wine Talk
IT'S Saturday afternoon.
You've been in Napa and Sonoma counties in California for two or three days and you're, well, wined out.
Don't be alarmed.
The human constitution can take only so much tasting-room chardonnay.
And terminally friendly tour guides.
And yet another bunch of tanks and barrels.
I'm not about to recommend a surly tour guide.
But you might look into the year-round film festival at Sonoma State University in Rohnert Park.
If you're anywhere around Santa Rosa, Rohnert Park is a few miles south on U.S. 101.
Every Thursday, Friday and Saturday evening at the school, the Sonoma Film Institute shows golden oldies -- double features, no less -- for $3.50.
That's about the going rate for an ounce of wine-country espresso and cheaper than some R-rated turkey on your motel room screen.


Suburban Visionary Has Big Plans To Improve Another Man's Project
Fed up with the characterless subdivisions and the strip shopping centers, the congested highways and the vanishing woodlands, Norman E. Blankman took a look at the Long Island that had grown up around him and began dreaming of a new kind of suburb.
So Mr.
Blankman, a 74-year-old developer who made his money owning skyscrapers in Manhattan and erecting hotels in New Mexico and Utah, brought some of the nation's most innovative architects and planners to Long Island.
During five days in late April and early May, they designed the towns of Mr.
Blankman's dreams, a string of New England-style villages, with narrow lanes and houses with wide porches, to be built in and around the hamlet of Yaphank in eastern Suffolk County.
It Isn't His
But the architects' drawings are about as far as Mr.
Blankman's dream is likely to advance.
For though some planning officials and civic groups have praised his ideas, there is a big problem: the project is not Mr.
Blankman's to develop.


CHRONICLE
It's been a long haul for three post-graduate fellows in cardiothoracic surgery at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center and Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, both in Manhattan.
So their mentors decided to say a formal farewell, with funny and poignant touches.
Dr.
O.
WAYNE ISOM, chairman of cardiothoracic surgery at New York Hospital, and Dr.
ROBERT J. GINSBERG, his counterpart at Sloan-Kettering, are giving a dinner tomorrow at Le Cirque for this year's group: Dr.
JOHN BROWN, Dr.
JAMES COUNCE and Dr.
DAVID M. JABONS, who were chosen from more than 60 applicants and who have performed some 1,500 operations in two years.


Suburban Visionary Has Big Plans To Improve Another Man's Project
Fed up with the characterless subdivisions and the strip shopping centers, the congested highways and the vanishing woodlands, Norman E. Blankman took a look at the Long Island that had grown up around him and began dreaming of a new kind of suburb.
So Mr.
Blankman, a 74-year-old developer who made his money owning skyscrapers in Manhattan and erecting hotels in New Mexico and Utah, brought some of the nation's most innovative architects and planners to Long Island.
During five days in late April and early May, they designed the towns of Mr.
Blankman's dreams, a string of New England-style villages, with narrow lanes and houses with wide porches, to be built in and around the hamlet of Yaphank in eastern Suffolk County.
It Isn't His
But the architects' drawings are about as far as Mr.
Blankman's dream is likely to advance.
For though some planning officials and civic groups have praised his ideas, there is a big problem: the project is not Mr.
Blankman's to develop.


Irish Spring Account To FCB/Leber Katz
The Colgate-Palmolive Company said yesterday that it had moved its Irish Spring soap and a new line of Irish Spring deodorants to FCB/ Leber Katz Partners in New York from Young &amp; Rubicam New York.
Billings were estimated at $11 million.
The company called the move the next step in consolidating its liquid and bar soaps at one agency.
Earlier this year, Colgate-Palmolive moved its Softsoap Liquid Soap to FCB/ Leber Katz, the longtime agency for Palmolive soap, from Martin Williams Advertising in Minneapolis.
The Irish Spring deodorant line was moved to keep advertising for the brand together.


A Compromise on Military's Gay Ban Is Discussed
President Clinton said today that the Administration was nearing a decision on homosexuals in the military, and civilian Pentagon aides said discussions were focusing on a new option that would leave some restrictions but fewer than those proposed by a panel of generals and admirals.
The officials described the evolving proposal as an attempt to split the difference between simply lifting the ban on homosexuals and allowing them to serve but forcing them to conceal their sexuality.


Save Us All From the White House Press Corps; That's Democracy
To the Editor:
A June 15 front-page news analysis and "Mr. Clinton Picks a Justice," your editorial on the nominaton of Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg to the Supreme Court, comment unfavorably on how President Clinton has made important governmental decisions.
Both observe that the Administration has followed a practice of "floating" word of potential programs, policies and candidates, and then changing course if reaction is negative.
This supposedly shows a "disorganized White House."


Pilgrims at Temples to Hash
With a baseball cap pulled low over his eyes and a flask of maple syrup in his coat pocket, Randolph J. Garbin covers the diner beat.
Let the other hacks haunt precinct houses or press boxes, he said.
He prefers places with names like the Four Aces, Skip's Blue Moon or Tony's Freehold Grill.
Let the rest devote ink to important matters.
He's more than content to write about a good plate of fried eggs and hash.


Dow Falls on Forecasts of Weaker Earnings
Stocks were generally lower yesterday, with the Dow Jones industrial average falling 13.29 points, to 3,497.53.
The decline was not limited to the large-capitalization stocks but extended across the broader market as disappointing earnings announcements drove a general but slight retreat.
The composite index of all New York Stock Exchange issues slipped 0.10 point, to 246.09, and the Nasdaq composite index of over-the-counter stocks fell 1.97 points, to 686.77.
The Standard &amp; Poor's 500-share index fell 0.29 point, to 445.93, and the American Stock Exchange index dropped 0.75 point, to 435.89.


COMPUADD COMPUTER FILES FOR CHAPTER 11
The Compuadd Computer Corporation, which soared to more than $500 million in annual revenue as a pioneer in selling personal computers by telephone and mail order, filed for Chapter 11 protection yesterday in Federal Bankruptcy Court in Austin, Tex.
Bill H. Hayden, sole owner and chief executive of the company, said it was not able to reach out-of-court settlements on claims stemming from discontinued retail operations.


Young Enters Record Book With Head Down
Anthony Young, 22 straight defeats on his mind and a sad immortality on the line, wanted nothing more than for the losing to stop.
The Mets played as if they had no idea of how to win.
Nothing novel.
Nothing changed.
And so the Mets, who are always more at odds with themselves than with their opponents, lost to the Expos, 6-3, last night at Shea Stadium.
They put four errors on the scoreboard and Young's name in the record book.
His 23d straight defeat equaled the sorry standard set by Cliff Curtis of the Boston Braves in 1910-11.


Dinkins Questions Tactics Used by Giuliani
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday questioned the campaign tactics of his Republican opponent, Rudolph W. Giuliani, contending that Mr.
Giuliani's recent comments on Crown Heights and rent regulation indicated that he did not have the "temperament" to lead New York City.
Speaking to reporters at the conclusion of the United States Conference of Mayors' meeting in midtown Manhattan, Mr.
Dinkins accused Mr.
Giuliani of trying to inflame sentiment over the 1991 racial unrest in Crown Heights, Brooklyn.


60-Minute Gourmet
OVER the decades that I have been a cook and avid eater, certain food axioms have become evident.
For example, salmon and dill are a natural match; similarly, rosemary and lamb have an undeniable affinity, as do basil and tomatoes, and saffron and shellfish.
The list is a long one, not entirely codified in cookbooks, but learned intuitively as one gains experience as a cook.
These rules often guide me in devising recipes.
Just recently, I saw some beautiful sea scallops in the market -- snow white and glistening fresh.
Immediately, my databank of seasonings went to work.
Scallops are so delicate that you would not want to make a very aggressive, peppery sauce for them.
Instead, I thought of sweet elements.
Roasted red peppers seemed ideal, for they are faintly sweet, smoky from the charring and colorful.


Budget in California Shuffles Taxes to Close a Gap
California appears to have avoided a state budget crisis this year.
But the price will be steep, in health care, parks, libraries, welfare and still higher college fees -- and the possible outright defiance of county governments at what they consider the illegal expropriation of their property taxes by the strapped state government.
Under enormous public pressure to avoid the kind of stalemate that forced the state to pay its bills with i.o.u.'s for more than two months last summer, the State Senate early this morning narrowly passed a Rube Goldberg-type of budget meant to get the recession-racked state government through another year.


Critic's Notebook; Design vs. the Environment: A Debate Among Architects
You can walk to McCormick Place, but not without dodging cars.
Though it is just minutes away by foot from the Loop, the cavernous convention center is so isolated from the rest of Chicago by the traffic streaming past that most visitors arrive and depart by taxi or bus.
Intentionally or not, the building is a perfect example of the problem addressed over the weekend by the more than 6,000 architects who gathered at McCormick Place: the extent to which architecture has contributed to the global environmental crisis.
Automobile traffic is only part of the problem.
Roughly half the world's energy consumption goes into the construction, maintenance and operation of buildings.
Architects don't initiate this gross consumption, but some of them have begun to recognize that design can help curtail it.
The choice of building materials, use of renewable resources like natural light and ventilation, and controlled patterns of suburban growth are some of the strategies architects can adopt toward what is called sustainable development: design that provides shelter without environmental or human exploitation.


The 'Ultimate Journey' Will Lift Off on July 30


Running in Jerusalem
To the Editor:
I saw your excellent June 13 article "Kollek's Last Run May Be Toughest" on the plane flying to Los Angeles.
For me to run again is very difficult.
Only the conviction that a Likud Party victory would bring irreparable harm to Jerusalem, Israel's capital and all its inhabitants, and possibly to the peace process, made me decide on this course.
I hope the Jerusalemites will support me and I'll win, but should I lose, it will be easier to live with a mistake than with regrets.
TEDDY KOLLEK  Mayor of Jerusalem Los Angeles, June 15, 1993


Helping Kids Grab On to the Future
The dark blue '68 Firebird convertible seems out of place cruising the local streets between Campbell Park and the adjacent Martin Luther King Jr. projects.
It's a California car, and not just because of the license plates.
With the white ragtop down, it looks as if it should have a surfboard jutting up from the back seat, cruising down the Pacific Coast Highway toward Malibu or Point Dume.


McCall Selects a Deputy
New York State Comptroller H. Carl McCall has nominated Rosemary Scanlon, chief economist for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, to be his deputy in charge of monitoring New York City.
The office of the Deputy Comptroller for New York City audits the city's budget and its agencies for the state.
Ms.
Scanlon will be paid $102,335.
Under Ms.
Scanlon, the office will go beyond its role as a fiscal monitor and begin working with the mayor's office to improve the city's economic condition, Mr.
McCall said.
Ms.
Scanlon's appointment is subject to review by the State Senate.


The Senate's Power Grab
In next month's Supreme Court confirmation hearings, the Senate Judiciary Committee will undoubtedly ask Ruth Bader Ginsburg detailed questions about her legal opinions on many divisive political issues.
This is a relatively new practice for the committee.
For most of U.S. history, the nominee did not even appear before the committee: It was considered beneath the dignity of the office of a Justice. (As the Clarence Thomas hearings showed, that belief has some merit.)
Even when the practice began in the 1930's, the questioning was usually perfunctory or nonexistent.
In 1962, Byron R. White was asked only about a dozen questions.
William O. Douglas waited outside the hearing room and was finally dismissed without being asked anything in 1939.


Tropical Storm Season Begins, Leaving East Texas Flooded


N.C.A.A. to Hear Ramsey Case
Nearly two years after ERIC RAMSEY claimed he received money and other illegal benefits to play football for Auburn, the National Collegiate Athletic Association's committee on infractions will hear the case next Wednesday in Kansas City, Mo.


Finding Strong Allies for Foreign Aid
Back in May, when political analysts and even the White House budget director were making dire predictions about the fate of President Clinton's Russian aid package, David Nagle, a former Iowa Congressman, figured about 40 people would come to a meeting to put together a lobbying strategy for the program.
About 90 showed up.


Italians in the Meadowlands? Not So Fast
Ostensibly, they were in New York to unveil Fantastic Italia, an exhibition chronicling Italian soccer that will be showcased at every city that the will be host to World Cup games next summer.
But ANTONIO MATARRESE and ARRIGIO SACCHI may have had an ulterior motive in scouring the area the last few days.
Matarrese, the president of the Italian Soccer Federation, and Sacchi, the national team coach, have been scouting New Jersey and New York for possible training sites for next year's opening round of the World Cup at Giants Stadium, where they will likely be placed if they qualify for the tournament.
"We have a range of options which we've found to be satisfactory," said Matarrese through a translator at a news conference at the United Nations Plaza Hotel yesterday.
"We think we have found suitable sites. But it would be premature to announce them. You see, our coach is a little superstitious, so we won't name a site until we qualify."


Eating Well
For two decades, Ellen Haas has been beating up on the Department of Agriculture.
No more.
She won't be picketing the Secretary of Agriculture as she did in 1973, when Earl Butz went to suburban Washington to milk a cow and she showed up to protest high food prices.
On May 28, Ms.
Haas was sworn in as the Assistant Secretary of Agriculture for Food and Consumer Services.
Now Ms.
Haas, the former executive director of Public Voice for Food and Health Policy in Washington, a public-interest group she founded in 1982, is responsible for many of the programs she has spent years criticizing: food stamps, school lunches and dietary guidelines.
But she said she would make her feelings known about department programs over which she has no control: pesticides, meat and poultry inspection and fish inspection.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
3.03
3.70
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.08
3.04
3.66
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.17
3.15
3.76
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.53
5.54
6.82
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.77
6.77
7.84
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.70
7.73
8.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.79
5.80
6.54
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


U.S. Warns Russia on Missile-Fuel Sales
The United States is trying to block the shipment of rocket-fuel ingredients from Russia to Libya, officials said today.
The shipment is the latest in a string of exports that have caused major worry in the Clinton Administration.
With a deteriorating economy, Russia has been increasingly dependent on military sales to earn hard currency.


Corrections
A table in Business Day on May 21 listing the American Stock Exchange's uncovered short sales for the month ended May 14 included some erroneous figures, which the exchange attributed to a data-processing error.
Revised figures appear today on page D20, along with the June figures.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
International Lease Finance Corp., Beverly Hills, Calif., is offering $100 million of 5.75 percent notes due in 1998 at 99.75 to yield 5.808 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The noncallable issue is rated A-2 by Moody's Investors Service, A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's and AA by Duff &amp; Phelps.


Bridge
The playoff matches that begin here Wednesday morning will determine two open teams and two women's teams to represent the United States in world championship play in Santiago, Chile, in September.
At least one of the successful open teams will consist largely or wholly of players making their debuts at world level.
The only player involved who was a member of the 1992 American team is Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill., who has won three world titles.
He has been added to the Reisinger team as a partner for Marty Bergen of Farmingdale, L.I., and it will be interesting to see how well they perform together.


A Budget Too Much Like Perot's
Ross Perot told voters he would reduce the deficit.
So did Bill Clinton.
But Mr.
Clinton added a more profound promise: to tilt Federal spending toward investments in education, training, technology and research.
In his February budget message President Clinton lived up to his promises, proposing to cut the deficit by $500 billion over five years, yet add $200 billion in programs to raise public and private investment.
Now Congress is about to dispose of Mr.
Clinton's investment plans.
Unless the Administration lobbies effectively, Congress will pass a budget that focuses on deficit reduction and virtually ignores economic growth.


A Top Pratt &amp; Whitney Post Goes to Manager at Boeing
Pratt &amp; Whitney, the big Hartford-based builder of jet engines for military and civilian aircraft, has reached out to an airplane maker to run its large commercial engine division.
Pratt, a division of United Technologies, said yesterday that it had named James T. Johnson, a longtime manager at the Boeing Company, as an executive vice president of Pratt and president of the company's large commercial engine division.


Treasurer Begins Review Of Legislature's Budget
The State Treasurer, Samuel F. Crane, today began a review of the $15.4 billion state budget, which the Legislature passed on Monday, and will advise Gov.
Jim Florio which items he should consider vetoing, said the Governor's spokesman, Jon Shure.
After little more than pro forma opposition from minority Democrats, the Legislature passed a Republican-drafted election-year budget for 1994 and sent it to Mr.
Florio.


2 Killed in Car Crash
A driver whose license has been suspended 30 times struck another car when he drove through a red light in Queens early yesterday, and his daughter and a passenger in the other car were killed, the police said.
The man, Santiago Acevedo, 30, of Northern Boulevard, was driving on Utopia Parkway near Underhill Avenue at 5:30 A.M. when he ran the red light, apparently under the impression that no one else was on the road at that hour, said Police Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.
Mr.
Acevedo was arrested and charged with driving with a suspended license, Officer McInnis said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  BOSNIAN REPLACED IN TALKS  President Alija Izetbegovic was replaced as head of Bosnia's delegation on the eve of key peace talks opening in Geneva with Serbian and Croatian leaders on their plan to divide the country into three loosely confederated ethnic states.
A1  KOHL BACKS ARMS FOR BOSNIA  Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany surprised and irritated his European Community partners by pressing strongly for an end to the arms embargo on Bosnian Muslims at a regional summit meeting that ended in Copenhagen.
A6


Review/Jazz Festival; Some Singers Get Together But End Up Sounding Apart
Anita O'Day, Cassandra Wilson and the duo of Nancy Marano and Eddie Monteiro have so little in common that putting them together at Town Hall on Saturday in a JVC Jazz Festival show named "The Jazz Singers" might be called the "variety assortment" school of programming.
Although Ms.
O'Day and Ms.
Wilson are both free-spirited iconoclasts, they belong to different generations and work out of different traditions.
In the 1940's, Ms.
O'Day brought an exuberant, rough-tough style of jazz improvisation to big-band singing.
Ms.
Wilson takes the note-bending innovations of Sarah Vaughan and Betty Carter to much further extremes of spontaneity.
Ms.
Marano and Mr.
Monteiro are traditionalists with highly developed skills in genteel scat singing


Aristide Likely to Meet Army Head This Week
Haiti's deposed President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, is expected to meet with his country's military leaders this week in what diplomats say could set the stage for a settlement of the long political crisis.
Diplomats involved in organizing the talks say Haiti's military commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, agreed to the meeting late Monday in response to sharply increased international pressures for a negotiated settlement.


Legislative Chiefs Agree to Extend Rent Rules Briefly
For the second time in a week, Senate and Assembly leaders agreed today to extend the state's rent regulations for a brief period while they continue discussing whether to weaken regulations on certain luxury apartments.
Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin, a Queens Democrat, and the Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, a Republican from Oyster Bay, L.I., agreed this afternoon to extend the existing rent law for seven days.
Both houses are expected to approve the extension on Wednesday.


Review/Music; 77 Trombones and a Church
Wendy Mae Chambers's "Mass for Mass Trombones" gives a certain surreal quality to 13th-century formats and acoustical effects.
On Saturday night, Ms.
Chambers's instrumentation was made up of one solo trombonist, 76 others divided into 11 choirs, and one large church, the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine.
She used the last with some effect.
The nine sections of the requiem luxuriated in the lazy reverberation time and the energized resonances bouncing around this huge space.


Dinkins's Actions on Crown Hts. Become Focus of Mayoral Race
Propelled by the imminent release of a state report on the racial disturbances in Crown Heights, the long-simmering controversy over how the Dinkins administration handled the 1991 violence moved to the forefront of the New York City mayoral campaign yesterday, forcing the Mayor again to defend his record on an issue that has haunted him for two years.
With the long-awaited report commissioned by Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo due in two to three weeks, the resurgence of interest in Crown Heights came just as Mayor David N. Dinkins prepared for a trip to Israel intended to portray his support for Jewish causes and to reach out to an ethnic group that could be crucial in the election.
On the Deensive
Instead, the Mayor was thrown on the political defensive yesterday, responding to news reports about Crown Heights.
In addition to reports that the state inquiry would heavily criticize Mr.
Dinkins and his Police Commissioner at the time, Lee P. Brown, several police officers asserted that superiors had ordered them not to make arrests as youths rampaged through the Brooklyn neighborhood, overturning cars and hurling stones and bottles at police lines.


U.S. Weighs Easing of Vietnam Trade Sanctions
The Clinton Administration is considering allowing American companies to bid on contracts in Vietnam that are financed by loans from international lending agencies like the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank, officials said today.
If accepted by the President, such an action, combined with an Administration decision not to block a plan that would give Hanoi access to loans from multilateral lending institutions, would be the most far-reaching easing of the 18-year-old United States trade embargo against its former wartime enemy.


Personal Health
THUMBS are out of style.
Modern babies suck on pacifiers, now also a fashion accessory for teen-agers, who wear them in psychedelic colors around their necks and sometimes actually put them in their mouths.
Sucking is an instinct essential to the survival of all mammals, which as newborns get all their sustenance by nursing.
Human babies have been observed on sonograms to suck their thumbs even before they are born.


Officers Jeer Perjury Conviction
More than 100 police officers staged a boisterous impromptu demonstration outside a Manhattan courtroom yesterday afternoon after a police officer in the 34th Precinct in upper Manhattan was convicted of perjury.
The police officer, John Rossi, 28, faces up to seven years in prison on perjury charges stemming from a gun possession case.
He was tried without a jury and found guilty by Jeffrey M. Atlas, an acting State Supreme Court judge.


Only Rent Regulations Keep Housing Remotely Affordable
To the Editor:
Like Ronald Reagan's claim that he could balance the budget by cutting taxes and spending more on the military, "Time to Make Sense on Rent Control" (editorial, June 14) contains more right-wing superstition than common sense.
How would allowing New York City landlords rent increases lower the cost of housing?


Fay Vincent Speaks From Exile
He is the last Commissioner.
Like other potentates who avoided the firing squad through mercy or sheer luck, he carries his exile with him.
Napoleon went to Elba.
The last Emperor of China puttered around his homeland after years of captivity.
The odd European nobles wind up on the gilded coast of the Mediterranean.


Japan Scorns Fund for Russia
Japan's Foreign Minister, Kabun Muto, said today that a Clinton Administration proposal to create a $4 billion fund to help turn Russia's state-owned enterprises into private companies was "preposterous," and added that an agreement had been reached to scale the fund back to about $500 million.
The proposal was made in April during a meeting here of the finance and foreign ministers of the Group of Seven industrial democracies.
The meeting produced an agreement to provide $28 billion in aid to support Russia's transition to a capitalist economy, but the $4 billion fund was not part of that total.


Sampras and Graf Roll Over Foes and Doubts
Less than a week ago, Pete Sampras raised his cherished serving arm in the rather mundane act of brushing his teeth and discovered his shoulder was too sore to help him carry brush to mouth.
How could it launch a serve worthy of a Wimbledon campaign?
Three days of frenetic treatment and diagnoses ensued, and on the eve of his match against the Australian Neil Borwick, Sampras was still concerned that he might suffer tendon damage by pursuing the one Grand Slam title for which he's been groomed for the last decade.
Sampras would love to further validate his ranking as the world's No. 1 player by winning what the tournament traditionalists consider the epitome of the genre.


Judge Says Assistance Center For Homeless Can Stay Closed
A state judge overseeing conditions in New York City's shelter system for homeless families yesterday agreed that a center in lower Manhattan, where families go to apply for shelter, could remain closed.
The center was closed on Friday, following an assault there last week on a caseworker by a homeless woman.
The caseworker was kicked in the face and needed 20 stitches.


Review/Dance; 'Finnegans Wake' Taken From the Page To the Joyce's Stage
Pilobolus Dance Theater, which just opened a four-week season at the Joyce Theater, is among the big success stories of contemporary dance.
With its wholly innovative approach to movement and imagery, the group seemed to emerge more from a creative parthenogenesis than any direct line of esthetic descent.
A great deal of the original Pilobolus appeal in the early 1970's came from its collegiate mentality.
The Pilobolus style, linked bodies transformed into expressive shapes by a system of gymnastic support, remains intensely physical and good-humored.


A Graduation Ceremony Earns Special Cheers
IT was graduation day for the Steppingstone Day School in Kew Gardens, Queens, and the 5-year-olds in their little white gowns and mortarboards started down the aisle to the strains of "Pomp and Circumstance."
For an outsider, the sight of 63 nursery-schoolers in academic procession might have appeared excessive, an exercise in cloying cuteness.
But, in fact, there were no outsiders present, and all the insiders -- the parents, grandparents, friends, relatives and teachers -- understood that what was taking place in the recreation hall of St.
Nicholas of Tolentine Roman Catholic Church was no frivolous mock commencement, no empty parody of a collegiate rite.
No, what was going on was a fitting celebration of achievements by children born with disabilities and who next fall would be heading for public school, probably to special education classes.


Where Is The Old Bob Dole?
I have such a longstanding respect for Senator Bob Dole that I fantasize that the old Bob Dole -- the responsible statesman -- will weigh back into the budget debate.
He was one of the first Republicans to recognize that the towering Reagan deficits endangered the health of the economy.
Ignoring the political risk, he stood up to his own President, who offered supply-side nostrums, blithely talking about "growing out of the deficits" and minimizing their size by basing projections on rosy scenarios.


Book Notes
Taking Big Chances
To many publishers, the delay of Oprah Winfrey's autobiography, which was summarily yanked by the talk-show host just three months before its scheduled publication date, was a chilling reminder of the perils of publishing books by celebrities.
Such books can be incredibly lucrative, particularly for a publishing house that hopes to subsidize a strong but unglamorous list with a blockbuster or two.
Alfred A. Knopf had planned to print 750,000 copies of Ms.
Winfrey's book in hard cover, and people in the industry estimated that the book could have brought in a staggering $15 million to $20 million.
But the pitfalls of planning such a book are numerous, not least because many celebrities seem to work in their own orbits, with their own agendas.


Shuttle Crew Gets Call From President Clinton


Showering Could Check Lyme Disease
To the Editor:
Re "Flaws Are Seen in Diagnosis and Control of Lyme Disease" (front page, June 15): I would like to contribute some observations regarding the control of Lyme disease derived from my dual role as an active officer of a hiking and climbing organization and a clinician.


Bruce Campbell, 42, Press Agent in Theater
Bruce Campbell, the press representative of the New York Shakespeare Festival, died of a gunshot wound to the head on Friday in his Manhattan apartment.
He was 42 years old.
The shooting was apparently a suicide, said Merle Debuskey, a friend.


High School Water-Gun Squirt Ends in Stabbing
A 17-year-old student was stabbed in the stomach and critically injured yesterday after confronting another student who had squirted him with a water gun outside a Queens high school known for its high academic standing, the police said.
Edwin Correa, a senior at Forest Hills High School, stumbled back into the school for help before being taken to Jamaica Hospital, where he underwent surgery.
He was listed in critical condition yesterday, hospital officials said.
The suspect, whom the police identified as Eliott Encarnacion, 16, was arrested.


Nude-Dancing Bar Thrives, Despite Loss of a Liquor License
When Alfred Ciraldo decided to open a topless bar across the street from a Roman Catholic church here, he knew he would face resistance.
In the last month, he has withstood inspections by an army of city officials, a charge of "Catholic bashing" from the church's pastor and the loss of his provisional liquor license.


Proposal to Prohibit Advertising in Space
In another sign of opposition to plans to launch billboards in space, members of Congress plan to introduce legislation today that would ban advertising in space visible to the naked eye on Earth.


Seven Killed in Madrid Car Bombing Are Mourned


Bosnians Divide Over New Talks To Split Country
President Alija Izetbegovic was replaced today as head of the Bosnian Government's delegation here for talks with Serbian and Croatian leaders on their plan to divide Bosnia into three ethnic states.
If the plan is accepted, it will probably mean the end of an independent Bosnia and Herzegovina.
After a stormy session of the nine-member collective presidency of Bosnia, which met in Zagreb, the Croatian capital, seven members decided to attend the talks and arrived here tonight.
The two others, President Izetbegovic and Vice President Ejup Ganic, returned to their capital, Sarajevo.


Dead Air: Mets Fans Tune Out In Droves
The Mets' dismal performance, which led yesterday to General Manager Al Harazin's resignation, hasn't been lost on television viewers and advertisers.
Ratings and sales are down, and the Mets' long run as the darling of local television seems to be ending as the resurgent Yankees are poised to wrest the title away.
"This has not been one of our easiest years," said Tom Ryan, general sales manager of WWOR-TV/Channel 9, who listed 1982 and 1983 as tougher ones.
"There are peaks and valleys in every season, and we hope our advertisers understand that. All our advertisers are still with us, which we're happy about."


Kmart Predicts Profit Drop, Causing Retail Stock Selloff
Kicking off a general selloff of retail stocks, the Kmart Corporation warned Wall Street yesterday that its second-quarter earnings were likely to be significantly lower than last year.
The company added that if consumer spending continued to languish, profits might be down for the entire year.
Its stock, traded on the New York Stock Exchange, hit a one-year low, dipping $1.50 to close at $20.125.


Forget Fine-Tuning: Mets Seek Overhaul
The Mets, conceding that "we have stunk it up royally," yesterday announced the latest stage of an organizational overhaul for the team with the worst record in baseball.
Al Harazin, the general manager and team executive who had been asked to relinquish control of baseball operations, resigned.
And Joe McIlvaine, who was a member of the club's hierarchy when it won the World Series in 1986, is on the verge of rejoining the team as the man charged with returning the Mets to respectability.


U.N. Votes to Send a Force To Uganda-Rwanda Border
The Security Council voted unanimously today to send a small peacekeeping force to monitor the Ugandan border to insure that neighboring Rwandan rebels do not smuggle weapons.
Fighting between the Rwandan Government, which is dominated by Hutu people, and an invading force led by the minority Tutsi has taken hundreds of lives.
It is estimated that a million people have been displaced in the civil war, which erupted in October 1990.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Activated John Orton, catcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Waived Larry Gonzales, catcher.
Recalled Victor Salverio, pitcher, from a rehabilitation assignment and assigned him to Palm Springs of the California League.


Leader of H.U.D. Assesses It Harshly
Housing Secretary Henry G. Cisneros acknowledged today that his agency's hapless management of apartment buildings it owns has "exacerbated the declining quality of life in urban America."
In a harsh assessment of the department's shortcomings, Mr.
Cisneros told the Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee that a wave of defaults on Government-insured mortgages has left the Department of Housing and Urban Development owning a rapidly growing inventory of troubled properties.


Review/Dance; Balanchine Showcases For Team Technique
George Balanchine, willing to take risks and to unnerve his audience, choreographed essentially for himself.
Yet he was also a great entertainer, and some of his boldest experiments became his most obvious crowd pleasers.
The 1977 "Vienna Waltzes," one of his biggest box-office hits, returned in spectacular form over the weekend as part of the New York City Ballet's Balanchine Celebration.
The five-part exploration of waltz rhythms was danced on Saturday night at the New York State Theater, sharing the bill with other new festival entries, "Ballo della Regina" and "Kammermusik No. 2." "Vienna Waltzes" was repeated on Sunday afternoon and again in the evening, when Margaret Tracey made an unscheduled debut in the ballet's classical third section.


Food Notes
Tropical Tastes
A muggy 85 degrees gave Monday, the first day of summer, a tropical feel.
Inside the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center, where 1,000 exhibitors were installed at the International Fancy Food and Confection Show, the temperature may have been cooler, but the taste was tropical.
Mango, passion fruit, pineapple, banana, guanabana, carambola and guava are flavors of the moment in teas, cookies, juices, preserves, marinades, chips, ices and dried fruits.
Harney &amp; Sons of Salisbury, Conn., introduced mango and passion fruit teabags.
White Coffee of Long Island City, Queens, has passion fruit tea and something called blue lagoon tea.


Squatters Demonstrate Against Eviction from 'Glass House'


Defending Champs 101: Blue Jays Teach Yanks a Lesson
So this is what being a championship team is all about.
Some hotshot team drifts on to your turf, walking the delicate line between pretender and contender, and it must be taught a lesson.
Although it is only June, the defending champion Blue Jays slapped the Yankees with a memorable lesson on pursuing a pennant tonight.
There were so many aspects to Toronto's lesson.
The Blue Jays displayed how pivotal it is to win at home, how crucial it is to remain steady when the deficit is sizable in the early innings, how important it is to rally and how integral it is to win, just win, when you have the lead in the late innings.


Washington Talk; Stronger Congress Tied To Fewer Committees
Congressional reform means so many different things to different people that it is no wonder not much seems to be changing.
When freshmen representatives discuss it, they usually mean radical changes like term limits and huge cuts in staff.


Mexico City Journal; A Glittering Vision of Suburbia Supplants a Dump
Yards from where an army of ragged men hang from rope slings shaping the sides of a strip mining pit on the edge of this city, nearly a dozen modern office buildings are under construction.
Except for a few splashes of purple paint, and the manicured cliffs behind them, they would look completely at home in any New Jersey corporate park.
In an adjoining crater also about six miles from the historic center of the city, workers are applying the marble and brass finishing touches to a fancy new shopping mall.


Review/Television; Spielberg's New Project? It's a Cartoon Dog's Life
Triumphant at the box office with the dinosaurs in "Jurassic Park," Steven Spielberg now trips over a dog.
Finally having its premiere on CBS tonight at 8 with two back-to-back half-hour episodes, the animated series "Family Dog," which Mr.
Spielberg produced, is about as much fun as a rabies epidemic.
Back in 1987, "Family Dog," written and directed by Brad Bird, was one of the more successful episodes in Mr.
Spielberg's rickety television anthology "Amazing Stories." The next step, of course, was to go for a series.
Working as executive producer with the director Tim Burton ("Batman"), Mr.
Spielberg had 10 episodes finished, at a cost somewhere around $6 million, by the spring of 1991.
The problem: The charm of the original was nowhere in sight.
One likely reason: Mr.
Bird had joined the mass trek of top animators to "The Simpsons."


Kohl Urges Arming of Bosnian Muslims
Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany surprised and irritated his European Community partners by pressing strongly for an end to the arms embargo on Bosnian Muslims at a regional summit meeting that ended here today.
The German leader's appeal was roundly rejected by the other community leaders, but it nonetheless stimulated an intense and at times emotional debate on the Bosnian crisis during a private dinner here Monday night and closed-door negotiations this morning.


For Some Catholic Girls, Dreams of Serving at Altar Are No Longer Just Dreams
As a child, Barbara Decker dreamed of being an altar server like her older brother, John.
Under the rules of the Roman Catholic Church that was impossible -- only boys could serve -- but that didn't keep her from pretending.
At home, she and John would cover a card table with a white cloth.
They would pound Wonder Bread into imaginary communion wafers, and with John playing the part of the priest, they would distribute them to their congregation of stuffed animals.


Health-Care Chiefs' Pay Rises at Issue
The pay of the chief executives of 26 top health-care corporations is rising rapidly and is unrelated to the size or success of their companies, according to testimony scheduled to be delivered before a Congressional subcommittee Wednesday.
Graef Crystal, an expert on executive compensation at the University of California at Berkeley, will say in his prepared testimony, which was released today to certain news organizations, that compensation for health- care executives ranged widely in 1992 at the 26 companies he studied.


Inquiry Sought on Russian Reactors
The United Nations agency overseeing the nuclear power industry called today for an independent international assessment of new evidence Russia has just given it suggesting one of the Chernobyl-type reactors that the major Western nations want shut down is safer than they think.
In a statement here, the International Atomic Energy Agency called for "independent international verification" of the Russian assertions that were presented to a team of 20 nuclear experts from 10 Western countries while they were conducting an intensive examination of this "top of the line" 1,000-megawatt RBMK reactor at Smolensk earlier this month.


Japanese Party Crumbles Further As 44 Quit to Form a Rival Group
The breakup of Japan's governing party widened today with the resignation of 44 more rebellious Members of Parliament who prepared to form a new centrist party that could be the core of a coalition government.
The new party will be headed by the former Finance Minister, Tsutomu Hata, a 57-year-old veteran of the governing Liberal Democratic Party.
Under some scenarios, Mr.
Hata is now in the lead position to become Prime Minister of the new Government.
Working behind the scenes is Ichiro Ozawa, 51, the new group's real power and a shrewd political strategist who now threatens to redraw the power structure that has ruled Japan for 38 years.


Charles Ehlers, 62, of Grace Co., And Wife, Arlene, in Plane Crash
Charles H. Ehlers, a senior executive of W. R. Grace &amp; Company, and his wife, Arlene, died on Friday, when his private plane crashed during takeoff from Martha's Vineyard, Mass.
Mr.
Ehlers, 62, and his wife, 61, lived in Concord, Mass.
Joyce Thorne, Mr.
Ehlers's executive assistant, also died in the crash.
She was 52 and lived in Burlington, Mass.


Jettison the Space Station
It is finally time for Congress to acknowledge that the proposed space station is too expensive to continue while the Federal Government is scrambling to cut expenditures.
There's no doubt that the Clinton Administration has made a valiant, good-faith attempt to pare down the costs of the program.
The White House ordered the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to come up with three proposals for redesigning the station to cut costs drastically.
And it set up a review committee of experts to judge the worthiness of the proposals and the accuracy of the cost estimates.


Nynex Sets Sale of Unit In Britain
The Nynex Corporation said yesterday that as part of its strategy to focus more on telecommunications, it had agreed to sell its British computer-software company for $:93.5 million, or about $139.3 million.
"We have decided to stick to our knitting and that means telecommunications," said Frederic V. Salerno, a vice chairman of Nynex who oversees the software company being sold, the BIS Group Ltd.
"Businesses outside of our core competencies simply require too much management attention."


A Buddhist Ceremony Is Held for Victims of Golden Venture Grounding


Corrections
A brief article yesterday about the Praemium Imperiale Awards for lifetime achievement in the arts misidentified the chief executive of the Fujisankei Communications Group, the primary sponsor of the prizes.
He is Yoshihiko Kobayashi.


Not Cleaning Up
Pollution-control stocks, which are economically sensitive, have lagged as the recovery has sputtered, some analysts say.
The Standard &amp; Poor's index of four pollution-control issues -- Browning-Ferris, Rollins Environmental, WMX Technologies and Zurn Industries -- is down more than 15 percent since the beginning of the year.


Radio Free Europe Will Drop 7 Languages
Acting swiftly to carry out President Clinton's plan to merge all of the Government's international broadcasting operations, Radio Free Europe is set to announce termination early next week of most of its foreign language transmissions.
Since the early 1950's, Radio Free Europe and its sister station, Radio Liberty, have been broadcasting from Munich to what was the Soviet Union and five of its allies.


Bradley Adds 2 Cents to Debate on Beijing
United States Senator BILL BRADLEY, Democrat of New Jersey, a former Olympic gold medalist in basketball, has joined the growing campaign against Beijing's bid to host the 2000 Games.
Bradley wrote a letter to the International Olympic Committee president, JUAN ANTONIO SAMARANCH, expressing "my strong opposition to awarding the Games to Beijing while its Government denies fundamental human rights to its citizens."


Zenith Data and Packard Bell in Deal for New PC's
Packard Bell Electronics Inc. and the Zenith Data Systems Corporation, two companies thriving in differing niches of the personal computer industry but struggling in broader competition, said yesterday that they would join forces to design and manufacture new desktop machines.
The pact also calls for Zenith Data to design and manufacture new notebook models under the Packard Bell label for sale through retailers where Packard Bell has become an established brand.
Zenith Data's parent, Groupe Bull S.A. of France, also agreed to acquire a 19.9 percent stake in privately held Packard Bell for an undisclosed price.


In Honor of Lunch, Humble and Not So
The park was the scene on June 15 of what its promoters touted as the first International Festival of Lunch.
Sponsored by City Guide, an official weekly giveaway for tourists in New York, the event was "a salute to midday cuisine and the people who eat it," said Dana Matthow, publisher of the guide.
In other words, a contest open to anyone who showed up with lunch (homemade or bought) and a soupcon of chutzpah.


Public &amp; Private; Going Nowhere
Like-minded women sighed and said, "It's going to be a long summer." In Minneapolis and St.
Paul, where people joke that there are only two seasons, winter and road work, you don't hear that line very much.But Operation Rescue had come to town, and those who believe abortion should stay legal were expecting the summer to be long and hot, as Wichita's had been just two summers ago.
So far, in fact, the right-wing anti-abortion group, which specializes in clinic blockades and provider harassment, has been remarkably quiet.
There were only two small demonstrations by local anti-abortion groups last weekend, one a photo op of people praying at the 10-foot-high chain-link fence that has recently gone up around the Planned Parenthood parking lot.


Guidelines Board Adopts New Rent Increases
In a raucous four-hour session, the New York City Rent Guidelines Board last night adopted rent increases for rent-stabilized apartments in New York City.
The board's action comes against the backdrop of a Legislative tug-of-war in Albany over the fate of rent regulation.
Yesterday, Senate and Assembly leaders agreed to extend the state's rent regulations for seven days while they continue discussions on whether to loosen regulations on certain luxury apartments.


Was He or Wasn't He? Tagliabue to Decide
National Football League Commissioner PAUL TAGLIABUE is expected to make a decision before the week is out on a Washington Redskins' complaint that the Houston Oilers broke a trade agreement for linebacker WILBER MARSHALL.
Tagliabue will hear from both sides today or tomorrow in either New York or Washington, the N.F.L. said Monday.


RESULTS PLUS
SOCCER  U.S.
Squanders Lead, and Heads Home  The United States wasted a three-goal lead in the last 25 minutes and was eliminated from the America Cup with a 3-3 tie against Venezuela last night in Quito, Ecuador.
The Americans went ahead on goals by Chris Henderson in the 20th minute, Peter Vermes in the 36th minute and Dominic Kinnear in the 51st.
But Jose Dolgetta scored in the 65th and 77th minutes and Miguel Echanaussi in the final minute.
The United States, 2-8-10 this year, was playing for the first time in the America Cup, South America's biennial championship.
The Americans, who are missing most of their good players, previously lost to Uruguay, 1-0, and Ecuador, 2-0, and had been the only team not to score in the tournament.
The tie clinched advancement to the quarterfinals for Uruguay (1-0-1), which played Ecuador late last night.
Venezuela (0-1-2) is unlikely to advance as one of the two-best third-place teams because of a minus-5 goal differential. (AP) YACHT RACING  Block Island Race Finally Begins  The 169 sailboats gathered off Rhode Island for Block Island Race Week finally got started yesterday after light winds and fog on Monday postponed the start for a day.
The fleet, separated into 14 divisions, managed two races yesterday in 12-23-knot breezes.
Dennis Conner, sailing his 60-foot yacht, Winston, crossed the finish line first in both races as an unofficial entry.
Conner, four-time defender of the America's Cup, said last week that he was using Race Week as a shakedown series for Winston.
The new ocean racerwill be sailing trans-Atlantic July 3 on its way to the start of the Whitbread Round the World Race, scheduled for late September.
First place under the big boats' handicap rule was Infinity, a new 50-foot sloop designed by Nelson/Marek and owned by John Thomson of Port Washington, L.I.
On board Infinity was Tom Whidden, Conner's tactician in several America's Cup campaigns.


Civil War Takes Its Toll on Sarajevo


In American-Russian Youth Orchestra at Yale, a Chord of Hope
Eighty of the best young musicians from the United States and Russia have gathered here to create an orchestra that organizers hope will foster political as well as musical harmony between the two nations.
As an added benefit, the organizers say, the program is bringing together Russian youths from different regions of the country that until now have been largely closed off from one another.


Ogle Freely, Dine With Discernment
IT'S too bad you can't eat ambiance.
At many of the beautiful old diners, it would probably taste a whole lot better than the food.
Cherished though they may be as nostalgic icons of the American road, the reputation of diners as places to eat is about on the same level as highway service areas and airport cafeterias.
Still, devotees of stainless steel, Naugahyde and Formica keep searching for diners that dish out the blue-plate meals of our dreams: meatloaf and bacon-rich succotash, a hot turkey sandwich with a mountain of creamy mashed potatoes and gravy flowing like lava from a high-cholesterol volcano.


Congressional Roundup; Senate Passes a Smaller Stimulus Bill
The Senate today approved by voice vote a far smaller version of President Clinton's ill-fated economic stimulus package, with fresh financing for summer jobs and child immunization and an unexpected last-minute Republican addition on welfare.
The supplemental appropriations bill is a diminutive orphan of the original $16 billion stimulus package, which was killed on April 21 after a Republican filibuster.
The new $1.9 billion bill is not proposed as an economic stimulus because it includes a few million dollars more in cuts than added expenditures, but it will bring some relief to hard-pressed cities.


Donald Knight Clifford; Advertising Executive, 93
Donald Knight Clifford, a retired New York advertising executive, died on Sunday at Lawrence Hospital in Bronxville, N.Y., where he had lived for nearly 70 years.
He was 93.
The cause was cancer, his family reported.


SENATORS BRACING FOR FIGHT ON PLAN TO INCREASE TAXES
With some of their careers and perhaps the eventual success of Bill Clinton's Presidency on the line, senators prepared today to begin voting on raising taxes and curbing popular programs.
Senators from both parties agree that the budget package will pass by the end of the week on a party-line vote with almost all the Democrats in favor and all the Republicans opposed.


European Community Sets Terms For 6 Former Soviet Allies to Join
Responding to criticism that it has done little to help the emerging democracies of Eastern Europe, the European Community formally invited six former Soviet-bloc countries today to join the regional group when their economic and political conditions permit.
No target date for entry was set, and none of the six countries -- Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Romania and Bulgaria -- are likely to be ready for membership before 2000.
"We're talking some years ahead," one European official said at the end of a European summit meeting here.


What Do Teachers Want Most? Help From Parents
What's the biggest problem in American education today?
Not students, but their parents, according to a nationwide survey of teachers.
By a substantial majority, teachers in the annual Metropolitan Life Survey of the American Teacher, conducted by Louis Harris &amp; Associates, placed greater parental involvement in their children's education at the top of their list of policy priorities.
Fifty-four percent of the 1,000 teachers surveyed by telephone around the country listed parental involvement as the top public-policy priority.


Tired After 2 Decades at City Hall, Young Will Retire as Detroit Mayor
After dominating Detroit politics and government for two decades, Coleman A. Young, the first black Mayor of the nation's eighth-largest city, said today that he no longer had the vitality to campaign for office or run a big city and would not seek re-election this fall.
Mr.
Young, who is 75 and suffers from emphysema, had kept everyone guessing about his intentions until a news conference this afternoon.
For weeks he had told reporters and confidants that he had not decided whether to run for a sixth four-year term.


Beyond 'Jurassic Park': Few Jobs in Old Bones
Michael Kass forges through intensive courses in geology, mathematics and chemistry.
He spends summer vacations searching for ancient bones in hot, dusty quarries.
Words like "Mesozoic" and "velociraptor" roll easily off his tongue.
But Mr.
Kass, a graduate student in paleontology at Brigham Young University in Provo, Utah, worries that he will not find a job once he leaves school.
After all, few paleontologists have the luxury of hunting dinosaur fossils for a living, like the adventure-seeking duo in the movie "Jurassic Park." Other opportunities, including museum work, teaching and research, are almost as scarce.


Lloyd's Had a Loss of $4.3 Billion for 1990
Lloyd's of London today posted an annual loss of more than $4.3 billion, a slightly worse-than-expected result that only compounded the gloom that has pervaded the venerable insurance institution.
The huge loss was for 1990, the latest year to be tallied under the Lloyd's system of waiting three years to allow all claims to be processed.
The loss, which was a result of heavy payouts on insurance policies and a spate of court cases charging fraud and mismanagement at Lloyd's, will take a heavy toll on the individuals who finance Lloyd's and are personally responsible for paying its obligations. 'Low Point'
"It represents in every way the low point of Lloyd's history in the last 305 years," David Rowland, the insurer's chairman, told hundreds of the investors at the annual meeting here.


Corrections
The American League baseball standings yesterday carried an erroneous entry in some copies for third place in the Eastern Division.
That spot belonged to the Yankees; the Mets were correctly listed in last place in the Eastern Division of the National League.


Notebooks May Hold Key to I.B.M.'s Revival
When I.B.M. brought Bruce Claflin back from Tokyo last year to manage the company's notebook computer unit, he was elated.
The 40-year-old marketing executive had been given his own business to run.
Then reality set in.
"It took me about a month to understand how deep a hole the business was in," Mr.
Claflin recalled.
"I don't think you could get it any worse than it was."


Plan to Set Banks' Role In Community Lending
In a step that could exert a broad influence over how much money banks lend in poorer communities, New York State banking authorities intend to establish new regulations setting a fixed percentage of deposits that would have to be plowed back into local communities.
The New York proposal was outlined today by Derrick D. Cephas, the state's Superintendent of Banks, in testimony before the House Banking Committee's Subcommittee on Oversight.
The proposal would be considerably stricter than the current system imposed by Federal law, the Community Reinvestment Act, which uses qualitative rather than quantitative standards for reinvesting in local communities.
It would give New York's own regulators a much more direct role in supervising lending practices within the state.


Two Tasks for Albany -- Ban Assault Weapons
The gang that pulled off four subway robberies last weekend terrorized riders with what witnesses described as automatic weapons.
Mercifully, no shots were fired.
But what about next time?
Assault rifles like Uzis and AK-47's are the weapons of choice these days among gangs and drug dealers.
Yet New York has not joined Connecticut and New Jersey in banning them.
Republicans in the State Senate stand in the way.
When will they get the message that citizens who've had it with guns matter more than lobbyists?
The State Assembly has approved a near-total ban on assault weapons -- the first time either house has done so.
The measure might stand a chance in the Republican-controlled Senate if the majority leader, Ralph Marino of Long Island, would endorse and push it.
Instead, he's neither for nor against.
"He's open on it," says his spokesman, John McCardle.
"He's willing to reconsider."


Corrections
An article yesterday about Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato misidentified the person with whom he said he would confer about running for governor.
It was his mother, Antoinette, not his brother, Armand.


Endless Season


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about Iran's political isolation referred incorrectly in some editions to a group of countries that view Iran as a menace.
Because the group includes Israel (along with Algeria, Egypt and Tunisia), it should have been characterized as regional, not Islamic.


Health Insurer Is Investigated By Prosecutor
Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan District Attorney, has begun a criminal investigation into Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield.
Mr.
Morgenthau confirmed yesterday that his office had issued subpoenas this week for documents kept by Empire, the state's largest health insurer.
He said he had begun the inquiry, which he described as preliminary, after recent published reports about possible financial irregularities at the company.


Bid Is $148.1 Million. Going, Going . . .
Bidding for the Baltimore Orioles jumped to $148.1 million yesterday after two potential ownership groups increased their offers for the team.
The latest offer was made on behalf of a group of Baltimore investors that includes a lawyer, PETER ANGELOS; sports broadcaster JIM McKAY, tennis player PAM SHRIVER and LEONARD WINEGLASS, chairman of Maryland based retailer Merry-Go-Round Enterprises.


Metropolitan Diary
DEAR DIARY:
The nomination of Zoe Baird to be Attorney General resulted in a flurry of phone messages for our 6-year-old granddaughter, Zoe, in New Jersey.
She had a great role model to emulate.
The Zoes of this world were going to make it.
When that nomination was withdrawn, we mourned with the younger Zoe.
The nomination of Lani Guinier to head the Justice Department's civil rights division resulted in another flurry of calls to Zoe's 3-year-old sister, Lani.
As an added factor, we were old friends of the Guinier family from the time they had lived in Queens.
Naturally, our disappointment was great when our Lani's namesake didn't make it, either.


Raymond Thuilier, French Restaurateur And a Top Chef, 96
Raymond Thuilier, the chef who founded the Oustau de Baumaniere, one of the fine restaurants of France, died on Sunday at his home in Carita, near Les Baux-de-Provence.
He was 96.
Mr.
Thuilier opened his luxury hotel-restaurant in a converted sheep farm at Les Baux in 1946 and ran it until 1990, when he was succeeded by his grandson, Jean-Andre Charial.
Mr.
Thuilier was known for his classic French cuisine, with multiple courses and distinct sauces, while his grandson has tried to lighten and streamline the cuisine.


Unseeded, Not Uncheered
Two sights make Zina Garrison-Jackson happy: her entourage and the green, green grass of Wimbledon, where she was a finalist in 1990.
After a nasty spat with Pam Shriver last week, Garrison-Jackson felt comfortable today in a 6-2, 7-5 victory over Sabine Hack of Germany.
Garrison-Jackson had a dozen family members and friends standing on the edge of Court 4 as she scampered on her favorite surface.
There were also dozens of black fans in the crowded aisles to watch the leading black female player, who is currently ranked 21st and unseeded here.


Iran's Police Begin A Dress-Code Drive As Complaints Rise
Iran's morals police have begun a nationwide crackdown on "vice and social corruption" in city streets, but after hundreds of arrests and with public indignation running high, President Hashemi Rafsanjani has declared that the operation has gone wrong, a newspaper reported today.
More than 800 women were arrested for dress code violations in Teheran, with many detained for wearing sunglasses, witnesses said.
Several clashes between the vice squads and the public were reported, and a Western European diplomat was said to have been beaten on Sunday for refusing to allow the authorities to search his car.


As Tina Turner, Wig to High Heels
"Jurassic Park" may be the summer's biggest movie success so far, but the surprise hit is the splashy, highly charged musical melodrama "What's Love Got To Do With It."
Adapted from Tina Turner's autobiography, "I, Tina," written by Ms.
Turner and Kurt Loder, the movie chronicles the singer's ferocious 16-year marriage and musical partnership with Ike Turner, the blues musician who discovered her and tore her down by beating and otherwise abusing her.
The film was directed by Brian Gibson, from a screenplay by Kate Lanier.


Save Us All From the White House Press Corps; Right to Ask
To the Editor:
My ABC News colleague Brit Hume took, I think, an unfair rap in the Rose Garden when he asked the President why it took him so long to pick a Supreme Court nominee -- whether this suggested a "zigzag" in White House decision making -- and got an angry response.
The President said he was tired of reporters asking questions about political process over substance, and implied this was manifestly insensitive.


COMPANY NEWS: Cheerios and X's; How to Play With Cereal, But Without the Milk
Cereal shoppers can have their games and eat them, too, with tick-tack-toe-inspired Cheerios, due in stores next month.
General Mills Inc. plans to add "X's" to the O-shaped cereal, the first time a new shape will appear in the product since its introduction as "Cheerioats" in 1941.
The company estimates that about 8,000 potential game pieces, about 4,400 X's and 3,600 O's, will be inside each 20-ounce box of regular Cheerios.


Sports of The Times; What Will Mets Rebuild With?
AT last, the Mets' co-owners have used the dreaded word that is baseball's synonym for surrender.
The word is rebuild.
"We're here," Fred Wilpon was saying yesterday as Nelson Doubleday stood next to him, "to rebuild a championship team."


Market Place; A Media Company's Prospects Hinge on an F.C.C. Ruling.
IT was an interesting day in the markets yesterday for Silver King Communications.
The company, which owns 12 UHF television stations, announced falling revenues for the quarter, which ended May 31, along with plunging profits.
And then its stock hit a 52-week high of $10.125 a share, up $1, in Nasdaq trading.
That's up from a low of $2.875 a share on April 16.
Wall Street's lust for a media company with falling earnings is the result of a subtle wrinkle in the battle between TV stations and cable systems, and a growing expectation -- perhaps unfounded -- that, after months of poor performance, something may be about to go Silver King's way.


Pazienza Boasts He's Too Tough to Be Counted Out of the Big Time
Given what he has overcome to get to this point, it is not a great leap of faith to believe what former world champion Vinnie Pazienza says: that his neck, once broken and still painful, will not stop him from beating Lloyd Honeyghan in a 12-round middleweight bout Saturday night.
Pazienza is reappearing in the big time as part of a feature that will be headlined by the heavyweight main event between Evander Holyfield, in a comeback of his own, and Alex Stewart.


Save Us All From the White House Press Corps
To the Editor:
"Mr. Clinton Picks a Justice" (editorial, June 15) closes an otherwise excellent discussion of President Clinton's Supreme Court nomination by criticizing Mr.
Clinton's "intemperate response to a reporter's question about his erratic selection process." Boy, are you wrong!


Pulling Out of Fort Apache, the Bronx; New 41st Precinct Station House Leaves Behind Symbol of Community's Past Troubles
"It was bad," George Hankins said as he sat in the shade in the South Bronx, his 260-pound boxer's body bending the chair beneath him.
"When I first came to the precinct there were the youth gangs: Savage Skulls, Savage Nomads, Ghetto Brothers, Black Spades, Spanish Mafia, Seven Immortals, Seven Crowns."
He stretched his memory back 25 years to his days as a rookie patrolman in the 41st Precinct, whose station house was known from here to Hollywood as Fort Apache, a solitary outpost in a neighborhood of death and decay and gangs with grandiosely macabre names.


Uncovered Short Sales on the Big Board and the Amex
Largest Increases
Security Name
06/15/93
05/14/93
Change
+EMC Corp
5,042,805
2,469,042
2,573,763
N
Amer Tel &amp; Tel
4,842,593
2,628,526
2,214,067
N
Exxon Corp
3,695,299
1,994,540
1,700,759
N
+Schwab (Charles)
4,456,049
2,758,048
1,698,001
N
Newmont Mining Corp
3,796,238
2,119,232
1,677,006
N
Wal-Mart Stores Inc
13,004,167
11,378,401
1,625,766
N
Disney (Walt) Co
15,760,376
14,161,712
1,598,664
N
U.S. Surgical Corp
9,437,029
8,138,503
1,298,526
N
Coca-Cola Co
5,723,410
4,519,095
1,204,315
N
WMX Technologies
2,579,978
1,395,063
1,184,915
N
Johnson &amp; Johnson
2,940,032
1,768,551
1,171,481
N
Philip Morris Cos.
2,716,282
1,560,925
1,155,357
N
LTV Corp
6,076,719
4,925,076
1,151,643
N
City National Corp
1,642,398
537,614
1,104,784
N
United Healthcare
2,319,864
1,262,552
1,057,312
N
Pacific Gas &amp; Elec
1,482,266
496,143
986,123
N
Ford Motor Co
11,928,226
10,969,146
959,080
N
Chrysler Corp
17,751,320
16,801,362
949,958
N
Duracell Int'l
3,883,358
2,942,373
940,985
N
Apache Corp
4,095,510
3,158,296
937,214
N
Imperial Chem (ADR)
1,497,406
576,869
920,537
N
T2 Medical Inc
5,761,903
4,850,065
911,838
N
Amoco Corp
1,701,939
806,678
895,261
N
+Office Depot Inc
2,835,456
1,951,382
884,074
N
Home Depot Inc
12,803,072
11,923,992
879,080
N
Largest Decreases
Security Name
06/15/93
05/14/93
Change
First Bank Syt Inc
1,397,722
5,616,912
-4,219,190
N
*Kirby Corp
312,469
2,870,104
-2,557,635
A
Motorola Inc
6,317,080
8,493,751
-2,176,671
N
British Petrol (ADR)
647,516
2,670,400
-2,022,884
N
Magna Intl Inc. Cl A
1,742,146
3,494,334
-1,752,188
N
Repsol, S.A. (ADR)
208,146
1,944,167
-1,736,021
N
Marvel Enter Group
2,181,049
3,909,999
-1,728,950
N
Lowe's Companies
1,803,299
3,100,965
-1,297,666
N
Alza Corp (Com Stk)
2,727,364
4,016,376
-1,289,012
N
Primerica Corp
1,498,019
2,780,623
-1,282,604
N
Dime Savings Bank
247,096
1,277,186
-1,030,090
N
Hong Kong Tele (ADR)
1,120,620
2,071,048
-950,428
N
Nrn Sts Pwr
565,540
1,500,630
-935,090
N
Unisys Corp
9,229,869
10,159,444
-929,575
N
Natl Medical Enter
1,882,796
2,754,043
-871,247
N
Carolina Pwr &amp; Light
3,499,869
4,313,201
-813,332
N
Freeport-McMoran C&amp;G
2,253,932
3,045,498
-791,566
N
Promus Cos.
525,613
1,309,819
-784,206
N
Humana Inc
660,924
1,428,889
-767,965
N
San Diego Gas &amp; El
640,139
1,387,012
-746,873
N
Philips NV
636,018
1,378,879
-742,861
N
Glaxo Holdings (ADR)
1,004,191
1,738,567
-734,376
N
RJR Nab Hldgs D/S A
907,740
1,639,848
-732,108
N
Blanch (EW) Holdings
33,410
732,900
-699,490
N
Western Resources
374,543
1,059,560
-685,017
N
Largest Positions
Security Name
06/15/93
05/14/93
Change
Chrysler Corp
17,751,320
16,801,362
949,958
N
Disney (Walt) Co
15,760,376
14,161,712
1,598,664
N
Wal-Mart Stores Inc
13,004,167
11,378,401
1,625,766
N
Marriott Corp
12,983,074
13,106,662
-123,588
N
Home Depot Inc
12,803,072
11,923,992
879,080
N
Ford Motor Co
11,928,226
10,969,146
959,080
N
Blockbuster Enter
11,600,148
11,700,715
-100,567
N
RJR Nabisco Hldgs
10,917,728
10,619,097
298,631
N
+Energy Service (R)
10,723,313
6,734,409
3,988,904
A
U.S. Surgical Corp
9,437,029
8,138,503
1,298,526
N
GM Class E Comm
9,283,987
8,920,680
363,307
N
Unisys Corp
9,229,869
10,159,444
-929,575
N
Intl Game Technology
8,943,272
8,929,797
13,475
N
News Corp (ADR)
8,609,426
8,559,910
49,516
N
American Barrick
7,074,047
6,880,898
193,149
N
Bell Atlantic Corp
6,514,131
5,754,930
759,201
N
+Elan Corp (R)
6,339,334
5,631,895
707,439
A
Motorola Inc
6,317,080
8,493,751
-2,176,671
N
LTV Corp
6,076,719
4,925,076
1,151,643
N
T2 Medical Inc
5,761,903
4,850,065
911,838
N
Coca-Cola Co
5,723,410
4,519,095
1,204,315
N
Shoney's Inc
5,629,033
5,283,032
346,001
N
Kroger Company
5,544,501
5,425,816
118,685
N
Conner Peripherals
5,061,760
5,181,775
-120,015
N
+EMC Corp
5,042,805
2,469,042
2,573,763
N
Largest Cover Ratios
Security Name
06/15/93
Avg. Vol.
Days
Mkt
Fleming Companies
4,198,828
52,647
80
N
Marriott Corp
12,983,074
177,190
73
N
Omnicom Group Inc.
3,927,228
54,695
72
N
General Host Corp
1,661,800
25,238
66
N
Russ Berrie &amp; Co
2,387,120
43,833
54
N
Fedders Corp
1,094,191
25,109
44
N
Autozone Inc
4,111,762
104,819
39
N
Thermo Electron Corp
2,192,487
55,857
39
N
+Epitope Inc
1,818,169
47,195
39
A
Mark IV Indust
2,321,408
60,561
38
N
Midwest Resources
1,047,635
29,133
36
N
Penn Pwr &amp; Lt Co
2,296,080
62,947
36
N
Scana Corp
1,239,244
33,957
36
N
Southwestern Pub Svc
1,459,589
40,885
36
N
Symbol Technologies
2,440,851
67,457
36
N
Vons Companies
2,293,764
63,571
36
N
*Davstar Ind Ltd
1,097,925
30,325
36
A
Solectron Corp
3,366,537
95,952
35
N
Amer Stores Co
2,538,953
73,723
34
N
+Schwab (Charles)
4,456,049
130,790
34
N
+Elan Corp
6,339,334
187,905
34
A
Delmarva Pwr &amp; Lt
1,430,761
43,404
33
N
Petrie Stores Corp
1,661,577
49,723
33
N
Cooper Companies
921,536
28,819
32
N
Surgical Care Aff
4,418,855
139,200
32
N
New York Stock Exchange
Security Name
06/15/93
05/14/93
Abbott Labs
800,680
1,022,589
Abitibi-Price Inc.
470,600
532,200
#ACM Govt Income
135,721
9,660
Acuson Corp
867,401
893,066
Adams Express
478,671
484,701
ADT Ltd (Com Shs)
321,300
354,269
Advanced Micro Dev
3,084,825
2,827,751
Aegon NV (Ord Shs)
416,846
431,000
Aetna Life Casualty
808,446
561,119
Affiliated Pub Ser A
763,009
766,717
Aflac Inc.
407,428
256,300
Ahmanson (Hf) &amp; Co
1,644,142
1,520,732
Air Products Chem
262,495
178,195
Alaska Air Group
327,251
320,248
Albertson's Inc
576,046
527,615
Alcan Aluminium Ltd.
812,946
711,237
Alcatel Alsthom-Adr
251,985
169,679
Alco Standard Corp
736,583
569,824
Alex. Brown Incorp
795,682
708,534
#Alexander &amp;Alexander
242,659
112,107
#Allegheny Pwr
885,399
404,466
Alliedsignal Inc
328,335
355,218
#Aluminum Co of Amer
972,655
508,292
Alza Corp (Com Stk)
4,016,376
5,321,907
AM International
636,941
672,534
#Amax Gold Inc.
336,675
138,140
Amax Inc
1,218,466
1,015,247
Amer Brands
1,333,034
1,142,795
Amer Elec Pwr
1,473,079
1,677,525
Amer Express Co
2,138,862
2,696,704
Amer Home Products
938,639
2,206,568
Amer Stores Co
2,610,591
2,500,666
#Amer Strat Incm Port
6,100
291,198
Amer Tel &amp; Tel
2,628,526
2,895,314
Amerada Hess Corp
162,544
514,068
American Barrick
6,880,898
6,644,801
American Cyanamid Co
268,294
219,539
American Intl Group
790,107
680,728
#American Re Corp
184,600
47,530
Ameritech Corp
676,137
1,003,355
Amoco Corp
806,678
1,603,476
AMP Inc
833,655
601,889
AMR Corp
3,612,279
3,247,611
Amsco Int'l Inc
709,753
522,867
#Amsouth Bancorp
188,189
55,802
Anacomp, Inc.
1,633,855
1,988,255
Anadarko Petroleum
1,373,820
1,216,909
Analog Devices
282,363
423,874
Anheuser Busch Co
1,650,782
1,371,390
Anntaylor Stores
1,152,108
1,432,101
#Anthem Electr
280,730
160,140
AON Corp
367,310
299,955
Apache Corp
3,158,296
3,002,084
Archer Daniels
262,434
274,233
Arkla, Inc
352,626
313,819
Armco Inc
1,036,291
757,030
Armstrong World Ind
832,536
638,914
Arrow Electronics
869,864
778,909
Artra Group Inc
291,190
291,790
Arvin Ind,inc
755,250
794,066
ASA Limited
929,557
773,850
#Asarco Inc
276,855
89,784
Atlantic Energy Inc.
695,382
745,823
Atlantic Richfield
826,489
568,174
Automatic Data Proc
589,140
571,448
Autozone Inc
3,501,697
2,833,645
#Avnet Inc
692,153
45,100
Avon Products
771,750
1,140,061
Baker Hughes Inc
1,341,339
965,490
#Ball Corp
229,334
94,655
Bally Mfg Corp
780,897
988,854
Balt Gas &amp; Elec Co
401,048
650,884
#Baltimore Bancorp
20,704
215,128
Banc One Corp
3,004,135
5,022,369
Bandag Inc
367,575
391,949
Bank of Boston Corp
3,555,607
3,223,683
Bank of New York
2,617,142
2,613,793
#Bankamerica 6 1/2% G
32,664
275,582
Bankamerica Corp
3,086,167
2,513,626
Bard (C R) Inc.
326,755
306,154
Barnett Banks Inc
1,223,421
1,364,319
Baroid Corp
1,751,125
1,619,954
Battle Mtn Gold
925,701
712,762
Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc
401,992
271,175
Baxter International
541,704
647,414
#BCE Inc
177,910
956
Bear Stearns Co
2,933,856
2,265,862
Bell Atlantic Corp
5,754,930
5,813,835
BellSouth Corp
303,788
430,788
Best Buy Co., Inc.
1,220,405
876,449
Bethlehem Steel Corp
2,793,388
2,227,258
#Betz Labs Inc
307,542
115,253
Beverly Enterprises
4,900,882
5,189,663
Black &amp; Decker Corp
808,260
1,143,839
Block (H &amp; R) Inc
644,216
543,936
Blockbuster Enter
11,700,715
12,102,246
Boeing Company
1,639,507
1,389,084
Boise Casc $1.79 D/S
281,655
171,256
Boise Cascade Corp
699,119
687,060
#Borden Inc
3,249,032
1,271,504
Boston Celtics LP
312,263
310,000
Boston Edison Co
348,085
738,255
#Boston Scientific
244,830
53,811
Bowater Inc
564,117
690,799
BP Prudhoe Bay Rlty
271,500
257,220
Bradlees Inc
605,919
672,592
Breed Technologies
397,214
298,400
Briggs &amp; Stratton
60,710
196,044
Brinker Int'l
272,203
212,271
Bristol-Myers Squibb
1,119,937
2,055,610
#Brit Steel Final ADR
27,447
297,979
British Airways(ADR)
754,130
675,766
British Petrol (ADR)
2,670,400
2,979,107
Brooke Group Ltd
288,949
177,444
Browning Ferris Ind
401,442
287,536
Brunswick Corp
998,621
834,346
Buenos Aires Emb-Adr
296,656
N.L.
Burlington Northern
907,654
1,096,870
Burlington Resources
451,258
346,871
Cabletron Systems
444,246
306,647
Cadence Design Sys
921,627
616,337
Caesars World
825,393
825,019
CAL Fed Bank "A"
743,242
1,076,379
Caldor Corp
383,651
261,628
Calgon Carbon Corp
524,393
485,914
Callaway Golf Co
1,273,810
1,260,138
Campbell Soup Co
598,388
522,226
Canadian Pacific Ltd
342,522
372,370
#+Capital Holding Co
270,864
129,080
Carnival Cruise Cl A
2,053,351
1,614,400
Carolco Pictures
598,219
392,166
Carolina Pwr &amp; Light
4,313,201
4,575,764
Carter Hawley
271,569
279,919
Carter-Wallace
1,009,183
948,051
Catalina Marketing
419,212
411,354
#Catellus Develop
607,405
243,993
Caterpillar
1,132,818
1,418,838
CBS Inc
518,413
1,110,633
Centerior Ener Corp
449,780
490,805
Centura Banks
309,179
322,932
Century Telephone
1,367,864
1,335,375
Ceridian Corp
300,559
242,825
Champion Intl Corp
1,095,801
1,050,154
Chase Manhattan Corp
994,341
1,086,607
#Chemical Banking
1,486,923
688,182
Chemical Waste Mgt
1,487,923
2,099,924
Chevron Corp
1,884,849
2,166,593
Chiquita Brands Intl
678,316
653,115
Chock Full O'Nuts
1,634,066
1,665,467
Chrysler Corp
16,801,362
13,849,138
Chubb Corp
791,925
639,972
Cigna Corp
465,237
430,375
Cigna High Incme Shs
288,925
253,942
Cincinnati Milacron
342,421
226,343
Cineplex Odeon Corp
884,000
911,252
Cinn Gas Elec Co
760,933
703,547
Cipsco Inc (Hldg Co)
1,746,487
1,801,500
Circuit City Stores
943,109
930,947
Circus Circus Ent
872,674
740,670
Citicorp
4,375,461
6,507,573
City National Corp
537,614
815,069
#Clark Equipment Co
226,641
72,100
Clayton Homes Inc
1,682,436
1,544,643
Clorox Co
679,667
671,698
CML Group, Inc.
2,526,628
1,670,977
CMS Energy Corp
370,711
277,842
CNA Financial Corp
271,205
294,586
Coachmen Ind, Inc
724,593
664,185
Coast Savings Fin
592,699
470,900
Coastal Corp
531,168
472,947
Coca Cola Co
4,519,095
4,511,789
Coca-Cola Enter
1,334,925
1,525,425
#Coeur D'Alene Mines
1,044,760
449,506
Colgate-Palmolive Co
1,040,449
679,013
#Colonial Interm High
137,566
2,128
#Coltec Industries
926,130
201,030
Columbia Gas System
1,009,159
1,222,821
Comdisco Inc
232,555
370,765
Comerica Inc
284,925
242,725
Commodore Intl
940,232
913,979
Community Psychr
1,423,182
1,639,208
Compaq Computer Corp
2,191,801
2,135,714
Compusa Inc.
3,627,045
3,969,786
Computer Assoc Intl
462,668
333,498
Conagra Inc
2,207,875
1,510,159
Conner Peripherals
5,181,775
6,955,327
Conse
1,977,891
1,825,973
Consl Frght $1.54d/S
341,600
212,700
Consolidated Ed
1,360,477
1,651,683
Consolidated Freight
274,080
325,708
Consolidated Nat Gas
860,236
670,916
Consolidated Rail
272,226
529,178
Consolidated Stores
1,841,507
1,210,506
#Consr G Grp Dina-Adr
6,525
194,000
Continental Bank
187,150
316,071
#Continental Corp
506,035
199,758
Contl Medical System
2,976,645
2,992,410
Cooper Companies
923,610
914,536
#Cooper Ind Inc
670,872
230,913
Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber
449,736
376,535
Corning Inc
1,761,773
1,291,446
Countrywide Credit
3,504,099
3,676,473
CPC Intl Inc
804,739
545,696
Craig (Jenny) Inc
278,630
297,008
Cray Research Inc
412,801
530,609
Crown Cork &amp; Seal Co
238,314
696,157
CSX Corp
559,950
601,613
Ctl &amp; South West
2,193,976
1,790,246
Ctl Maine Pwr
477,700
539,106
Ctl Vermont Pub Svc
240,175
540,086
CUC Int'l Inc
480,507
817,395
Cummins Engine Co
977,243
849,235
Cwealth Ed Co
1,466,143
1,555,121
#Cyprus Minerals Co
280,274
67,925
Dallas Semiconductor
326,357
326,412
Dames &amp; Moore Inc
293,974
272,782
#Damon Corp
35,802
329,425
Dana Corp
1,126,465
958,940
Danaher Corp
426,660
377,895
Data General Corp
478,821
618,913
Dayton-Hudson
299,390
476,637
Dean Witter Discover
277,863
269,228
Deere &amp; Co
281,873
456,761
Delmarva Pwr &amp; Lt
1,398,182
1,916,338
Delta Air Lines, Inc
3,208,635
3,967,320
#Deluxe Corp
274,721
110,526
Detroit Ed Co
397,642
417,038
Dexter Corp
253,300
227,729
Diagnostek, Inc.
497,243
719,513
#Dial Corp. (The)
307,660
173,785
Digital Equipment
793,115
654,130
Dillard Dep't Cl A
566,648
549,126
#Dime Savings Bank
1,277,186
351,920
Discount Auto Parts
482,948
477,701
Discount Corp of Ny
320,600
321,808
Disney (Walt) Co
14,161,712
14,412,885
Dole Food Company
629,740
613,035
#Dominion Resources
619,566
338,389
Dover Corp
281,224
299,171
Dow Chemical Co
1,341,857
1,268,731
Dow Jones &amp; Co
339,495
843,325
DPL Inc
881,477
814,300
DQE
577,574
818,119
Dresser Inds Inc
168,342
498,641
Duke Pwr Co
1,560,086
1,406,916
Dun &amp; Bradstreet
484,737
374,595
DuPont (EI) de Nem
1,399,283
1,707,057
Duracell Int'l
2,942,373
2,044,597
Duty Free Intl
1,940,752
2,376,033
E.W. Blanch Holdings
732,900
N.L.
Eastman Kodak Co
3,565,884
5,389,887
Edwards (AG) Inc
303,118
260,121
Eg&amp;G Inc,
418,614
403,445
#Elcor Corp
407,757
186,538
EMC Corp
2,469,042
2,300,090
Emerson Electric Co
635,497
730,566
Employee Benefit Pln
457,269
797,954
Enquirer/Star Group
551,711
563,700
Enron
939,906
833,853
Enserch Corp
607,508
459,410
Entergy Corp
559,217
785,602
#Equitable Companies
4,038,715
2,120,120
Ethyl Corp
266,579
422,520
Exel Limited
266,974
264,078
Exxon Corp
1,994,540
3,226,038
Fairchild Corp Cl A
633,600
640,900
#Fay's Inc
4,002
122,500
Fed Express Corp
594,576
755,022
Fed Home Loan Mtge
844,583
853,554
Fed National Mtge
876,382
713,599
Fed Paper Board
1,441,321
1,135,968
Fedders Corp
1,103,042
1,176,838
Federal-Mogul
777,600
823,476
Federated Dept Store
670,521
1,862,447
#Ferro Corp
283,509
153,912
First Bank Syt Inc
5,616,912
4,783,377
First Chicago Corp
761,091
741,598
First Fidelity Banco
923,382
608,892
First Fin Management
843,993
957,627
First Intst Bancorp
586,187
528,002
First Repub Bancorp
434,457
412,627
First Union Corp
1,110,327
1,233,841
Fisher Scientific
807,990
725,101
#Fisher-Price Inc
20,796
170,835
Fleming Companies
4,327,743
4,261,376
Flightsafety Int'l
588,187
547,637
Florida Progress
871,852
1,037,750
Fluor Corp
367,674
512,714
Foodmaker Inc
1,191,943
1,152,280
Ford Motor Co
10,969,146
9,416,868
Foundation Health
573,440
995,929
FPL Group Inc
1,036,340
774,151
Franklin Resources
736,688
733,580
Freeport-McMoran C&amp;G
3,045,498
2,851,964
Freeport-McMoran Inc
4,777,157
4,769,122
Fuqua Ind Inc
429,518
388,521
Galen Health Care
534,525
659,459
Gap,inc
1,547,215
1,038,891
Gen Motors Ser A Prf
940,380
862,155
Gencorp Inc
886,952
803,955
Genentech (New)
657,830
430,577
General Amer Inv
523,262
530,067
General Dynamics
182,590
332,572
General Electric Co
2,670,438
2,771,575
General Host Corp
1,640,002
1,620,000
General Mills, Inc
1,246,470
940,837
General Motors Corp
2,037,060
2,139,833
General Pub Util
1,358,730
1,011,755
General Re Corp
250,056
297,437
#Georgia Gulf
526,500
198,900
Georgia-Pacific
768,517
1,058,422
Gerber Products Co
1,348,385
1,175,570
Gillette Co
1,013,394
696,096
Glaxo Holdings (ADR)
1,738,567
1,382,190
Glenfed
3,096,758
3,334,600
GM Class E Comm
8,920,680
10,066,542
#GM Class H Comm
227,970
72,415
Goodrich BF Co
288,954
347,855
#Goodyear Tire Rubber
1,877,434
1,036,270
Grace (WR) Co (Hldg)
2,194,288
1,811,580
#Grand Met (ADR)
263,350
118,755
Great Atl &amp; Pacific
266,670
302,675
Great Lakes Chemical
157,892
410,252
Great Western Fin
1,088,734
1,189,999
Grow Group, Inc
993,035
857,950
GTE Corp
1,053,447
1,183,320
Gtech Hldgs Corp
348,461
331,628
Hadson Corp
1,085,338
1,174,522
Halliburton Co
715,774
527,294
Hancock Fabrics Inc
304,567
318,317
Hanson (ADR)
1,781,668
2,318,930
#Harcourt General
191,514
63,903
Harley-Davidson, Inc
497,834
349,434
Harnischfeger Indust
196,727
441,346
Hca-Hosp Corp Am "A"
368,722
346,066
Health Images Inc
1,222,217
1,335,162
Healthtrust Inc-Thc
1,429,758
919,589
#Hecla Mining Co
717,093
373,555
Heinz (Hj) Co
1,936,888
1,886,214
Hercules Inc
1,360,748
1,260,175
Hershey Foods Corp
431,224
338,589
Hewlett-Packard Co
1,586,673
1,349,273
Hibernia Corp (Cl A)
410,919
406,039
Hills Department Str
399,825
399,000
Hilton Hotels Corp
313,658
282,000
HMO America, Inc.
483,651
398,180
Home Depot Inc
11,923,992
8,522,127
Home Shopping Net
1,116,914
1,756,231
Homestake Mining Co
1,385,611
1,523,517
#Honeywell Inc
1,322,283
677,784
Hong Kong Tele (ADR)
2,071,048
1,904,066
Horace Mann Educator
374,350
433,780
Horizon Healthcare
953,284
1,057,018
#Horsham Corporation
316,311
143,806
#Houston Ind, Inc
905,163
403,272
Huffy Corp
916,983
936,315
Humana Inc
1,428,889
1,506,459
ICN Pharmaceuticals
991,176
1,032,246
IES Industries
318,713
290,742
#IMC Fertilizer Group
601,477
290,403
Imcera Group Inc
333,840
348,686
Imperial Chem (ADR)
576,869
777,207
Inco Limited
627,356
611,178
#Ingersoll-Rand Co
416,776
213,823
Intellicall, Inc.
252,799
259,291
Interco Inc
592,666
486,231
Intl Business Mach
3,748,744
4,475,301
Intl Game Technology
8,929,797
9,478,195
Intl Paper Co
1,125,339
924,866
#Intl Rectifier Corp
211,655
80,941
#Intrcap Ca Insd Muni
461,056
4,400
#Intrcap Insd Mun Inc
341,421
450
Ionics, Inc.
690,607
595,653
Ipalco Enterprises
251,444
440,396
Itel Corp
2,290,915
2,245,590
ITT Corp
292,054
285,779
James River Corp
310,664
374,682
Jamesway Corp
726,835
728,235
Johnson &amp; Johnson
1,768,551
1,770,553
Jones Apparel Group
392,711
376,645
Jostens Inc
456,667
551,210
JWP Inc
2,611,718
2,521,286
Kaiser Aluminum
594,657
538,634
Kansas City Pwr Lt
928,147
805,171
Kaufman &amp; Broad Home
836,039
793,244
Kellogg Co
2,681,584
2,102,202
#Kemper Corp
832,901
379,550
Kerr-McGee Corp
771,472
608,541
Keycorp
1,007,098
1,297,310
Kimberly Clark Corp
457,646
395,934
KLM Royal Air
76,834
209,488
Kmart D/S A "Percs"
585,300
835,767
Kmart Corp
3,143,404
2,127,336
Knight Ridder
613,290
664,814
Koger Properties
756,761
774,007
Korea Fund Inc
584,209
615,007
Kroger Company
5,425,816
5,361,498
L.A. Gear, Inc.
1,595,494
1,523,938
#Latin Amer Invest
49,676
325,425
LG&amp;E Energy Corp
763,358
706,706
Lilco
629,203
393,446
Lilly (Eli) &amp; Co
820,219
691,492
Limited, Inc, The
1,279,331
1,592,109
#Litton Ind, Inc
2,691,481
1,461,705
Liz Claiborne, Inc.
2,510,058
1,947,317
Lockheed Corp
553,652
555,984
Loctite Corp
305,928
222,558
Loews Corp
235,389
354,586
Logicon Inc
322,147
322,148
Lone Star Ind Inc
287,654
335,588
Longs Drug Stores
1,223,222
1,145,264
Loral Corp
134,829
254,310
Louisiana-Pacific
162,793
354,343
Lowe's Companies
3,100,965
3,621,891
#LSI Logic Corp
237,279
73,067
LTV Corp
4,925,076
4,651,364
LTV Corp $1.25 Ser D
610,293
595,804
LTV Corp $3.06 Pr B
482,310
482,352
LTV Corp $5.25 Pr C
351,600
354,841
Lubrizol Corp, the
208,854
436,191
Luby's Cafeterias
253,227
157,474
LVI Group Inc
1,036,374
998,674
Lyondell Petrochem
517,482
426,300
Magma Copper Co
732,782
443,709
Magna Intl Inc. Cl A
3,494,334
3,554,318
Magnetek Inc
2,337,882
2,316,044
Manor Care Inc
1,831,953
2,004,205
Manpower Inc
1,919,705
1,412,230
Marion Merrell Dow
795,420
730,670
Mark IV Indust
2,011,965
1,911,428
Marriott Corp
13,106,662
12,882,456
Marsh &amp; McLennan
320,722
295,043
Marvel Enter Group
3,909,999
3,579,532
Masco Corp
511,888
351,402
Mattel Inc
3,170,993
2,698,348
Maxus Energy
463,248
795,966
May Department Store
284,213
394,954
Maytag Corp
601,981
747,850
McDermott Intern'l
339,281
237,655
McDonald's Corp
1,291,345
1,872,269
McDonnell Douglas
4,055,070
4,646,479
MCN Corp (Hldg Co)
340,732
303,571
Medical Care America
2,715,636
2,718,641
Medtronic Inc
548,495
360,425
Mellon Bank Corp
1,073,957
1,094,448
Merck &amp; Co
3,617,764
3,476,622
Merrill Lynch &amp; Co
1,782,732
1,949,206
#Merry-Go-Round
125,055
533,928
Mesa Inc.
1,129,010
761,347
Mgic Invest Corp
1,264,050
1,211,064
Micron Tech
385,187
280,894
Mid-Amer Waste Sys
1,443,130
1,392,720
Midwest Resources
691,791
570,865
Millipore Corp
651,079
479,522
Minn Mng &amp; Mfg (3m)
1,355,187
1,228,964
Minn Power &amp; Light
669,216
705,260
Mirage Resorts, Inc.
1,711,892
1,597,950
MNC Financial, Inc.
353,588
358,519
Mobil Corp
1,492,713
1,549,032
Monsanto Co
365,661
387,991
Montana Pwr Co
630,457
622,446
Morgan Stanley Group
443,240
450,990
Morton Int'l, Inc.
203,351
334,596
Motorola Inc
8,493,751
8,385,880
Muni Advatage Fund
1,083,842
N.L.
Municipal Partners
312,908
520,538
Murphy Oil Corp
379,226
366,090
Mylan Labs Inc
3,571,683
3,083,214
Nat'l Health Labs
4,372,415
4,839,470
National City Corp
641,222
535,375
National Semiconduct
1,428,559
1,500,814
Nationsbank Corp
2,230,907
1,907,404
#Natl Medical Enter
2,754,043
1,286,569
Navistar Internat'l
361,666
500,159
NBD Bancorp, Inc
1,854,763
1,955,692
Nevada Pwr Co
1,405,330
1,311,852
New Eng El System
1,503,985
1,467,375
New Plan Realty
708,005
689,173
New York State E/Gas
559,000
540,775
Newell Co.
1,155,356
1,108,239
Newmont Gold Co
325,500
610,184
Newmont Mining Corp
2,119,232
1,691,395
News Corp Ltd (ADR)
8,559,910
7,549,140
#Niagara Mohawk Pwr
1,042,377
422,043
Nike Inc Class B
569,137
802,059
#Nipsco Industries
1,200,726
595,702
#Noble Affiliates,inc
100,295
1,497,841
Norfolk Southern Co
441,660
461,522
#North Amer Mtge Co
279,348
80,329
Northeast Utilities
631,646
578,551
Norwest Corp
1,281,163
1,353,396
#Novacare, Inc.
1,019,112
263,335
Nrn Sts Pwr
1,500,630
1,939,588
Nrn Telecom Ltd
1,169,886
1,216,059
Nucor Corp
495,371
628,806
Nutmeg Industries
1,051,696
1,127,210
Nynex Corp
153,666
279,505
#OAK Ind Inc
3,000
129,200
Oakwood Homes Corp
336,916
347,519
Occidental Petrol
3,183,930
3,410,702
OEA, Inc.
887,645
1,017,998
Office Depot Inc
1,951,382
2,462,566
Offshore Pipelines
535,080
514,137
Ogden Corp
1,224,633
1,267,661
Ogden Projects Inc
326,224
356,310
Ohio Ed Co
1,216,766
1,324,305
Oklahoma Gas &amp; El
395,273
316,866
OLD Republic Intl
485,908
530,437
Olin Corporation
389,564
366,441
Omnicom Group Inc.
3,486,045
3,552,658
#Orange &amp; Rock Utls
334,042
180,249
Oryx Energy Company
1,118,700
1,415,508
Outboard Marine Corp
1,107,744
1,350,253
Owens-Corning Fiber
2,823,403
3,154,733
#Owens-Illinois Inc
603,413
21,885
Pacific Enterprises
101,223
342,561
Pacific Gas &amp; Elec
496,143
582,470
Pacific Telesis Gr.
414,401
506,544
Pacificorp
2,424,857
2,008,843
Paine Webber Inc
1,135,724
1,038,607
Pall Corp
955,843
767,000
Parker Drilling Co
321,052
731,257
Parker-Hannifin Corp
504,233
340,011
Penn Pwr &amp; Lt Co
2,081,360
2,096,194
#+Penney (JC) Co
1,217,284
580,169
#Pep Boys M M &amp; Jack
477,485
256,837
Pepsico Inc
1,818,123
2,207,576
Perkin-Elmer Corp
723,807
669,362
Petrie Stores Corp
1,865,930
1,860,743
Petroleum &amp; Resource
400,208
400,738
Pfizer Inc
1,798,720
1,112,881
#Phelps Dodge Corp
939,996
281,484
Phila Electric Co
853,002
956,354
Philip Morris Cos.
1,560,925
2,223,652
#Philips N.V
1,378,879
486,158
Phillips Petroleum
391,498
917,592
#PHM Corp. (Holding)
225,845
87,250
#Pier 1 Imports
771,486
439,857
#Pilgrim Regional Bk
125,700
7,890
Pinnacle West Cap
57,937
193,466
Pitney Bowes
282,184
362,167
PNC Bank Corp
934,016
858,291
Polaroid Corp
316,903
366,968
Policy Management
255,130
208,103
Portland Genl Corp
1,309,052
1,895,024
Potomac El Pwr Co
2,439,076
2,551,973
Praxair Inc
530,476
551,152
Presley Companies
309,070
255,487
Primerica Corp
2,780,623
2,334,682
#Procter &amp; Gamble
3,350,055
1,741,772
Promus Cos. Inc
1,309,819
1,393,503
PS Group
612,675
606,950
#PSI Resources Inc.
272,877
1,123,750
Pub Svc Co Colorado
220,945
401,700
Pub Svc New Mexico
1,023,300
1,080,859
Public Svc Enter Grp
675,709
620,125
Puget Sound Pwr &amp; Lt
526,535
482,904
Quaker Oats Co
1,633,691
1,074,924
Quantum Chemical
1,037,167
1,269,163
Ralston Purina Co
1,159,389
760,265
Raychem Corp
409,015
404,299
Raytheon Co
382,372
474,995
Reader's Digest "A"
754,493
744,561
Reebok Intl Ltd
943,373
873,716
#Reliance Elec Co "A"
200,600
77,799
#Repsol, S.A. (ADR)
1,944,167
197,380
Republic NY Corp
514,500
383,600
#Revco D.S. Inc
127,323
3,602
#Rhone-Poulenc Ord A
543,264
150
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer
881,502
829,196
Riverwood Intl Corp
313,400
303,500
RJR Nab Hldgs D/S A
1,639,848
2,116,694
RJR Nabisco Hldgs
10,619,097
9,573,750
Rochester Gas &amp; El
355,949
396,120
Rockefeller Center
1,447,831
1,451,120
Rockwell Intl Corp
414,503
656,544
#Rohm &amp; Haas Co
216,538
99,355
Rohr, Inc.
372,122
396,588
Rollins Environment
408,926
356,112
Rowan Companies
707,367
803,036
Royal Appliance Mfg
1,803,808
1,839,520
Royal Caribbean
163,361
N.L.
Royal Dch Ptrl 5 Gld
1,316,482
920,110
Rubbermaid Inc.
804,206
969,041
Russ Berrie &amp; Co Inc
2,322,548
2,865,547
Safety-Kleen Corp
696,777
898,924
Safeway Inc
4,034,375
2,718,117
Salomon Bros Fund
317,804
270,804
Salomon Inc
332,768
463,439
San Diego Gas &amp; El
1,387,012
926,457
Santa Fe Pacif Corp
329,788
316,947
Sara Lee Corp
1,744,291
1,191,480
Savannah Foods &amp; Ind
923,315
905,501
Scana Corp
803,266
528,522
Scecorp (Hldg Co.)
809,810
689,537
Schering-Plough Corp
828,100
625,221
Schlumberger Ltd
855,659
927,296
Schwab (Charles)
2,758,048
2,978,491
Scientific Atlanta
734,120
941,839
Seagram Co. Ltd
1,154,107
886,333
Seagull Energy
262,552
212,903
Sealed Air Corp
386,758
388,458
Sears Roebuck &amp; Co
1,276,405
1,408,589
Seitel, Inc.
416,564
413,922
Sensormatic Elec
950,869
752,580
Sequa Corp Cl A
357,782
290,582
Service Corp Intl
819,498
1,085,320
Shawmut National
681,225
740,281
Shell T+t (New ADR)
165,318
387,000
Sherwin-Williams Co
134,194
361,513
Shoney's Inc
5,283,032
5,103,612
Sierra Pacific Res.
601,411
988,008
Signal Apparel Cl A
293,100
254,900
Silicon Graphics
1,535,925
1,116,878
#Sizeler Property Inv
129,221
20
Smith Intl Inc
545,291
476,830
Smith's Food/Rx Cl B
829,625
799,211
Smthkl Beech ADR Eqt
1,019,344
925,344
Snyder Oil Corp
2,536,517
1,902,852
Society Corp
812,982
724,682
Solectron Corp
3,449,602
2,934,387
Sotheby's Hldgs Cl A
1,251,133
1,142,268
Southdown Inc
519,702
576,752
Southern Co
928,793
1,060,503
Southern Indiana G&amp;E
359,233
369,566
Southern Natl Corp
608,728
423,805
Southwestern Bell
494,203
571,807
Southwestern Pub Svc
1,654,415
1,273,866
Sprint Corp
4,317,800
4,336,678
Standard Comm Corp
355,402
333,000
#Standard Pacific
295,159
150,800
Sterling Software
430,490
287,858
Stone Contain $1.75e
264,817
158,900
Stone Container Corp
1,960,077
2,019,657
Storage Tech
3,294,700
2,619,435
Stratus Computer Inc
351,362
466,378
Stride Rite Corp
249,170
522,583
Student Loan-Vot C/S
488,575
353,606
Sun Co, Inc
421,862
348,172
#Sunbeam-Oster Co
815,105
428,354
Sunshine Mining Co
2,699,624
2,100,948
Suntrust Banks Inc
465,820
286,577
Superior Indust Intl
310,701
394,512
Surgical Care Aff
4,314,425
3,945,675
Svc Merchandise Co
896,458
782,151
Symbol Technologies
2,558,124
2,959,568
Syntex Corp
1,053,460
980,000
Sysco Corp
2,557,726
2,869,255
T2 Medical Inc
4,850,065
5,025,013
Tambrands Inc
668,912
915,000
Tandem Computers
756,513
787,046
Tandy Corp
1,042,876
1,280,536
#Tandycrafts Inc
57,327
233,229
TCBY Enterprises
341,906
309,180
Teco Energy
647,756
695,621
Tektronix, Inc
115,957
341,140
Tel de Mexico ADR L
1,675,233
3,490,891
Telecom Corp NZ ADR
282,476
337,111
Teledyne Inc
368,630
388,498
Telef de Espana ADR
495,275
742,184
Templeton Emerging
358,011
341,792
Tenneco $2.80 D/S A
87,616
248,146
#Tenneco Inc (Hld Co)
538,734
273,901
Teradyne, Inc
354,884
580,790
Terex Corp
575,900
398,350
Texaco Inc
540,463
903,567
Texas Instruments
1,352,884
830,902
Texas Util Co
856,139
895,117
Textron Inc
280,371
336,700
Thermo Electron Corp
1,936,469
1,875,751
Thomas &amp; Betts
396,243
338,285
Tiffany &amp; Co.
1,729,075
1,689,765
Time Warner Inc.
1,239,311
833,214
Times Mirror Co, The
1,515,092
1,209,546
TJX Companies Inc.
1,088,851
1,107,638
Tosco Corp
298,155
291,080
Toys "R" Us, Inc
3,595,950
3,772,137
Trans Mar Mex(Adr L)
568,900
539,500
#Transamerica Corp
55,376
286,516
Transco Energy Co
453,149
559,116
Travelers Corp
769,542
646,230
Tri Continental Corp
252,198
238,058
Trinity Ind
259,930
163,319
#Trinova Corp
176,021
48,800
Triton Energy Corp
974,717
1,361,032
TRW Inc
335,021
526,831
Tucson El Pwr Co
2,977,817
3,138,166
Tultex Corp
305,248
276,000
Tyco Labs Inc
1,041,009
1,061,552
Tyco Toys, Inc.
651,771
618,003
U's Surgical Corp
8,138,503
6,891,607
U's West Inc
704,443
950,844
UAL Corporation
1,165,210
873,273
UDC Homes Inc
307,565
291,402
Unifi, Inc.
1,359,557
1,221,518
Unilever NV (Ord)
545,532
386,752
Union Camp Corp
611,337
495,714
Union Carbide Corp
1,472,864
1,591,855
Union Elec Co
398,219
467,577
Union Pacific Corp
449,780
508,774
Union Planters Corp
761,523
652,850
Union Texas Petrol
681,539
739,546
Unisys Corp
10,159,444
10,623,876
Unisys Ser A Pfd
916,577
912,553
United Asset Manage
1,055,031
922,737
United Healthcare
1,262,552
1,191,632
United Tech Corp
614,628
571,495
#Universal Health
2,432
203,838
Unocal Corp
1,358,027
1,304,923
Upjohn Company
844,205
1,358,580
USAir Group Inc
1,842,053
2,767,803
USF&amp;G Corp
404,814
717,825
USG Corp
391,265
N.L.
UST Inc
968,403
1,414,691
USX-Marathon Group
519,912
1,228,071
USX-U.S. Steel Group
1,484,559
977,586
Utilicorp United Inc
814,307
470,385
Valassis Communictns
1,910,357
1,849,828
#Valero Energy
258,973
100,037
#Value Health
340,750
92,637
Value Merchants, Inc
1,182,548
1,086,191
Varity Corp (Del)
1,067,353
729,525
Vencor Incorp
329,071
276,792
Venture Stores
251,307
146,423
Vodafone Group (ADR)
1,193,828
740,619
Vons Companies, Inc.
2,228,990
1,615,450
Waban Inc
1,217,695
1,112,635
Wachovia Corp
1,216,234
1,307,844
Wal-Mart Stores Inc
11,378,401
10,663,928
Walgreen Co
949,520
990,863
Warnaco Group Cl A
672,532
725,000
Warner Lambert Co
518,986
797,068
Washington Water Pwr
654,550
812,640
Waste Management
1,395,063
842,775
Waterhouse Inv Svcs
293,804
308,504
Webb (Del) Corp
255,511
251,081
#Weingarten Rlty Inv
12,794
275,195
Weis Markets Inc
515,200
520,916
Wellcome (ADR)
323,389
363,298
#Wellman, Inc.
224,806
39,862
Wells Fargo &amp; Co
1,120,946
763,844
Wendy's Intl
1,531,820
1,446,208
Western Digital Corp
389,729
547,500
Western Resources
1,059,560
814,172
Westinghouse Elect
2,414,455
1,966,867
Westinghouse$1.53dep
624,900
608,500
Weyerhaeuser Co
485,148
912,430
Wheelabrator Tech
491,659
637,170
Wheeling-Pitt
588,261
543,888
Whirlpool Corp
2,187,359
2,123,078
Williams Cos. Inc
679,718
664,335
#Williams Coal Seam
35,024
161,879
Willis Corroon (ADR)
82,074
274,000
Windmere Corp
711,500
688,900
Winn-Dixie Stores
1,100,663
1,145,523
Wisconsin Energy
653,534
486,656
Wisconsin Pub Svc
855,400
1,003,738
WMS Industries
546,032
356,430
Woolworth Corp Hldg
446,841
631,383
Worldcorp, Inc.
362,000
325,200
WPL Holdings, Inc.
250,997
342,130
Wrigley (Wm) Jr Co
766,352
575,682
Wstrn Co N Amer
515,979
521,749
Xerox Corp
508,112
1,123,624
Zapata Corp
524,678
522,783
Zenith Electronics
2,666,619
2,722,612
Zweig Fund,inc.
373,955
373,000
American
Air &amp; Water Tech Cor
262,900
241,009
ALC Communications
886,014
1,001,019
*Alpine Group (The)
513,261
487,761
*Amdahl Corp
348,816
233,508
Audre Recognition
799,764
675,227
*Aurora Electronics
602,650
694,074
*Belmac Corp
943,507
740,633
Beta Well Service
364,160
393,239
Bombay Company
401,759
339,990
Cablevision Sys Corp
298,100
299,350
Calif Energy Co
278,198
255,659
Carrington Labs Inc
327,315
347,391
*Chambers Devel A
539,704
665,623
+Cheyenne Software
1,782,182
N.L.
Citizens First Banco
642,900
564,589
Clinicorp Inc
321,542
407,049
Columbia Lab
669,200
686,465
CST Entertainment
376,300
376,350
*Davstar Ind Ltd
952,647
894,925
*Echo Bay Mines Ltd
825,695
509,840
*Elan Corp
5,410,114
4,315,576
#*Energy Service
6,694,309
3,031,314
*Epitope Inc
1,690,129
1,836,687
*Forest Laboratories
703,038
703,472
Fruit of the Loom
611,912
550,053
*Giant Food Inc A
161,848
309,740
*Greyhound Lines Inc
1,074,681
901,488
*Gulf Canada Res Ltd
861,358
982,037
*Hasbro Inc
2,469,360
1,808,668
Health Professionals
1,039,108
1,156,096
*Hillhaven Corp
2,600,700
3,495,900
Hondo Oil&amp;Gas
684,100
644,535
*Howtek Inc
804,681
825,641
*I C H Corp
467,700
444,400
IGI Inc
191,687
421,737
*Interdigital Comm
3,309,700
3,243,317
*Ivax Corp
3,954,109
3,915,631
*Jan Bell Marketing
687,516
810,652
*Kirby Corp
2,870,104
2,874,416
*Medco Research
915,366
920,543
*Media Logic
443,200
424,499
#*Nabors Ind
1,901,694
983,976
*New Line Cinema Corp
677,350
750,250
*New York Times Co
1,672,727
1,625,159
#NTN Communications
465,999
158,094
*O'Brien Environment
781,900
783,350
Olsten Corp
422,232
499,082
*Organogenesis
649,481
652,180
Plains Resources
767,450
762,308
#PLC Systems
73,810
386,203
*Porta Systems Corp
397,552
453,667
Response Tech
395,400
395,400
*Royal Oak Mines Inc
300,188
808,700
SPI Pharm
298,914
294,501
*Sterling Elect Corp
259,446
344,821
Sulcus Computer Corp
1,555,915
1,632,985
*Thermo Instrument
889,302
887,588
Tubos D Acero
362,142
577,012
*Turner Broad Sys Clb
1,588,338
2,231,656
*US Bioscience Inc
606,959
787,684
*US Filter Corp
465,746
458,952
Viratek Inc
396,960
394,040
+Wang Lab Cl B
2,817,022
N.L.
Short Sales Tables Explained  These tables show issues with a short interest position in the current month of at least 250,000 shares or a change up or down from the previous month of at least 115,901 shares.
Cover ratio represents the number of days, at average volume level, that it would take to purchase the number of shares sold short.
A -- American Stock Exchange.
N -- New York Stock Exchange.
N.L. -- Not listed.
+ -- Stock split.
* (American Stock Exchange only.) May have been affected by arbitrage transactions resulting from any one or more of the following: proposed or pending acquisitions; convertible securities of the same company; rights offerings; stock splits or distributions; tenders; other special situations.
Short interest may also be affected by options positions.
# Indicates a change of 75 percent or more from the previous month.


A Nudging Up of Rates Is Considered by the Fed
After rising unexpectedly in the beginning of the year, inflation seemed to have abated in May, but the Federal Reserve remains haunted by its specter.
Another inflationary spike this year strikes most economists as unlikely in an economy that remains subdued.
But the Fed's policy makers say they are toying with the notion of nudging up interest rates anyway to make doubly sure that inflation does not return.


Accounts
*
Comerica Bank-Texas, Dallas, to W.B.
Doner &amp; Co., Southfield, Mich., to handle advertising throughout Texas, previously handled by Maxwell Sandoz, Dallas.
Doner already handles Comerica Bank's advertising in Michigan and Illinois.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Litchfield Insurance Group, Torrington, Conn., to the Magee Marketing Group Inc., Wethersfield, Conn., to handle its account, previously at Graham Communications, Quincy, Mass.
Billings were not disclosed.


Anthony Fahnestock, A Stock Manager, 52
Anthony E. Fahnestock, an investment manager in Manhattan, died on Monday at home in Navesink, N.J.
He was 52 and also lived in Brooklyn.
The cause was cancer, his family said.
For the last seven years Mr.
Fahnestock was a partner and the senior vice president of Desai Capital Management, where he helped oversee investments in growth companies like Au Bon Pain, Loehmann's and Snapple Beverage.


Man Who Would Be Kin In Minuet With President
President Clinton and the man who says he is his half-brother both talked a lot today about talking to one another, but neither quite managed to get through by telephone.
The pattern was probably familiar to anyone with siblings.
But as it played out on morning television and in the Oval Office, the blend of good will and reticence struck an oddly public note.


Review/Television; Men and Women and Sex and Power
Fans of talk shows and news programs will have noticed that sexual harassment has replaced date rape as television's offense of the season.
Both subjects enjoy that good old man-woman appeal, but, as tonight's edition of CBS's "48 Hours" demonstrates, charges of harassment have more reach and variety.


Campus Journal; From 'Not College Material' to Stanford's No. 2 Job
When Condoleezza Rice was at St.
Mary's Academy in Denver, a counselor studying her standardized test scores said she was not college material, despite her straight-A record.
Ms.
Rice was hurt by the assessment, which her parents, both educators, encouraged her to ignore.
She did, and went on to graduate from the University of Denver at the age of 19 and earn her doctorate there at 26.
She became a leading Soviet scholar and, for two years, an adviser to the National Security Council in the Bush Administration, helping shape policy toward the newly configured Eastern Europe and Soviet Union after the collapse of Communism.


Review/Jazz Festival; Musically Sparring, in a Friendly Way, of Course
Jazz has always used a friendly competition to turn the burners up under soloists, and George Wein, the founder of the JVC Festival and the pianist at Monday night's show, "After 45 Years: George Wein and the Newport All-Stars," at Town Hall, took advantage of the tradition.
The concert, part of the JVC Jazz Festival, was defined by two encounters during the second half.
The trumpeters Doc Cheatham and Jon Faddis came out and performed a series of startlingly witty and empathetic duets.
Then Gerry Mulligan and Wynton Marsalis appeared and proceeded to push each other to increasingly vibrant and intricate improvisations.
The 39-year-old Mr.
Faddis and the 88-year-old Mr.
Cheatham are regular sparring partners, and after Mr.
Cheatham shaped a perfect solo on "I've Got the World on a String," Mr.
Faddis joined him for a duet on "On the Sunny Side of the Street." Mr.
Faddis soloed first, sending clear high notes to the ceiling.
Then Mr.
Cheatham improvised, fooling with the melody, only to start singing the song.
"I do not know the words," he sang, scatting a bit until he came to the line "I'd be rich as Rockefeller," which he interpreted as "I'd be rich as George Wein."


Duties Ended On Computer Flat Screens
Caught in the awkward position of fostering one high-technology industry at the expense of another, the Commerce Department has revoked import duties on advanced screens that are used in laptop computers and other equipment.
In its decision, announced late Monday, the department brushed aside the protests of a handful of fledgling American companies, which argued that the duties were crucial to developing a domestic advanced-screen industry.
Flat-panel displays that are capable of producing vivid colors and detailed images are central components in notebook computers and are expected to be used heavily in high-definition television systems.


Sheffield to Be Arraigned in Absentia
GARY SHEFFIELD of the San Diego Padres faces arraignment on a misdemeanor assault charge today in Houston.
Sheffield will not be present at the hearing -- the Padres will be in San Francisco playing the Giants.
The Houston lawyer, CHRIS TRITICO, will represent Sheffield and enter his not guilty plea.


Arm Bosnians? Clinton Didn't Mean It
In a further sign of confusion in the Clinton Administration policy toward Bosnia, the United States today played down the significance of a letter from President Clinton to Chancellor Helmut Kohl of Germany urging him to support a stillborn American effort to arm the Muslim Government of Bosnia.
The letter included a sentence that the German leader assumed was a marching order from the United States to lobby the European Community to allow Bosnia's Muslims to arm themselves against the Bosnian Serbs and Croats.


Anatomy of a Disaster
Benchmarks in Al Harazin's brief tenure as general manager of the Mets.


Trial Is Moved for 2 Charged in Burning Of a Brooklyn Man
The trial of two white Florida men accused of burning a tourist from Brooklyn because he was black has been moved to West Palm Beach.
After eight futile days of jury selection here, Judge Donald Evans of State Circuit Court ordered the trial moved beyond the Tampa television market.
A tentative starting date of Aug. 23 has been set.


DDB Needham Quits A Longtime Account
Abandoning its efforts to hold on to a longtime, once-lucrative account, DDB Needham New York said yesterday that it would immediately resign its remaining assignments from the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company.
Billings were estimated at $9.5 million, compared with $20 million to $25 million as recently as four years ago, before Bristol-Myers began moving accounts to other shops on its roster from DDB Needham.
The decision was a painful one for DDB Needham.
Its relationship with the client dates to 1969, when one of its predecessor agencies, Doyle Dane Bernbach, joined the Bristol-Myers roster.
But Andy Berlin, the president of DDB Needham New York, said, "It wasn't a relationship that was going anywhere."


Two Tasks for Albany -- Pass the Gay Rights Bill
The New York State Senate's majority leader, Ralph Marino, has been stalling for months.
But as the Legislature chugs toward summer recess, New Yorkers will soon know where Mr.
Marino and his 34 G.O.P. colleagues stand on anti-gay bigotry.
Pending before the State Senate is an overdue civil rights bill passed in February by the Democrat-led Assembly.
Like similar laws in eight states, the measure would bar discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in employment, housing, public accommodations, education and credit.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the United States Supreme Court's decision to let stand a New York State income tax on nonresidents referred incorrectly to the status of a New Jersey Senate bill to impose a similar commuter tax on nonresidents.
Late on Monday, the Senate postponed its vote until next week.
The article also misstated the scope of the proposed tax in New Jersey.
It would apply only to New York residents.


Meal Deduction on Table, But Congress Won't Bite
One line in the Senate's budget bill, overlooked because it has never been publicly debated, would affect the tens of millions of Americans who have expense accounts.
But they need not worry.
It will never become law.
It would require businesses to have receipts for any expense of more than $20 for which they claim a tax deduction.
The threshold is now $25.


Teacher Unions, Long Far Apart, Discuss a Merger
After decades of hostilities, the nation's two main teachers' unions are talking about merging.
The issue will be on the table at the annual meeting of the 2.1-million-member National Education Association in San Francisco next week.
The other union, the 820,000-member American Federation of Teachers, has long been open to such a merger.
And although people from both unions say that significant differences remain and that an actual merger is a long way off, they also say merging makes sense now.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 18
June 11
June 19
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.3
7.2
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.0
2.9
Gasoline stocks
225.9
224.7
221.8
Distillate stocks
106.4
103.5
100.1
Crude imports, daily
7.6
7.6
5.7
Product imports, daily
1.8
1.5
1.4
Crude stocks
352.2
343.4
341.1
Crude production, daily
6.8
6.8
7.1
Refinery utilization (%)
92.3
92.6
91.4
Source: American Petroleum Institute


New Questions on Tory Campaign Financing
Already battered by a series of political miscues and polls showing declining support, Britain's Conservative Party is now facing questions about the propriety of its campaign finances, leaving Prime Minister John Major once again on the defensive.
In the latest disclosure, The Guardian reported today that the Conservatives accepted as much as $10.5 million from people with ties to the Saudi Arabian Government just before last year's general election.
The Conservative Party's own rules prohibit accepting contributions from foreign governments, although they are not illegal.


Pat Nixon Dies of Lung Cancer at 81


AT WORK WITH: Pete Castellotti; The Whole Is Greater Than the Slices
PICTURE it. The perfect pizza. Bubbling cheese, charred crust, sizzling sauce.
Well, for Pete Castellotti, the owner of John's Pizzeria, it's even more perfect than that.
His pizza is solid gold, studded not with sausage, mushroom and fresh garlic, which is John's biggest seller, but with sapphires and rubies.
This dream pizza hangs around Mr.
Castellotti's neck on a braided gold chain, which he displays proudly.
And often.
He had it made for himself a few years back, and while he was at it, he had one made for his son, Pete Jr., who works with him.
"He don't ever wear it," Mr.
Castellotti says.
"I'll kill him."


Little Movement in Treasury Rates
Interest rates were little changed yesterday as securities dealers concentrated on digesting a large supply of new Treasury issues while awaiting more economic data to provide clues to future rate moves.
At the regular monthly auction of new two-year notes, the Treasury sold $16 billion of 4 1/8 percent notes with an average yield of 4.14 percent.
The average rate was little changed from 4.17 percent a month earlier and closer to the bottom than the top of its range for the last six months.
Since late 1992 the two-year issue has ranged from a high of 4.72 percent on Dec. 22 to a low of 3.88 percent on April 27.


Court Rules That First Lady Is 'De Facto' Federal Official
Ruling that Hillary Rodham Clinton was a full-time Government official, a Federal appeals court today approved the secrecy of her task force on health care and essentially acquiesced in Mrs.
Clinton's views about the role and powers of the First Lady.
The ruling, by the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, came in a case filed by doctors and others seeking to force the panel, the Task Force on National Health Care Reform, to conduct its business in public.


H. Huber Boscowitz Retired Packaging Executive, 91
H.
Huber Boscowitz, a retired packaging-industry executive and former champion bridge player, died on Monday at his Manhattan home.
He was 91.
He died after a brief illness, said Julia Meade, a friend.


The Pop Life
Gabriel's Just Causes
Peter Gabriel is a busy man, as usual.
After five years off the road, the English rocker is touring the world again in a show wrapped in high-tech visuals and special effects.
Tonight, he's bringing it to Brendan Byrne Arena in the Meadowlands and on Thursday, to Madison Square Garden.
The Womad Festival, which he conceived and co-founded in 1980 as a showcase for musicians from developing countries, is coming to the United States this year for the first time.


Pat Nixon, Former First Lady, Dies at 81
Pat Nixon, the quiet consort who stood by her husband, Richard M. Nixon, in the White House and out, through victory, defeat, sorrow and illness, died yesterday at their home in Park Ridge, N.J.
She was 81.
Mrs.
Nixon, who had been ill for several years, died of lung cancer, said Kim Taylor, a spokeswoman for the Nixon family.


Lunches for $19.92 Were So Popular, They're Now $19.93
IT would be wonderful if all price increases were as small as this one.
Last summer, a number of New York restaurants offered lunches for $19.92, in a program organized for the week of the Democratic National Convention.
The price has been increased by a penny for this summer's special lunches, offered in addition to the regular menus.
They will be served July 6 to July 11 as part of NY93 Summer in the City, a promotional effort by businesses and the city government.


Punitive Tariffs Raised Against Foreign Steel
In a move angering European and Asian steelmakers, the Clinton Administration announced steep penalties today on steel from 19 countries that the Commerce Department said had been sold at less than fair value.
The ruling would more than double the price of some imported steel -- and, for many foreign companies, significantly increase punitive duties beyond the levels of the preliminary penalties announced in January.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Steep penalties were announced on steel from 19 countries that the Commerce Department said was being dumped in the United States.
The ruling angered European and Asian producers and could more than double the price of imported steel.  [ Page D1. ]
Import duties on advanced computer screens were revoked by the Commerce Department, which rejected calls for protection from domestic companies that wanted to make the screens.  [ D1. ]


Books of The Times; New Evil. New Empire. Same Fun.
The Night Manager  By John le Carre  429 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $24.
In John le Carre's last suspense novel, "The Secret Pilgrim," he put a final punctuation mark on the cold war by having George Smiley, his legendary, all-too-human character, sum up his career for the next generation of British spies.
Something one of Smiley's colleagues said at the end of that rich and rather philosophical novel remains in mind: "Now we had defeated Communism, we were going to have to set about defeating capitalism."


Arthur H. Kunz Is Dead at 59; Guided Long Island Development
Arthur H. Kunz, a government planner who helped guide Long Island's development as one of the nation's largest suburban areas, died on Saturday at a hospital in Smithtown, L.I., where he lived.
He was 59.
His family said he died of a heart attack after making a good recovery from a transplant of a kidney donated by his daughter six weeks ago.


Political Director Is Replaced in White House Staff Shake-Up
Continuing a staff shakeup, Thomas F. McLarty 3d, the White House chief of staff, has decided to replace Rahm Emanuel, President Clinton's political director, with Joan N. Baggett, a former union lobbyist who has been Mr.
Emanuel's deputy.
Mr.
Emanuel will become deputy communications director, White House officials said.
His replacement, which had been rumored for weeks, comes as Mr.
McLarty prepares to put the final touches on his plan for reorganizing the White House operation.


Harazin Victim of a Brave New World
As a man whose baseball upbringing was on the business side, Al Harazin knows the significance of the bottom line.
Simply but economically painfully put, if the Mets had been the contender and perhaps division champion Harazin and many others thought they would be last season and this, as many as 3 million fans who haven't gone and won't go to Shea Stadium would have bought tickets.
That converts to $36 million lost, which could have paid for nearly all of the Mets' $39 million payroll this season.
That is why Harazin is the latest victim in the increasingly volatile world of general managers.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A Survey Shows That the Industry's Davids are Stinging the Goliaths.
AS if giant agencies don't have enough problems already, a survey from a leading research company shows that consumers are being increasingly attracted to advertisements created by small and in-house shops.
The fifth annual survey of the most notable print ads, conducted by Starch INRA Hooper Inc. of Mamaroneck, N.Y., found that more readers are paying less attention to the work of the agency behemoths.
For 1992, the highest-scoring work in 10 of 17 categories was produced by small and in-house agencies.
That compared with one of 15 categories in 1991, three of 15 in 1990, four of 14 in 1989 and two of 14 in 1988, the first year of the survey.


Only Rent Regulations Keep Housing Remotely Affordable; Exit the Middle Class
To the Editor:
"Time to Make Sense on Rent Control" (editorial, June 14) proposes to cancel protection to "luxury" apartments (whatever that means) and additionally to all tenants whose income exceeds $100,000 a year.
State Senator Ralph Marino wants all apartments renting for more than $750 a month decontrolled, as they are "luxury" (perhaps they are in his Long Island constituency).


No Headline
"We're going to do everything to improve the aroma around here." -- NELSON DOUBLEDAY co-owner of the New York Mets.  [ B9:5. ]


Uncovered Short Sales on the Big Board and the Amex
Largest Increases
Security Name
06/15/93
05/14/93
Change
+EMC Corp
5,042,805
2,469,042
2,573,763
N
Amer Tel &amp; Tel
4,842,593
2,628,526
2,214,067
N
Exxon Corp
3,695,299
1,994,540
1,700,759
N
+Schwab (Charles)
4,456,049
2,758,048
1,698,001
N
Newmont Mining Corp
3,796,238
2,119,232
1,677,006
N
Wal-Mart Stores Inc
13,004,167
11,378,401
1,625,766
N
Disney (Walt) Co
15,760,376
14,161,712
1,598,664
N
U.S. Surgical Corp
9,437,029
8,138,503
1,298,526
N
Coca-Cola Co
5,723,410
4,519,095
1,204,315
N
WMX Technologies
2,579,978
1,395,063
1,184,915
N
Johnson &amp; Johnson
2,940,032
1,768,551
1,171,481
N
Philip Morris Cos.
2,716,282
1,560,925
1,155,357
N
LTV Corp
6,076,719
4,925,076
1,151,643
N
City National Corp
1,642,398
537,614
1,104,784
N
United Healthcare
2,319,864
1,262,552
1,057,312
N
Pacific Gas &amp; Elec
1,482,266
496,143
986,123
N
Ford Motor Co
11,928,226
10,969,146
959,080
N
Chrysler Corp
17,751,320
16,801,362
949,958
N
Duracell Int'l
3,883,358
2,942,373
940,985
N
Apache Corp
4,095,510
3,158,296
937,214
N
Imperial Chem (ADR)
1,497,406
576,869
920,537
N
T2 Medical Inc
5,761,903
4,850,065
911,838
N
Amoco Corp
1,701,939
806,678
895,261
N
+Office Depot Inc
2,835,456
1,951,382
884,074
N
Home Depot Inc
12,803,072
11,923,992
879,080
N
Largest Decreases
Security Name
06/15/93
05/14/93
Change
First Bank Syt Inc
1,397,722
5,616,912
-4,219,190
N
*Kirby Corp
312,469
2,870,104
-2,557,635
A
Motorola Inc
6,317,080
8,493,751
-2,176,671
N
British Petrol (ADR)
647,516
2,670,400
-2,022,884
N
Magna Intl Inc. Cl A
1,742,146
3,494,334
-1,752,188
N
Repsol, S.A. (ADR)
208,146
1,944,167
-1,736,021
N
Marvel Enter Group
2,181,049
3,909,999
-1,728,950
N
Lowe's Companies
1,803,299
3,100,965
-1,297,666
N
Alza Corp (Com Stk)
2,727,364
4,016,376
-1,289,012
N
Primerica Corp
1,498,019
2,780,623
-1,282,604
N
Dime Savings Bank
247,096
1,277,186
-1,030,090
N
Hong Kong Tele (ADR)
1,120,620
2,071,048
-950,428
N
Nrn Sts Pwr
565,540
1,500,630
-935,090
N
Unisys Corp
9,229,869
10,159,444
-929,575
N
Natl Medical Enter
1,882,796
2,754,043
-871,247
N
Carolina Pwr &amp; Light
3,499,869
4,313,201
-813,332
N
Freeport-McMoran C&amp;G
2,253,932
3,045,498
-791,566
N
Promus Cos.
525,613
1,309,819
-784,206
N
Humana Inc
660,924
1,428,889
-767,965
N
San Diego Gas &amp; El
640,139
1,387,012
-746,873
N
Philips NV
636,018
1,378,879
-742,861
N
Glaxo Holdings (ADR)
1,004,191
1,738,567
-734,376
N
RJR Nab Hldgs D/S A
907,740
1,639,848
-732,108
N
Blanch (EW) Holdings
33,410
732,900
-699,490
N
Western Resources
374,543
1,059,560
-685,017
N
Largest Positions
Security Name
06/15/93
05/14/93
Change
Chrysler Corp
17,751,320
16,801,362
949,958
N
Disney (Walt) Co
15,760,376
14,161,712
1,598,664
N
Wal-Mart Stores Inc
13,004,167
11,378,401
1,625,766
N
Marriott Corp
12,983,074
13,106,662
-123,588
N
Home Depot Inc
12,803,072
11,923,992
879,080
N
Ford Motor Co
11,928,226
10,969,146
959,080
N
Blockbuster Enter
11,600,148
11,700,715
-100,567
N
RJR Nabisco Hldgs
10,917,728
10,619,097
298,631
N
+Energy Service (R)
10,723,313
6,734,409
3,988,904
A
U.S. Surgical Corp
9,437,029
8,138,503
1,298,526
N
GM Class E Comm
9,283,987
8,920,680
363,307
N
Unisys Corp
9,229,869
10,159,444
-929,575
N
Intl Game Technology
8,943,272
8,929,797
13,475
N
News Corp (ADR)
8,609,426
8,559,910
49,516
N
American Barrick
7,074,047
6,880,898
193,149
N
Bell Atlantic Corp
6,514,131
5,754,930
759,201
N
+Elan Corp (R)
6,339,334
5,631,895
707,439
A
Motorola Inc
6,317,080
8,493,751
-2,176,671
N
LTV Corp
6,076,719
4,925,076
1,151,643
N
T2 Medical Inc
5,761,903
4,850,065
911,838
N
Coca-Cola Co
5,723,410
4,519,095
1,204,315
N
Shoney's Inc
5,629,033
5,283,032
346,001
N
Kroger Company
5,544,501
5,425,816
118,685
N
Conner Peripherals
5,061,760
5,181,775
-120,015
N
+EMC Corp
5,042,805
2,469,042
2,573,763
N
Largest Cover Ratios
Security Name
06/15/93
Avg. Vol.
Days
Mkt
Fleming Companies
4,198,828
52,647
80
N
Marriott Corp
12,983,074
177,190
73
N
Omnicom Group Inc.
3,927,228
54,695
72
N
General Host Corp
1,661,800
25,238
66
N
Russ Berrie &amp; Co
2,387,120
43,833
54
N
Fedders Corp
1,094,191
25,109
44
N
Autozone Inc
4,111,762
104,819
39
N
Thermo Electron Corp
2,192,487
55,857
39
N
+Epitope Inc
1,818,169
47,195
39
A
Mark IV Indust
2,321,408
60,561
38
N
Midwest Resources
1,047,635
29,133
36
N
Penn Pwr &amp; Lt Co
2,296,080
62,947
36
N
Scana Corp
1,239,244
33,957
36
N
Southwestern Pub Svc
1,459,589
40,885
36
N
Symbol Technologies
2,440,851
67,457
36
N
Vons Companies
2,293,764
63,571
36
N
*Davstar Ind Ltd
1,097,925
30,325
36
A
Solectron Corp
3,366,537
95,952
35
N
Amer Stores Co
2,538,953
73,723
34
N
+Schwab (Charles)
4,456,049
130,790
34
N
+Elan Corp
6,339,334
187,905
34
A
Delmarva Pwr &amp; Lt
1,430,761
43,404
33
N
Petrie Stores Corp
1,661,577
49,723
33
N
Cooper Companies
921,536
28,819
32
N
Surgical Care Aff
4,418,855
139,200
32
N
New York Stock Exchange
Security Name
06/15/93
05/14/93
Abbott Labs
800,680
1,022,589
Abitibi-Price Inc.
470,600
532,200
#ACM Govt Income
135,721
9,660
Acuson Corp
867,401
893,066
Adams Express
478,671
484,701
ADT Ltd (Com Shs)
321,300
354,269
Advanced Micro Dev
3,084,825
2,827,751
Aegon NV (Ord Shs)
416,846
431,000
Aetna Life Casualty
808,446
561,119
Affiliated Pub Ser A
763,009
766,717
Aflac Inc.
407,428
256,300
Ahmanson (Hf) &amp; Co
1,644,142
1,520,732
Air Products Chem
262,495
178,195
Alaska Air Group
327,251
320,248
Albertson's Inc
576,046
527,615
Alcan Aluminium Ltd.
812,946
711,237
Alcatel Alsthom-Adr
251,985
169,679
Alco Standard Corp
736,583
569,824
Alex. Brown Incorp
795,682
708,534
#Alexander &amp;Alexander
242,659
112,107
#Allegheny Pwr
885,399
404,466
Alliedsignal Inc
328,335
355,218
#Aluminum Co of Amer
972,655
508,292
Alza Corp (Com Stk)
4,016,376
5,321,907
AM International
636,941
672,534
#Amax Gold Inc.
336,675
138,140
Amax Inc
1,218,466
1,015,247
Amer Brands
1,333,034
1,142,795
Amer Elec Pwr
1,473,079
1,677,525
Amer Express Co
2,138,862
2,696,704
Amer Home Products
938,639
2,206,568
Amer Stores Co
2,610,591
2,500,666
#Amer Strat Incm Port
6,100
291,198
Amer Tel &amp; Tel
2,628,526
2,895,314
Amerada Hess Corp
162,544
514,068
American Barrick
6,880,898
6,644,801
American Cyanamid Co
268,294
219,539
American Intl Group
790,107
680,728
#American Re Corp
184,600
47,530
Ameritech Corp
676,137
1,003,355
Amoco Corp
806,678
1,603,476
AMP Inc
833,655
601,889
AMR Corp
3,612,279
3,247,611
Amsco Int'l Inc
709,753
522,867
#Amsouth Bancorp
188,189
55,802
Anacomp, Inc.
1,633,855
1,988,255
Anadarko Petroleum
1,373,820
1,216,909
Analog Devices
282,363
423,874
Anheuser Busch Co
1,650,782
1,371,390
Anntaylor Stores
1,152,108
1,432,101
#Anthem Electr
280,730
160,140
AON Corp
367,310
299,955
Apache Corp
3,158,296
3,002,084
Archer Daniels
262,434
274,233
Arkla, Inc
352,626
313,819
Armco Inc
1,036,291
757,030
Armstrong World Ind
832,536
638,914
Arrow Electronics
869,864
778,909
Artra Group Inc
291,190
291,790
Arvin Ind,inc
755,250
794,066
ASA Limited
929,557
773,850
#Asarco Inc
276,855
89,784
Atlantic Energy Inc.
695,382
745,823
Atlantic Richfield
826,489
568,174
Automatic Data Proc
589,140
571,448
Autozone Inc
3,501,697
2,833,645
#Avnet Inc
692,153
45,100
Avon Products
771,750
1,140,061
Baker Hughes Inc
1,341,339
965,490
#Ball Corp
229,334
94,655
Bally Mfg Corp
780,897
988,854
Balt Gas &amp; Elec Co
401,048
650,884
#Baltimore Bancorp
20,704
215,128
Banc One Corp
3,004,135
5,022,369
Bandag Inc
367,575
391,949
Bank of Boston Corp
3,555,607
3,223,683
Bank of New York
2,617,142
2,613,793
#Bankamerica 6 1/2% G
32,664
275,582
Bankamerica Corp
3,086,167
2,513,626
Bard (C R) Inc.
326,755
306,154
Barnett Banks Inc
1,223,421
1,364,319
Baroid Corp
1,751,125
1,619,954
Battle Mtn Gold
925,701
712,762
Bausch &amp; Lomb Inc
401,992
271,175
Baxter International
541,704
647,414
#BCE Inc
177,910
956
Bear Stearns Co
2,933,856
2,265,862
Bell Atlantic Corp
5,754,930
5,813,835
BellSouth Corp
303,788
430,788
Best Buy Co., Inc.
1,220,405
876,449
Bethlehem Steel Corp
2,793,388
2,227,258
#Betz Labs Inc
307,542
115,253
Beverly Enterprises
4,900,882
5,189,663
Black &amp; Decker Corp
808,260
1,143,839
Block (H &amp; R) Inc
644,216
543,936
Blockbuster Enter
11,700,715
12,102,246
Boeing Company
1,639,507
1,389,084
Boise Casc $1.79 D/S
281,655
171,256
Boise Cascade Corp
699,119
687,060
#Borden Inc
3,249,032
1,271,504
Boston Celtics LP
312,263
310,000
Boston Edison Co
348,085
738,255
#Boston Scientific
244,830
53,811
Bowater Inc
564,117
690,799
BP Prudhoe Bay Rlty
271,500
257,220
Bradlees Inc
605,919
672,592
Breed Technologies
397,214
298,400
Briggs &amp; Stratton
60,710
196,044
Brinker Int'l
272,203
212,271
Bristol-Myers Squibb
1,119,937
2,055,610
#Brit Steel Final ADR
27,447
297,979
British Airways(ADR)
754,130
675,766
British Petrol (ADR)
2,670,400
2,979,107
Brooke Group Ltd
288,949
177,444
Browning Ferris Ind
401,442
287,536
Brunswick Corp
998,621
834,346
Buenos Aires Emb-Adr
296,656
N.L.
Burlington Northern
907,654
1,096,870
Burlington Resources
451,258
346,871
Cabletron Systems
444,246
306,647
Cadence Design Sys
921,627
616,337
Caesars World
825,393
825,019
CAL Fed Bank "A"
743,242
1,076,379
Caldor Corp
383,651
261,628
Calgon Carbon Corp
524,393
485,914
Callaway Golf Co
1,273,810
1,260,138
Campbell Soup Co
598,388
522,226
Canadian Pacific Ltd
342,522
372,370
#+Capital Holding Co
270,864
129,080
Carnival Cruise Cl A
2,053,351
1,614,400
Carolco Pictures
598,219
392,166
Carolina Pwr &amp; Light
4,313,201
4,575,764
Carter Hawley
271,569
279,919
Carter-Wallace
1,009,183
948,051
Catalina Marketing
419,212
411,354
#Catellus Develop
607,405
243,993
Caterpillar
1,132,818
1,418,838
CBS Inc
518,413
1,110,633
Centerior Ener Corp
449,780
490,805
Centura Banks
309,179
322,932
Century Telephone
1,367,864
1,335,375
Ceridian Corp
300,559
242,825
Champion Intl Corp
1,095,801
1,050,154
Chase Manhattan Corp
994,341
1,086,607
#Chemical Banking
1,486,923
688,182
Chemical Waste Mgt
1,487,923
2,099,924
Chevron Corp
1,884,849
2,166,593
Chiquita Brands Intl
678,316
653,115
Chock Full O'Nuts
1,634,066
1,665,467
Chrysler Corp
16,801,362
13,849,138
Chubb Corp
791,925
639,972
Cigna Corp
465,237
430,375
Cigna High Incme Shs
288,925
253,942
Cincinnati Milacron
342,421
226,343
Cineplex Odeon Corp
884,000
911,252
Cinn Gas Elec Co
760,933
703,547
Cipsco Inc (Hldg Co)
1,746,487
1,801,500
Circuit City Stores
943,109
930,947
Circus Circus Ent
872,674
740,670
Citicorp
4,375,461
6,507,573
City National Corp
537,614
815,069
#Clark Equipment Co
226,641
72,100
Clayton Homes Inc
1,682,436
1,544,643
Clorox Co
679,667
671,698
CML Group, Inc.
2,526,628
1,670,977
CMS Energy Corp
370,711
277,842
CNA Financial Corp
271,205
294,586
Coachmen Ind, Inc
724,593
664,185
Coast Savings Fin
592,699
470,900
Coastal Corp
531,168
472,947
Coca Cola Co
4,519,095
4,511,789
Coca-Cola Enter
1,334,925
1,525,425
#Coeur D'Alene Mines
1,044,760
449,506
Colgate-Palmolive Co
1,040,449
679,013
#Colonial Interm High
137,566
2,128
#Coltec Industries
926,130
201,030
Columbia Gas System
1,009,159
1,222,821
Comdisco Inc
232,555
370,765
Comerica Inc
284,925
242,725
Commodore Intl
940,232
913,979
Community Psychr
1,423,182
1,639,208
Compaq Computer Corp
2,191,801
2,135,714
Compusa Inc.
3,627,045
3,969,786
Computer Assoc Intl
462,668
333,498
Conagra Inc
2,207,875
1,510,159
Conner Peripherals
5,181,775
6,955,327
Conse
1,977,891
1,825,973
Consl Frght $1.54d/S
341,600
212,700
Consolidated Ed
1,360,477
1,651,683
Consolidated Freight
274,080
325,708
Consolidated Nat Gas
860,236
670,916
Consolidated Rail
272,226
529,178
Consolidated Stores
1,841,507
1,210,506
#Consr G Grp Dina-Adr
6,525
194,000
Continental Bank
187,150
316,071
#Continental Corp
506,035
199,758
Contl Medical System
2,976,645
2,992,410
Cooper Companies
923,610
914,536
#Cooper Ind Inc
670,872
230,913
Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber
449,736
376,535
Corning Inc
1,761,773
1,291,446
Countrywide Credit
3,504,099
3,676,473
CPC Intl Inc
804,739
545,696
Craig (Jenny) Inc
278,630
297,008
Cray Research Inc
412,801
530,609
Crown Cork &amp; Seal Co
238,314
696,157
CSX Corp
559,950
601,613
Ctl &amp; South West
2,193,976
1,790,246
Ctl Maine Pwr
477,700
539,106
Ctl Vermont Pub Svc
240,175
540,086
CUC Int'l Inc
480,507
817,395
Cummins Engine Co
977,243
849,235
Cwealth Ed Co
1,466,143
1,555,121
#Cyprus Minerals Co
280,274
67,925
Dallas Semiconductor
326,357
326,412
Dames &amp; Moore Inc
293,974
272,782
#Damon Corp
35,802
329,425
Dana Corp
1,126,465
958,940
Danaher Corp
426,660
377,895
Data General Corp
478,821
618,913
Dayton-Hudson
299,390
476,637
Dean Witter Discover
277,863
269,228
Deere &amp; Co
281,873
456,761
Delmarva Pwr &amp; Lt
1,398,182
1,916,338
Delta Air Lines, Inc
3,208,635
3,967,320
#Deluxe Corp
274,721
110,526
Detroit Ed Co
397,642
417,038
Dexter Corp
253,300
227,729
Diagnostek, Inc.
497,243
719,513
#Dial Corp. (The)
307,660
173,785
Digital Equipment
793,115
654,130
Dillard Dep't Cl A
566,648
549,126
#Dime Savings Bank
1,277,186
351,920
Discount Auto Parts
482,948
477,701
Discount Corp of Ny
320,600
321,808
Disney (Walt) Co
14,161,712
14,412,885
Dole Food Company
629,740
613,035
#Dominion Resources
619,566
338,389
Dover Corp
281,224
299,171
Dow Chemical Co
1,341,857
1,268,731
Dow Jones &amp; Co
339,495
843,325
DPL Inc
881,477
814,300
DQE
577,574
818,119
Dresser Inds Inc
168,342
498,641
Duke Pwr Co
1,560,086
1,406,916
Dun &amp; Bradstreet
484,737
374,595
DuPont (EI) de Nem
1,399,283
1,707,057
Duracell Int'l
2,942,373
2,044,597
Duty Free Intl
1,940,752
2,376,033
E.W. Blanch Holdings
732,900
N.L.
Eastman Kodak Co
3,565,884
5,389,887
Edwards (AG) Inc
303,118
260,121
Eg&amp;G Inc,
418,614
403,445
#Elcor Corp
407,757
186,538
EMC Corp
2,469,042
2,300,090
Emerson Electric Co
635,497
730,566
Employee Benefit Pln
457,269
797,954
Enquirer/Star Group
551,711
563,700
Enron
939,906
833,853
Enserch Corp
607,508
459,410
Entergy Corp
559,217
785,602
#Equitable Companies
4,038,715
2,120,120
Ethyl Corp
266,579
422,520
Exel Limited
266,974
264,078
Exxon Corp
1,994,540
3,226,038
Fairchild Corp Cl A
633,600
640,900
#Fay's Inc
4,002
122,500
Fed Express Corp
594,576
755,022
Fed Home Loan Mtge
844,583
853,554
Fed National Mtge
876,382
713,599
Fed Paper Board
1,441,321
1,135,968
Fedders Corp
1,103,042
1,176,838
Federal-Mogul
777,600
823,476
Federated Dept Store
670,521
1,862,447
#Ferro Corp
283,509
153,912
First Bank Syt Inc
5,616,912
4,783,377
First Chicago Corp
761,091
741,598
First Fidelity Banco
923,382
608,892
First Fin Management
843,993
957,627
First Intst Bancorp
586,187
528,002
First Repub Bancorp
434,457
412,627
First Union Corp
1,110,327
1,233,841
Fisher Scientific
807,990
725,101
#Fisher-Price Inc
20,796
170,835
Fleming Companies
4,327,743
4,261,376
Flightsafety Int'l
588,187
547,637
Florida Progress
871,852
1,037,750
Fluor Corp
367,674
512,714
Foodmaker Inc
1,191,943
1,152,280
Ford Motor Co
10,969,146
9,416,868
Foundation Health
573,440
995,929
FPL Group Inc
1,036,340
774,151
Franklin Resources
736,688
733,580
Freeport-McMoran C&amp;G
3,045,498
2,851,964
Freeport-McMoran Inc
4,777,157
4,769,122
Fuqua Ind Inc
429,518
388,521
Galen Health Care
534,525
659,459
Gap,inc
1,547,215
1,038,891
Gen Motors Ser A Prf
940,380
862,155
Gencorp Inc
886,952
803,955
Genentech (New)
657,830
430,577
General Amer Inv
523,262
530,067
General Dynamics
182,590
332,572
General Electric Co
2,670,438
2,771,575
General Host Corp
1,640,002
1,620,000
General Mills, Inc
1,246,470
940,837
General Motors Corp
2,037,060
2,139,833
General Pub Util
1,358,730
1,011,755
General Re Corp
250,056
297,437
#Georgia Gulf
526,500
198,900
Georgia-Pacific
768,517
1,058,422
Gerber Products Co
1,348,385
1,175,570
Gillette Co
1,013,394
696,096
Glaxo Holdings (ADR)
1,738,567
1,382,190
Glenfed
3,096,758
3,334,600
GM Class E Comm
8,920,680
10,066,542
#GM Class H Comm
227,970
72,415
Goodrich BF Co
288,954
347,855
#Goodyear Tire Rubber
1,877,434
1,036,270
Grace (WR) Co (Hldg)
2,194,288
1,811,580
#Grand Met (ADR)
263,350
118,755
Great Atl &amp; Pacific
266,670
302,675
Great Lakes Chemical
157,892
410,252
Great Western Fin
1,088,734
1,189,999
Grow Group, Inc
993,035
857,950
GTE Corp
1,053,447
1,183,320
Gtech Hldgs Corp
348,461
331,628
Hadson Corp
1,085,338
1,174,522
Halliburton Co
715,774
527,294
Hancock Fabrics Inc
304,567
318,317
Hanson (ADR)
1,781,668
2,318,930
#Harcourt General
191,514
63,903
Harley-Davidson, Inc
497,834
349,434
Harnischfeger Indust
196,727
441,346
Hca-Hosp Corp Am "A"
368,722
346,066
Health Images Inc
1,222,217
1,335,162
Healthtrust Inc-Thc
1,429,758
919,589
#Hecla Mining Co
717,093
373,555
Heinz (Hj) Co
1,936,888
1,886,214
Hercules Inc
1,360,748
1,260,175
Hershey Foods Corp
431,224
338,589
Hewlett-Packard Co
1,586,673
1,349,273
Hibernia Corp (Cl A)
410,919
406,039
Hills Department Str
399,825
399,000
Hilton Hotels Corp
313,658
282,000
HMO America, Inc.
483,651
398,180
Home Depot Inc
11,923,992
8,522,127
Home Shopping Net
1,116,914
1,756,231
Homestake Mining Co
1,385,611
1,523,517
#Honeywell Inc
1,322,283
677,784
Hong Kong Tele (ADR)
2,071,048
1,904,066
Horace Mann Educator
374,350
433,780
Horizon Healthcare
953,284
1,057,018
#Horsham Corporation
316,311
143,806
#Houston Ind, Inc
905,163
403,272
Huffy Corp
916,983
936,315
Humana Inc
1,428,889
1,506,459
ICN Pharmaceuticals
991,176
1,032,246
IES Industries
318,713
290,742
#IMC Fertilizer Group
601,477
290,403
Imcera Group Inc
333,840
348,686
Imperial Chem (ADR)
576,869
777,207
Inco Limited
627,356
611,178
#Ingersoll-Rand Co
416,776
213,823
Intellicall, Inc.
252,799
259,291
Interco Inc
592,666
486,231
Intl Business Mach
3,748,744
4,475,301
Intl Game Technology
8,929,797
9,478,195
Intl Paper Co
1,125,339
924,866
#Intl Rectifier Corp
211,655
80,941
#Intrcap Ca Insd Muni
461,056
4,400
#Intrcap Insd Mun Inc
341,421
450
Ionics, Inc.
690,607
595,653
Ipalco Enterprises
251,444
440,396
Itel Corp
2,290,915
2,245,590
ITT Corp
292,054
285,779
James River Corp
310,664
374,682
Jamesway Corp
726,835
728,235
Johnson &amp; Johnson
1,768,551
1,770,553
Jones Apparel Group
392,711
376,645
Jostens Inc
456,667
551,210
JWP Inc
2,611,718
2,521,286
Kaiser Aluminum
594,657
538,634
Kansas City Pwr Lt
928,147
805,171
Kaufman &amp; Broad Home
836,039
793,244
Kellogg Co
2,681,584
2,102,202
#Kemper Corp
832,901
379,550
Kerr-McGee Corp
771,472
608,541
Keycorp
1,007,098
1,297,310
Kimberly Clark Corp
457,646
395,934
KLM Royal Air
76,834
209,488
Kmart D/S A "Percs"
585,300
835,767
Kmart Corp
3,143,404
2,127,336
Knight Ridder
613,290
664,814
Koger Properties
756,761
774,007
Korea Fund Inc
584,209
615,007
Kroger Company
5,425,816
5,361,498
L.A. Gear, Inc.
1,595,494
1,523,938
#Latin Amer Invest
49,676
325,425
LG&amp;E Energy Corp
763,358
706,706
Lilco
629,203
393,446
Lilly (Eli) &amp; Co
820,219
691,492
Limited, Inc, The
1,279,331
1,592,109
#Litton Ind, Inc
2,691,481
1,461,705
Liz Claiborne, Inc.
2,510,058
1,947,317
Lockheed Corp
553,652
555,984
Loctite Corp
305,928
222,558
Loews Corp
235,389
354,586
Logicon Inc
322,147
322,148
Lone Star Ind Inc
287,654
335,588
Longs Drug Stores
1,223,222
1,145,264
Loral Corp
134,829
254,310
Louisiana-Pacific
162,793
354,343
Lowe's Companies
3,100,965
3,621,891
#LSI Logic Corp
237,279
73,067
LTV Corp
4,925,076
4,651,364
LTV Corp $1.25 Ser D
610,293
595,804
LTV Corp $3.06 Pr B
482,310
482,352
LTV Corp $5.25 Pr C
351,600
354,841
Lubrizol Corp, the
208,854
436,191
Luby's Cafeterias
253,227
157,474
LVI Group Inc
1,036,374
998,674
Lyondell Petrochem
517,482
426,300
Magma Copper Co
732,782
443,709
Magna Intl Inc. Cl A
3,494,334
3,554,318
Magnetek Inc
2,337,882
2,316,044
Manor Care Inc
1,831,953
2,004,205
Manpower Inc
1,919,705
1,412,230
Marion Merrell Dow
795,420
730,670
Mark IV Indust
2,011,965
1,911,428
Marriott Corp
13,106,662
12,882,456
Marsh &amp; McLennan
320,722
295,043
Marvel Enter Group
3,909,999
3,579,532
Masco Corp
511,888
351,402
Mattel Inc
3,170,993
2,698,348
Maxus Energy
463,248
795,966
May Department Store
284,213
394,954
Maytag Corp
601,981
747,850
McDermott Intern'l
339,281
237,655
McDonald's Corp
1,291,345
1,872,269
McDonnell Douglas
4,055,070
4,646,479
MCN Corp (Hldg Co)
340,732
303,571
Medical Care America
2,715,636
2,718,641
Medtronic Inc
548,495
360,425
Mellon Bank Corp
1,073,957
1,094,448
Merck &amp; Co
3,617,764
3,476,622
Merrill Lynch &amp; Co
1,782,732
1,949,206
#Merry-Go-Round
125,055
533,928
Mesa Inc.
1,129,010
761,347
Mgic Invest Corp
1,264,050
1,211,064
Micron Tech
385,187
280,894
Mid-Amer Waste Sys
1,443,130
1,392,720
Midwest Resources
691,791
570,865
Millipore Corp
651,079
479,522
Minn Mng &amp; Mfg (3m)
1,355,187
1,228,964
Minn Power &amp; Light
669,216
705,260
Mirage Resorts, Inc.
1,711,892
1,597,950
MNC Financial, Inc.
353,588
358,519
Mobil Corp
1,492,713
1,549,032
Monsanto Co
365,661
387,991
Montana Pwr Co
630,457
622,446
Morgan Stanley Group
443,240
450,990
Morton Int'l, Inc.
203,351
334,596
Motorola Inc
8,493,751
8,385,880
Muni Advatage Fund
1,083,842
N.L.
Municipal Partners
312,908
520,538
Murphy Oil Corp
379,226
366,090
Mylan Labs Inc
3,571,683
3,083,214
Nat'l Health Labs
4,372,415
4,839,470
National City Corp
641,222
535,375
National Semiconduct
1,428,559
1,500,814
Nationsbank Corp
2,230,907
1,907,404
#Natl Medical Enter
2,754,043
1,286,569
Navistar Internat'l
361,666
500,159
NBD Bancorp, Inc
1,854,763
1,955,692
Nevada Pwr Co
1,405,330
1,311,852
New Eng El System
1,503,985
1,467,375
New Plan Realty
708,005
689,173
New York State E/Gas
559,000
540,775
Newell Co.
1,155,356
1,108,239
Newmont Gold Co
325,500
610,184
Newmont Mining Corp
2,119,232
1,691,395
News Corp Ltd (ADR)
8,559,910
7,549,140
#Niagara Mohawk Pwr
1,042,377
422,043
Nike Inc Class B
569,137
802,059
#Nipsco Industries
1,200,726
595,702
#Noble Affiliates,inc
100,295
1,497,841
Norfolk Southern Co
441,660
461,522
#North Amer Mtge Co
279,348
80,329
Northeast Utilities
631,646
578,551
Norwest Corp
1,281,163
1,353,396
#Novacare, Inc.
1,019,112
263,335
Nrn Sts Pwr
1,500,630
1,939,588
Nrn Telecom Ltd
1,169,886
1,216,059
Nucor Corp
495,371
628,806
Nutmeg Industries
1,051,696
1,127,210
Nynex Corp
153,666
279,505
#OAK Ind Inc
3,000
129,200
Oakwood Homes Corp
336,916
347,519
Occidental Petrol
3,183,930
3,410,702
OEA, Inc.
887,645
1,017,998
Office Depot Inc
1,951,382
2,462,566
Offshore Pipelines
535,080
514,137
Ogden Corp
1,224,633
1,267,661
Ogden Projects Inc
326,224
356,310
Ohio Ed Co
1,216,766
1,324,305
Oklahoma Gas &amp; El
395,273
316,866
OLD Republic Intl
485,908
530,437
Olin Corporation
389,564
366,441
Omnicom Group Inc.
3,486,045
3,552,658
#Orange &amp; Rock Utls
334,042
180,249
Oryx Energy Company
1,118,700
1,415,508
Outboard Marine Corp
1,107,744
1,350,253
Owens-Corning Fiber
2,823,403
3,154,733
#Owens-Illinois Inc
603,413
21,885
Pacific Enterprises
101,223
342,561
Pacific Gas &amp; Elec
496,143
582,470
Pacific Telesis Gr.
414,401
506,544
Pacificorp
2,424,857
2,008,843
Paine Webber Inc
1,135,724
1,038,607
Pall Corp
955,843
767,000
Parker Drilling Co
321,052
731,257
Parker-Hannifin Corp
504,233
340,011
Penn Pwr &amp; Lt Co
2,081,360
2,096,194
#+Penney (JC) Co
1,217,284
580,169
#Pep Boys M M &amp; Jack
477,485
256,837
Pepsico Inc
1,818,123
2,207,576
Perkin-Elmer Corp
723,807
669,362
Petrie Stores Corp
1,865,930
1,860,743
Petroleum &amp; Resource
400,208
400,738
Pfizer Inc
1,798,720
1,112,881
#Phelps Dodge Corp
939,996
281,484
Phila Electric Co
853,002
956,354
Philip Morris Cos.
1,560,925
2,223,652
#Philips N.V
1,378,879
486,158
Phillips Petroleum
391,498
917,592
#PHM Corp. (Holding)
225,845
87,250
#Pier 1 Imports
771,486
439,857
#Pilgrim Regional Bk
125,700
7,890
Pinnacle West Cap
57,937
193,466
Pitney Bowes
282,184
362,167
PNC Bank Corp
934,016
858,291
Polaroid Corp
316,903
366,968
Policy Management
255,130
208,103
Portland Genl Corp
1,309,052
1,895,024
Potomac El Pwr Co
2,439,076
2,551,973
Praxair Inc
530,476
551,152
Presley Companies
309,070
255,487
Primerica Corp
2,780,623
2,334,682
#Procter &amp; Gamble
3,350,055
1,741,772
Promus Cos. Inc
1,309,819
1,393,503
PS Group
612,675
606,950
#PSI Resources Inc.
272,877
1,123,750
Pub Svc Co Colorado
220,945
401,700
Pub Svc New Mexico
1,023,300
1,080,859
Public Svc Enter Grp
675,709
620,125
Puget Sound Pwr &amp; Lt
526,535
482,904
Quaker Oats Co
1,633,691
1,074,924
Quantum Chemical
1,037,167
1,269,163
Ralston Purina Co
1,159,389
760,265
Raychem Corp
409,015
404,299
Raytheon Co
382,372
474,995
Reader's Digest "A"
754,493
744,561
Reebok Intl Ltd
943,373
873,716
#Reliance Elec Co "A"
200,600
77,799
#Repsol, S.A. (ADR)
1,944,167
197,380
Republic NY Corp
514,500
383,600
#Revco D.S. Inc
127,323
3,602
#Rhone-Poulenc Ord A
543,264
150
Rhone-Poulenc Rorer
881,502
829,196
Riverwood Intl Corp
313,400
303,500
RJR Nab Hldgs D/S A
1,639,848
2,116,694
RJR Nabisco Hldgs
10,619,097
9,573,750
Rochester Gas &amp; El
355,949
396,120
Rockefeller Center
1,447,831
1,451,120
Rockwell Intl Corp
414,503
656,544
#Rohm &amp; Haas Co
216,538
99,355
Rohr, Inc.
372,122
396,588
Rollins Environment
408,926
356,112
Rowan Companies
707,367
803,036
Royal Appliance Mfg
1,803,808
1,839,520
Royal Caribbean
163,361
N.L.
Royal Dch Ptrl 5 Gld
1,316,482
920,110
Rubbermaid Inc.
804,206
969,041
Russ Berrie &amp; Co Inc
2,322,548
2,865,547
Safety-Kleen Corp
696,777
898,924
Safeway Inc
4,034,375
2,718,117
Salomon Bros Fund
317,804
270,804
Salomon Inc
332,768
463,439
San Diego Gas &amp; El
1,387,012
926,457
Santa Fe Pacif Corp
329,788
316,947
Sara Lee Corp
1,744,291
1,191,480
Savannah Foods &amp; Ind
923,315
905,501
Scana Corp
803,266
528,522
Scecorp (Hldg Co.)
809,810
689,537
Schering-Plough Corp
828,100
625,221
Schlumberger Ltd
855,659
927,296
Schwab (Charles)
2,758,048
2,978,491
Scientific Atlanta
734,120
941,839
Seagram Co. Ltd
1,154,107
886,333
Seagull Energy
262,552
212,903
Sealed Air Corp
386,758
388,458
Sears Roebuck &amp; Co
1,276,405
1,408,589
Seitel, Inc.
416,564
413,922
Sensormatic Elec
950,869
752,580
Sequa Corp Cl A
357,782
290,582
Service Corp Intl
819,498
1,085,320
Shawmut National
681,225
740,281
Shell T+t (New ADR)
165,318
387,000
Sherwin-Williams Co
134,194
361,513
Shoney's Inc
5,283,032
5,103,612
Sierra Pacific Res.
601,411
988,008
Signal Apparel Cl A
293,100
254,900
Silicon Graphics
1,535,925
1,116,878
#Sizeler Property Inv
129,221
20
Smith Intl Inc
545,291
476,830
Smith's Food/Rx Cl B
829,625
799,211
Smthkl Beech ADR Eqt
1,019,344
925,344
Snyder Oil Corp
2,536,517
1,902,852
Society Corp
812,982
724,682
Solectron Corp
3,449,602
2,934,387
Sotheby's Hldgs Cl A
1,251,133
1,142,268
Southdown Inc
519,702
576,752
Southern Co
928,793
1,060,503
Southern Indiana G&amp;E
359,233
369,566
Southern Natl Corp
608,728
423,805
Southwestern Bell
494,203
571,807
Southwestern Pub Svc
1,654,415
1,273,866
Sprint Corp
4,317,800
4,336,678
Standard Comm Corp
355,402
333,000
#Standard Pacific
295,159
150,800
Sterling Software
430,490
287,858
Stone Contain $1.75e
264,817
158,900
Stone Container Corp
1,960,077
2,019,657
Storage Tech
3,294,700
2,619,435
Stratus Computer Inc
351,362
466,378
Stride Rite Corp
249,170
522,583
Student Loan-Vot C/S
488,575
353,606
Sun Co, Inc
421,862
348,172
#Sunbeam-Oster Co
815,105
428,354
Sunshine Mining Co
2,699,624
2,100,948
Suntrust Banks Inc
465,820
286,577
Superior Indust Intl
310,701
394,512
Surgical Care Aff
4,314,425
3,945,675
Svc Merchandise Co
896,458
782,151
Symbol Technologies
2,558,124
2,959,568
Syntex Corp
1,053,460
980,000
Sysco Corp
2,557,726
2,869,255
T2 Medical Inc
4,850,065
5,025,013
Tambrands Inc
668,912
915,000
Tandem Computers
756,513
787,046
Tandy Corp
1,042,876
1,280,536
#Tandycrafts Inc
57,327
233,229
TCBY Enterprises
341,906
309,180
Teco Energy
647,756
695,621
Tektronix, Inc
115,957
341,140
Tel de Mexico ADR L
1,675,233
3,490,891
Telecom Corp NZ ADR
282,476
337,111
Teledyne Inc
368,630
388,498
Telef de Espana ADR
495,275
742,184
Templeton Emerging
358,011
341,792
Tenneco $2.80 D/S A
87,616
248,146
#Tenneco Inc (Hld Co)
538,734
273,901
Teradyne, Inc
354,884
580,790
Terex Corp
575,900
398,350
Texaco Inc
540,463
903,567
Texas Instruments
1,352,884
830,902
Texas Util Co
856,139
895,117
Textron Inc
280,371
336,700
Thermo Electron Corp
1,936,469
1,875,751
Thomas &amp; Betts
396,243
338,285
Tiffany &amp; Co.
1,729,075
1,689,765
Time Warner Inc.
1,239,311
833,214
Times Mirror Co, The
1,515,092
1,209,546
TJX Companies Inc.
1,088,851
1,107,638
Tosco Corp
298,155
291,080
Toys "R" Us, Inc
3,595,950
3,772,137
Trans Mar Mex(Adr L)
568,900
539,500
#Transamerica Corp
55,376
286,516
Transco Energy Co
453,149
559,116
Travelers Corp
769,542
646,230
Tri Continental Corp
252,198
238,058
Trinity Ind
259,930
163,319
#Trinova Corp
176,021
48,800
Triton Energy Corp
974,717
1,361,032
TRW Inc
335,021
526,831
Tucson El Pwr Co
2,977,817
3,138,166
Tultex Corp
305,248
276,000
Tyco Labs Inc
1,041,009
1,061,552
Tyco Toys, Inc.
651,771
618,003
U's Surgical Corp
8,138,503
6,891,607
U's West Inc
704,443
950,844
UAL Corporation
1,165,210
873,273
UDC Homes Inc
307,565
291,402
Unifi, Inc.
1,359,557
1,221,518
Unilever NV (Ord)
545,532
386,752
Union Camp Corp
611,337
495,714
Union Carbide Corp
1,472,864
1,591,855
Union Elec Co
398,219
467,577
Union Pacific Corp
449,780
508,774
Union Planters Corp
761,523
652,850
Union Texas Petrol
681,539
739,546
Unisys Corp
10,159,444
10,623,876
Unisys Ser A Pfd
916,577
912,553
United Asset Manage
1,055,031
922,737
United Healthcare
1,262,552
1,191,632
United Tech Corp
614,628
571,495
#Universal Health
2,432
203,838
Unocal Corp
1,358,027
1,304,923
Upjohn Company
844,205
1,358,580
USAir Group Inc
1,842,053
2,767,803
USF&amp;G Corp
404,814
717,825
USG Corp
391,265
N.L.
UST Inc
968,403
1,414,691
USX-Marathon Group
519,912
1,228,071
USX-U.S. Steel Group
1,484,559
977,586
Utilicorp United Inc
814,307
470,385
Valassis Communictns
1,910,357
1,849,828
#Valero Energy
258,973
100,037
#Value Health
340,750
92,637
Value Merchants, Inc
1,182,548
1,086,191
Varity Corp (Del)
1,067,353
729,525
Vencor Incorp
329,071
276,792
Venture Stores
251,307
146,423
Vodafone Group (ADR)
1,193,828
740,619
Vons Companies, Inc.
2,228,990
1,615,450
Waban Inc
1,217,695
1,112,635
Wachovia Corp
1,216,234
1,307,844
Wal-Mart Stores Inc
11,378,401
10,663,928
Walgreen Co
949,520
990,863
Warnaco Group Cl A
672,532
725,000
Warner Lambert Co
518,986
797,068
Washington Water Pwr
654,550
812,640
Waste Management
1,395,063
842,775
Waterhouse Inv Svcs
293,804
308,504
Webb (Del) Corp
255,511
251,081
#Weingarten Rlty Inv
12,794
275,195
Weis Markets Inc
515,200
520,916
Wellcome (ADR)
323,389
363,298
#Wellman, Inc.
224,806
39,862
Wells Fargo &amp; Co
1,120,946
763,844
Wendy's Intl
1,531,820
1,446,208
Western Digital Corp
389,729
547,500
Western Resources
1,059,560
814,172
Westinghouse Elect
2,414,455
1,966,867
Westinghouse$1.53dep
624,900
608,500
Weyerhaeuser Co
485,148
912,430
Wheelabrator Tech
491,659
637,170
Wheeling-Pitt
588,261
543,888
Whirlpool Corp
2,187,359
2,123,078
Williams Cos. Inc
679,718
664,335
#Williams Coal Seam
35,024
161,879
Willis Corroon (ADR)
82,074
274,000
Windmere Corp
711,500
688,900
Winn-Dixie Stores
1,100,663
1,145,523
Wisconsin Energy
653,534
486,656
Wisconsin Pub Svc
855,400
1,003,738
WMS Industries
546,032
356,430
Woolworth Corp Hldg
446,841
631,383
Worldcorp, Inc.
362,000
325,200
WPL Holdings, Inc.
250,997
342,130
Wrigley (Wm) Jr Co
766,352
575,682
Wstrn Co N Amer
515,979
521,749
Xerox Corp
508,112
1,123,624
Zapata Corp
524,678
522,783
Zenith Electronics
2,666,619
2,722,612
Zweig Fund,inc.
373,955
373,000
American
Air &amp; Water Tech Cor
262,900
241,009
ALC Communications
886,014
1,001,019
*Alpine Group (The)
513,261
487,761
*Amdahl Corp
348,816
233,508
Audre Recognition
799,764
675,227
*Aurora Electronics
602,650
694,074
*Belmac Corp
943,507
740,633
Beta Well Service
364,160
393,239
Bombay Company
401,759
339,990
Cablevision Sys Corp
298,100
299,350
Calif Energy Co
278,198
255,659
Carrington Labs Inc
327,315
347,391
*Chambers Devel A
539,704
665,623
+Cheyenne Software
1,782,182
N.L.
Citizens First Banco
642,900
564,589
Clinicorp Inc
321,542
407,049
Columbia Lab
669,200
686,465
CST Entertainment
376,300
376,350
*Davstar Ind Ltd
952,647
894,925
*Echo Bay Mines Ltd
825,695
509,840
*Elan Corp
5,410,114
4,315,576
#*Energy Service
6,694,309
3,031,314
*Epitope Inc
1,690,129
1,836,687
*Forest Laboratories
703,038
703,472
Fruit of the Loom
611,912
550,053
*Giant Food Inc A
161,848
309,740
*Greyhound Lines Inc
1,074,681
901,488
*Gulf Canada Res Ltd
861,358
982,037
*Hasbro Inc
2,469,360
1,808,668
Health Professionals
1,039,108
1,156,096
*Hillhaven Corp
2,600,700
3,495,900
Hondo Oil&amp;Gas
684,100
644,535
*Howtek Inc
804,681
825,641
*I C H Corp
467,700
444,400
IGI Inc
191,687
421,737
*Interdigital Comm
3,309,700
3,243,317
*Ivax Corp
3,954,109
3,915,631
*Jan Bell Marketing
687,516
810,652
*Kirby Corp
2,870,104
2,874,416
*Medco Research
915,366
920,543
*Media Logic
443,200
424,499
#*Nabors Ind
1,901,694
983,976
*New Line Cinema Corp
677,350
750,250
*New York Times Co
1,672,727
1,625,159
#NTN Communications
465,999
158,094
*O'Brien Environment
781,900
783,350
Olsten Corp
422,232
499,082
*Organogenesis
649,481
652,180
Plains Resources
767,450
762,308
#PLC Systems
73,810
386,203
*Porta Systems Corp
397,552
453,667
Response Tech
395,400
395,400
*Royal Oak Mines Inc
300,188
808,700
SPI Pharm
298,914
294,501
*Sterling Elect Corp
259,446
344,821
Sulcus Computer Corp
1,555,915
1,632,985
*Thermo Instrument
889,302
887,588
Tubos D Acero
362,142
577,012
*Turner Broad Sys Clb
1,588,338
2,231,656
*US Bioscience Inc
606,959
787,684
*US Filter Corp
465,746
458,952
Viratek Inc
396,960
394,040
+Wang Lab Cl B
2,817,022
N.L.
Short Sales Tables Explained  These tables show issues with a short interest position in the current month of at least 250,000 shares or a change up or down from the previous month of at least 115,901 shares.
Cover ratio represents the number of days, at average volume level, that it would take to purchase the number of shares sold short.
A -- American Stock Exchange.
N -- New York Stock Exchange.
N.L. -- Not listed.
+ -- Stock split.
* (American Stock Exchange only.) May have been affected by arbitrage transactions resulting from any one or more of the following: proposed or pending acquisitions; convertible securities of the same company; rights offerings; stock splits or distributions; tenders; other special situations.
Short interest may also be affected by options positions.
# Indicates a change of 75 percent or more from the previous month.


Pressure Grows on Azerbaijan Leader to Quit
The former Communist leader of Azerbaijan, Heydar Aliyev, continued today to ratchet up the pressure on President Abulfez Elchibey to resign, saying the President's continued absence from the capital was the cause of general instability.
Even as he spoke, rebel forces calling for the President's resignation casually sauntered around Baku.


Whether Positive or Negative, Result of Prostate Cancer Test Can Create Maze of Questions
TWO years ago, Richard Howe, 64 years old, a retired oil company executive in Houston, asked his doctor for a new prostate cancer test that he had seen advertised.
When Mr.
Howe's results came back, they were positive, catapulting him into a world of medical decision-making in the face of enormous uncertainty.
But, Mr.
Howe says, he is sure he did the right thing.
His doctor found cancerous cells in his prostate, Mr.
Howe had an operation to remove the tumor, and now, he says, he is probably cured of a cancer that might have killed him.


COMPANY NEWS
AKZO N.V., Arnhem, the Netherlands, said it had agreed to sell its paper chemicals division to Nobel Industries of Sweden.
Terms were not disclosed.
AMERICAN TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH CO., Basking Ridge, N.J., said it had reached an agreement to acquire a majority interest in Barphone S.A. of France.
The transaction was valued at $47 million.


Sergeant Acquitted In Brooklyn Assault
A New York City police sergeant was acquitted last night of charges that he assaulted a community leader who is a member of his Brooklyn precinct's community council and one of her sons.
The sergeant, Peter Viola, was found not guilty in State Supreme Court in Brooklyn in a case that drew wide notice because the woman he was accused of assaulting, Ann B. Dodds, is considered a driving force behind community-improvement efforts in her Bedford-Stuyvesant neighborhood.


CHRONICLE
Incumbents in the top leadership positions of the National Organization for Women are routinely challenged in elections, and this year, when 3,000 delegates to the annual convention are expected to cast ballots in Boston on July 3, will be no exception.
Contending that the administration of PATRICIA IRELAND has lost touch with the grass roots, a team headed by EFIA NWANGAZA, a lawyer from Greenville, S.C., is seeking office.


Save Us All From the White House Press Corps; The Worst of Taste
To the Editor:
That was no question!
The ABC reporter delivered an accusatory speech and tacked a question mark on the end.
The speech-question was in the worst of taste and merited President Clinton's response.


French Immigration Curbs Provoke Cabinet Rift
The conservative Government of Edouard Balladur faced a damaging rift over its drive to clamp down on immigration after a leading Gaullist legislator suggested today that perusing a foreign newspaper in the streets of Paris might be cause enough for the police to demand the identity papers of the reader.
Since taking office in March, Interior Minister Charles Pasqua has embarked on a policy he has called "zero immigration" in response to rapidly rising unemployment.
His proposed legislation, including tighter controls on French citizenship and wider identity checks, has tried to tread a fine line falling just short of outright racism.


Hextall Is Following His Family Tradition
His father was a hockey player.
His uncle was a hockey player.
His grandfather was a hockey player, too.
"My mum remembers me when I was 2 years old," Ron Hextall was saying today, "and I would throw the socks up the stairs and make the save" when they bounced back.
He figures he was born to be a hockey player.
Now that he is an Islander goalie, acquired on Sunday in a trade with Quebec, there is irony about him wearing a New York uniform and trying to keep pucks out of the net.


METROPOLITAN GOLF REPORT
Hochster and Walker Cup
When the Hochster Memorial was won yesterday by Cliff Earle of McGregor Links in Saratoga, N.Y., it capped a week of celebration at the Quaker Ridge Golf Club.
The 77-year-old club in Scarsdale, N.Y., has been quaking with excitment since last Wednesday, when it was awarded its first United States Golf Association event, the 1997 Walker Cup.
"We don't have have a driving range and enough real estate to accommodate a large field," said Rick Vershure, the head pro at Quaker Ridge, "but we have enough room for a small field like the Walker Cup."


In an Edgy Mogadishu, Relief Efforts Are in Jeopardy
Food distribution has begun again in Mogadishu after a 10-day interruption during the United Nations military operation against a Somali clan leader.
But relief officials said that although no one had starved before food distribution resumed late last week, continuing instability made relief operations increasingly difficult.


Olerud Is Blue Jays' New King of Swing
The first thing everyone raves about is the swing.
John Olerud just might have the prettiest swing in baseball.
It is fluid, it is effortless and there is no sense of panic in his eyes or his hands as his bat slides through the strike zone.
Olerud simply waits, sees the ball and then strokes it.
Beautiful.
But the gorgeous left-handed swing had only produced a .269 career average in three seasons with the Toronto Blue Jays before Olerud tinkered with his mechanics this past spring.
He moved his hands away from his body, he backed off the plate to get a better look at pitches and he decided to be more aggressive.
No more watching first-pitch strikes.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  A DISTURBANCE'S LONG SHADOW
Propelled by the imminent release of a state report on racial disturbances in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, the long-simmering controversy over how the Dinkins administration handled the 1991 violence has moved to the forefront of the mayoral campaign.
A1.
RENT CONTROLS STILL ON HOLD
For the second time in a week, New York State Senate and Assembly leaders have agreed to extend the state's rent regulations for a brief period while they continue discussing whether to weaken regulations on certain luxury apartments.
Assembly Speaker Saul Weprin and the Senate majority leader, Ralph J. Marino, announced they have agreed to extend the existing rent-regulation law for seven days.
B3.
Against the backdrop of a legislative tug of war over rent regulation, the city's Rent Guidelines Board votes on proposed increases for rent-stabilized apartments.
B3.


Review/Jazz; A Crowd-Pleasing Kenny G
If the music of the popular soprano saxophonist Kenny G is lightweight and shamelessly crowd-pleasing, it is also hard to dislike.
This 36-year-old instrumentalist from Seattle, whose full name is Kenny Gorelick, has invented his own brand of amiable mood music.
Ceaselessly melodic and gentle in spirit (even when driven by a rhythm-and-blues backbeat), it evokes idyllic Pacific Ocean vistas, and birds curling and dipping into picture-postcard sunsets.
The versatility and sweetness of Mr.
Gorelick's tone poems have made him the best-selling solo instrumentalist in the country.
His newest album, "Breathless" (Arista), teems with wistfully sunny melodies burbled in settings that find a natural blend of pop romanticism, jazz-fusion energy and New Age ambiance.


Bradley Passes 76ers' Physical
SHAWN BRADLEY, after a momentary scare, passed a Philadelphia 76er physical this week.
On Monday, the 76ers welcomed the 21-year-old center to their headquarters, measured him to be 7 feet 5 3/4 inches and proceeded to X-ray his entire body.
An initial echocardiogram found "a shadow" on the heart, according to Bradley's father, RENIER, and the team ordered more extensive tests.


Two Suspects Are Arrested In Art Theft On Park Ave.
Two men were arrested yesterday in the theft of more than $1 million in 20th-century paintings and other valuables from a Park Avenue apartment, the authorities said.
Six paintings were recovered after a U.S.
Postal Service agent posing as a "wealthy European art dealer" told the suspects in April 1992 that he was interested in buying the stolen works, said Robert T. Johnson, the Bronx District Attorney.


Los Angeles Panel Backs Restaurant Smoking Ban
A day after the tobacco industry sued to void the Federal Government's findings on the dangers of secondhand smoke, the City Council here upped the ante in the cigarette wars today by voting to ban smoking in restaurants.
The legislation would make Los Angeles the nation's largest city to forbid smoking by restaurant diners.
Its chances of approval by Mayor Tom Bradley are considered good, although a spokeswoman for the Mayor said today that he had made no final decision on whether to sign or veto it before retiring from office next week.


Aztec Manufacturing Co.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Tournament Won't Pay Price
NICK FALDO, BERNHARD LANGER and IAN WOOSNAM wanted too much money to show up, according to organizers of the French Open, so they will be missing when the tournament begins today in Saint Quentin en Yvelines.
However, six of the top 10 money winners on the European PGA Tour are entered.
"Faldo asked for $150,000, Langer and Woosnam for $95,000," said LIONEL PROVOST, the president of Promogolf, one of the organizers.
"These are obscene figures to be throwing around with millions of Europeans out of work. This year we decided to call a halt to the money madness."


Review/Jazz Festival; Young Saxophonist Is Almost an Old Pro
In the middle of "Echos," his second tune at Avery Fisher Hall on Tuesday night, the young tenor saxophonist Josh Redman started to improvise.
Not the kind of improvisation in which a musician puts together preplanned phrases and memorized ideas, but the rarer sort that comes from somewere else.
It's unfettered creativity, where ideas immediately become music; musicians often chalk it up to a higher power.
Mr.
Redman had that freedom.
He was honking, and breaking up lines with staccato phrases, scribbling lines furiously and jumping octaves, laying thought over thought until dense pools of notes made up a musical landscape.
Then, by running off a classically balanced be-bop line, he would escape.


When Politics Go Bizarre: Council Member's Arrest
Samuel Horwitz, a City Councilman from Brooklyn, planned to attend a kindergarten graduation ceremony yesterday for the son of a constituent.
But Mr.
Horwitz never made it into the auditorium.
Instead, the 74-year-old Democratic Councilman was arrested, handcuffed and taken to the police precinct station house in a turbulent morning that underscored how bizarre New York City politics can be.
School officials said Mr.
Horwitz had been arrested because he insisted on entering the elementary-school auditorium even though he had no ticket, with the tickets issued only to parents.


House Passes a Bill to Encourage Strikes
To the Editor:
"House Passes Bill to Ban Replacement of Strikers" (news article, June 16) incorrectly reports of H.R. 5: "The measure would apply only to companies where a labor group is recognized by the employer or the National Labor Relations Board as the exclusive representative of the workers in negotiations."


Fed Finds Slow Pace For Growth
The prospect of higher taxes and costly health-care changes is helping to limit economic growth to a "slow to moderate pace" in most sections of the country, the Federal Reserve's latest survey of business conditions said today.
The Fed's anecdotal assessment of business conditions through mid-June came as the Commerce Department published statistics showing that new orders for big-ticket manufactured goods fell for the third straight month in May and that the economy grew at an even slower pace in the first three months of the year than had previously been thought.


Block (H &amp; R) (N) reports earnings for Year to April 30


Advice With Grace
To The Home Section:
If I saw a friend of mine about to make a serious mistake, I would be remiss if I did not respectfully give her my advice.
Then she could say: "Thanks for caring. I will consider your viewpoint," and make her own decision.


Clinton Bill on Educational Standards Advances
The House Education and Labor Committee today approved the Clinton Administration's education bill, which calls for voluntary national standards and would offer grants to state and local authorities to develop plans to meet them.
The bill was supported on a party-line vote, with all 28 Democrats in favor and all 15 Republicans opposed.
The Republicans complained that the bill's standards would effectively become mandatory.
One Republican, Representative Steve Gunderson of Wisconsin, said the bill would "nationalize education."


Things Can Get Awfully Bizarre at the N.H.L. Talent Bazaar
Randy Sexton is a rookie general manager for the Ottawa Senators, but experienced at scenes like the one here at the National Hockey League Draft and Congress.
"When I was a boy, I grew up on a farm," he said.
"I used to go to auctions all the time. Pigs. Horses. Cattle. Chickens."


Salem Sportswear (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Agreement Is Reached In Olympia &amp; York Rift
A court-appointed mediator told a Federal bankruptcy judge yesterday that he had broken a deadlock and forged an agreement that would allow the United States branch of Olympia &amp; York, the distressed Canadian real estate giant, to restructure its $5.3 billion in debt and avoid a bankruptcy.
The agreement, reached in Federal Bankruptcy Court in Manhattan, came after several months of sometimes difficult negotiations that led to the appointment of the mediator, former Secretary of State Cyrus R. Vance, in May.


When the New Remotes Zap, Everything Listens
ONCE upon a time, people changed the channels on their television set digitally, with thumb and forefinger.
Today, in record numbers, a recumbent public uses remote controls.
There are more than 99 million of them for television sets in the country today, according to the Electronic Industries Association and industry estimates.
And when the remote controls for VCR's, CD players and cable-television boxes are counted, that total swells to more than 224 million.


INSIDE
Panel Acts on Base Closings
In the first set of votes that will cause pain to many communities, a Government panel decided to close or shrink two Army bases but also spared two, one of them in New Jersey.
Page A20.
Iraqis Move Toward Iran
Iraq moved troops toward Iran and put air defenses on alert in its largest mobilization since the gulf war, American officials said.
Page A3.
Nigeria Voids Its Elections
The Nigerian military Government annulled the presidential elections held 11 days ago and abandoned its promise to hand power back to elected civilians soon.
Page A8.
Pratt &amp; Whitney Pact Voted
Union employees at Pratt &amp; Whitney plants in Connecticut approved a package of contract concessions aimed at saving 2,300 jobs.
Page B1.


Contenders Are Interested in Obtaining Mets' Tanana
Frank Tanana did not do enough to win a game for the Mets yesterday at Shea Stadium.
Tanana also did nothing to hurt his trade value.
Such are the kinds of calculations that will color the rest of the season for the Mets.
The interest in Tanana from other clubs is real.
The Mets have fielded more than a couple of calls asking about the 39-year-old left-hander, and according to one executive in baseball, there is a standing offer on the table that the Mets could act on at any time in the next week.
The other club is believed to be the Chicago White Sox.


HOME IMPROVEMENT
BUILDING simple exterior stairs and a landing of the type appropriate for a back door begins with constructing the landing's rectangular frame and mounting it to the house and to posts firmly anchored in the ground.
These steps were described in last week's column.
The next step is attaching four joists across the frame to support the flooring.
Cut these from pressure-treated 2 by 6's to fit between the frame's ledger and side.
Coat the ends with a wood preservative.
Position the joists parallel to the frame's ends, spacing them about 16 inches apart.
Fasten them with metal joist hangers and the galvanized nails sold with them.


Objects of Desire That Defined Their Eras
THE young man who once fell in love with the young woman sitting in the beanbag chair didn't realize until it was over that he had confused the lady for the chair.
The originality, flair and insolence of the 1968 design by the Italian group Zanotta had modified her like an adjective.
In other times, she might have been sitting in a '57 Cadillac convertible with tailfins, or sipping from the streamlined, curvaceous Coca-Cola bottle designed by Raymond Loewy, or daubing perfume onto her wrist with the translucent stopper of a Lalique perfume flacon.


The 4 Percent's Solution Isn't Latest N.F.L. Pact
Early next week in Washington, the power brokers for the National Football League and the N.F.L.
Players Association will join for what qualifies as a historic moment in league history: the ceremonial signing of the league's new seven-year collective bargaining agreement with its players.
"I don't know exactly how much pomp and circumstance to expect from the N.F.L," joked Jim Quinn, the lead attorney for the players association.
"In the other sports we do these things every few years and it's not such a big deal. This is the N.F.L., you know."


Goodmark Foods (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the inflating of a hot air balloon misidentified the location in New Jersey.
It was downtown Trenton, not Solberg Airport in Readington.


Administration May Cut Growth Forecast to 2.5%
The Clinton Administration is likely to cut its forecast for this year's economic growth to around 2.5 percent from the 3.1 percent prediction it made in January, the Administration's chief economist said today.
Laura D'Andrea Tyson, head of the Council of Economic Advisers, said the Administration was contemplating a downward revision in the forecast because of the defeat of President Clinton's $16 billion jobs program and slower-than-anticipated growth in the first quarter.


RJR Drops Plans for a Foods Stock
More evidence emerged yesterday of the unpopularity of consumer product company stocks, when after nearly four months of trying, RJR Nabisco abandoned its efforts to offer a separate class of stock tied to its food businesses.
When plans for the new stock were announced in March, the company said it would seek $17 to $19 a share, hoping to raise at least $1.5 billion to retire debt.
But company officials said yesterday that market conditions no longer made the public offering attractive.


92 Are Arrested for Failure to Pay Child Support
Nassau County officials today announced the arrests of 83 men and nine women for failure to pay court-ordered child support ranging between several hundred and tens of thousands of dollars.
The arrests came a day after a similar crackdown in New Jersey, where the authorities statewide arrested 324 people who were delinquent in paying more than $2 million in child support.


Riddick Bowe &amp; Co. File Suit Against Lou Duva &amp; Co.
Heavyweight champion Riddick Bowe will fight former heavyweight champion Evander Holyfield, at least in court.
Bowe, his manager Rock Newman and his promoter, Spencer Promotions Inc. filed a $25 million suit against Dan Duva and his company, Main Events, as well as manager Shelly Finkel and Holyfield.
The 24-page complaint, filed yesterday in United States District Court in Manhattan charged Duva and Main Events with breach of contract, interference with prospective economic advantage and breach of fiduciary duty.


Market Place; Troubles loom for Brooke after a Supreme Court setback.
SOMETIMES, playing market long shots proves enormously profitable, with investors rewarded handsomely for their patience and confidence in a company.
But more often, things work out the way they did at Brooke Group Ltd., with bitter investors and a company mumbling about possible bankruptcy.


How House Panel Is Persuaded to Retreat
The House subcommittee that helps to support the District of Columbia's government thought it had found a painless way to funnel money to the District: it would force a giant federally sponsored mortgage corporation to pay local income taxes.
Not surprisingly, the corporation, known as Fannie Mae, fought back.
The federally chartered concern, which is the nation's biggest underwriter of home mortgages, lobbied vigorously to defeat the proposal, which was withdrawn today.


Generic Growth
The strong recent performance of the stock of A. L. Laboratories, a maker of generic drugs, may be indicative of the entire generic sector, which stands to benefit from President Clinton's pledge to curb drug price increases under his health-care plan.
Most generic companies are small and ripe for spurts in growth, analysts say.


COMPANY NEWS
AMERICAN TELEPHONE AND TELEGRAPH CO., Basking Ridge, N.J., said it had bought a majority interest in Meson, a distributor of business communications systems in Poland.
Terms were not disclosed.
BE AEROSPACE, Wellington, Fla., said yesterday that it was in talks to purchase the Acurex Corp. of Mountain View, Calif., a maker of galley equipment for airliners, for $62.5 million.


United Foods Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Prosecuting Welfare Fraud Ineffective, Judge Says
Sentencing a group of people who pleaded guilty to receiving welfare payments fraudulently, a Federal judge yesterday declared that criminal prosecutions of such people were ineffective in combating that type of fraud.
The judge, Jack B. Weinstein of Federal District Court in Brooklyn, held that more progress could be made if ethnic and community groups worked to dissuade the people they represented not to engage in such crime and if welfare agencies strengthened procedures to curb it.


House Retains Space Station In a Close Vote
Putting space research and jobs ahead of cutting the budget deficit, the House today endorsed the troubled space station by a hairline margin, probably insuring at least one more year of construction.
The station is several years behind its original construction schedule and has run several billion dollars over its original budget, set by the Reagan Administration a decade ago.
And with the cold war over and the deficit growing as an economic and political issue, the construction of a permanently staffed orbital laboratory has steadily lost Congressional support in the last three years.


Robert Shrock, 88, Fossil Expert
Robert Rakes Shrock, a geology professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who discovered a number of species of fossils, died Tuesday at the Reservoir Nursing Home in Waltham, Mass.
He was 88.
He died of cancer, his family said.
Professor Shrock, who lived in Lexington, Mass., spent 38 years at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, starting as an assistant professor in 1937.
He was chairman of the department of geology and geophysics from 1949 to 1965.
He reached emeritus status in 1970 but continued as a senior lecturer for five more years.


At Last, Shout of 'Eureka!' In Age-Old Math Mystery
More than 350 years ago, a French mathematician wrote a deceptively simple theorem in the margins of a book, adding that he had discovered a marvelous proof of it but lacked space to include it in the margin.
He died without ever offering his proof, and mathematicians have been trying ever since to supply it.
Now, after thousands of claims of success that proved untrue, mathematicians say the daunting challenge, perhaps the most famous of unsolved mathematical problems, has at last been surmounted.


Blazing a Power Trail in the Adirondacks; When Senator Ronald Stafford Says Not in My District, a Whole State Goes Without
Now and then, an issue arises that spotlights the way things really work in the New York State Legislature.
There is, for instance, the current tale of how the fate of arguably the most important environmental legislation of the year has come to rest largely with one man: Senator Ronald B. Stafford, Republican from Plattsburgh.
At stake is the creation of an environmental trust fund, legislation that would set aside at least $100 million for the state to purchase and preserve undeveloped land, including in Adirondack Park and in Long Island's Pine Barrens and along barrier beaches.


Cornwall Village Gets a Tate Gallery Branch
Nestled into the cliffs overlooking Porthmeor Beach in this tiny fishing village in the farthest corner of Cornwall is the brand new Tate St.
Ives, a pristine white structure that politely defers to the sea.
Within, there is a selection of art from the English artists who belong to the St.
Ives School, selected from the holdings of the Tate Gallery in London.
The opening of the $4.95 million museum has not been without considerable fanfare, in the hope of improving the fortunes of St.
Ives, an economically depressed area with an artistically rich history.


Green for a Greeting, Red for Rape
At first it seems almost funny, that the Navy has produced a one-page guide on sexual harassment that reads like a 6-year-old's reading primer.
On second thought, it's no laughing matter.
Maybe this equivalent of the 1992 Presidential campaign's "It's the economy, stupid" is precisely what a service so deeply steeped in sexism needs to reform its ways.
The guide, which has been sent to all commanding officers for posting on military bulletin boards, defines harassment in terms of traffic lights.
"Sexual assault and rape" gets a red light.
"Expressing concern or encouragement" gets a green.
Behavior that falls somewhere between a casual hello and a determined grope gets a yellow.
Many women would agree that "unwanted letters or poems" is properly yellow.
But "sexually suggestive touching"?
Surely that qualifies for red.


Maurice Galy, 75, Retired President Of Lycee Francais
Maurice Galy, president of the Lycee Francais de New York for more than three decades, died on June 11 at his home in Massat in the Pyrenees region of southwestern France.
He was 75.
He had suffered from a long illness, said a friend of the family.


Venet Agency Is Out of Business
Two weeks after losing its largest account, Venet Advertising in Cranford, N.J., said yesterday that it had closed after 39 years.


Arocha Gets as Close to Cuba as He Can
Along with Nike and Radio Mambi, a Miami radio station, Rene Arocha paid for 500 general-admission tickets to tonight's St.
Louis Cardinals-Florida Marlins game.
Another 35 friends and hundreds of well-wishers were among the 37,936 fans who came through the turnstiles at Joe Robbie Stadium.
Arocha, the Cardinals' rookie pitcher who defected from Cuba nearly two years ago and has made Miami his adopted hometown, "just wanted to give a thanks to the community," according to Gus Dominguez, his agent.


Drug Emporium (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Iraqi Forces Go on Alert at Iran Border
Iraq has moved some troops closer to the Iranian border and put its air defenses on high alert in its largest military mobilization since the Persian Gulf war, American officials said today.
Intelligence officials have said the flurry of activity appears to reflect Baghdad's fears of a new Iranian attack rather than plans for an offensive strike of its own.
But the moves have raised concern within the Clinton Administration, where officials say they are uncertain of Iraq's intentions.


Why Not Take a Gander at This Piece?
THE nicest people do it, the most intelligent people do it, the "letting it all hang out, telling it like it is" people do it.
It's unconscious, subconscious, automatic.
It's highly unlikely that there's anyone around who hasn't, at one time or another, used a euphemism.
"They're probably just as old as language," said Dr.
Frederick C. Mish, editor in chief of Merriam-Webster Inc., dictionary publishers in Springfield, Mass.
He noted that the actual word was Greek in origin, loosely meaning something that sounds better, and that it was generally related to "getting around the taboos and certain sacred words."


Mets Prepared to Give McIlvaine Blank Check
There is no longer any reason to read too deeply for meaning in the statements out of Shea Stadium: Joe McIlvaine is going to be the next general manager of the Mets.
The club has told him that no baseball decisions will be made before he either says yes or no to the job, and that if he wants to accept the title and remain in California indefinitely, he can do so with absolute veto power over all baseball affairs.
"He is a man who will fill a need we have, and he is a man that we know to be of great honesty, integrity and ability," Fred Wilpon, one of the owners of the Mets, said yesterday.
"He doesn't have to pick up. He's been in the National League. He will be right in step."


S.&amp; L. Woes Impinge on Privileged Haven
June's languor has settled on the rich green reaches of the Palm Beach Polo and Country Club.
Only the occasional golfer studiously addresses a ball on the shimmering, lush fairways, and there are just a few horses sheltering from the heat over at the cool emerald-painted barns.
But the lassitude is deceptive, for the members of this haven for the moneyed are confronting a deeply unsettling matter.
The Resolution Trust Corporation, the Federal agency assigned to clean up the savings and loan mess, now owns the place, after a default by its previous owner, and will sell it at a public auction on July 14.
Maharajahs and Stars
Even more distressing for a group of members who want to buy the club is what they call a near-betrayal by the Government: They say they got a pledge from Resolution Trust that they would have an advantage over other buyers at the sale, but now they fear that the agency, in an effort to help the taxpayer by getting the best price, will sell to a buyer who will destroy the club's exclusive way of life.


Economic Rumblings
Soundings in the private sector provide further evidence that the economy is growing at only a moderate pace.
And small businesses are complaining that they have been cut out of the economic plan in Congress.
Articles in Business Day, page D1.


Changing Channels: Letterman Prepares For Last NBC Show
After all the jokes about General Electric toasters and pinhead network executives, and after all the ill feeling about his decision to jump to CBS in August, David Letterman is still approaching his final performance on NBC with "a bit of nostalgia" that he said was likely to produce "an emotional outpouring."
The very last "Late Night With David Letterman," concluding a run of more than 11 years on NBC, will be broadcast tomorrow night.
As the star prepared this week for his exit from the stage at Studio 6A in the General Electric Building, he said: "I absolutely will have many important things to say and I will have many people to thank. Maybe we'll just have one solo spotlight on a stool downstage and I'll just sit there and sob for an hour." 'Wonderful Surprise' Guest
That is not the real format for Friday's finale, of course.
Instead, one of the show's most popular guests, Tom Hanks, is scheduled, along with a guest Mr.
Letterman described as "a wonderful surprise." He said it was a guest who would not agree to come on if the name was revealed in advance.
But he added, "It is someone in my life who has meant a great deal and it is someone who has never been booked on the show before."


Books of The Times; Finding the Beauty and the Otherness of Bugs
Broadsides From the Other Orders  A Book of Bugs  By Sue Hubbell  Illustrated by Dimitry Schidlovsky. 276 pages.
Random House. $23.
As Sue Hubbell explains in her charming new book, "Broadsides From the Other Orders: A Book of Bugs," the otherness of insects is precisely what first attracted her to the world of bugs.
As a child she was frightened by an adult's threat that dragonflies, called devil's darning needles, would sew up her mouth if they caught her, and by visions of rose chafers devouring the beauty of the world.


'Reforms' That Split Japan's Political World
The turmoil that has suddenly upset Japan's political system is due to a number of problems and rivalries building up for years, but the immediate trigger was a dispute over cleaning up the scandal-plagued electoral system.
Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa's Government staked its future on passing political reform legislation, which many regard as essential to restoring public trust in politicians.


A Convenience Born of Intolerance
WERE remote controls always so complicated?
No, says the inventor of the first practical unit, Dr.
Robert Adler.
Dr.
Adler, 79, retired as vice president for research at the Zenith Electronics Corporation in Glenview, Ill., and is a technical consultant to Zenith.
"People accuse me of creating the Couch Potato, and I say, 'You're right!' " Dr.
Adler said.
"Remote controls are just logical. Since we do not watch TV at arm's length, something to switch channels has always been desirable."


Stewart Comes Back From Life's Standing 8
Of all the fighters he belted to the canvas in a career that began with 24 straight knockouts, Alex Stewart defines himself by the moment he was knocked flat on his back -- but got up.
Even though Stewart eventually lost that fight 14 months ago by decision to George Foreman, it turned around a career that was foundering.


Geneticist Is Badly Hurt In Mail Bomb Explosion
A world-renowned geneticist from the University of California at San Francisco suffered grave injuries when a mail bomb exploded as he was opening the package in his kitchen, an event that has sent tremors of fear and bafflement through the ranks of scientists.
Officials of the Federal Bureau of Investigation said they had no suspects or motives yet in the bombing.
They said they were pursuing many leads, including an intact return address on the package that blew up.


Hand to Mouth
To The Home Section:
On May 20, Dulcie Leimbach mentioned in passing an implement to teach a baby how to eat: a pusher (Currents: "Feeding Baby").


Timetable for Deciding on Closings
Here are the dates by which the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission, the President and Congress are expected to act on closings of American military bases:
JULY 1.  The commission submits its final recommendations to President Clinton.


Credit-Card Tickets Got Better Treatment
To the Editor:
Last Thursday, when I went to see "Jurassic Park" at the Ziegfeld, a Cineplex Odeon-owned theater, I found a new policy toward moviegoers.
I bought my tickets for the midnight show (tickets for the 9:30 show had sold out to those who paid by credit card over the phone earlier in the day).
I discovered there were two lines for ticket holders: one for the privileged credit-card ticket holders, and another for the lowly cash ticket holders.
By the time the ticket holders were let in, both lines were roughly the same length.


SYMBOL OF POWER: RULING MEXICO CITY
In a half-step toward meeting demands for greater democracy in the hemisphere's biggest metropolis, the administration of President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has proposed a new form of government for Mexico City.
The country's main opposition parties objected almost as soon as the proposal was presented late Tuesday, saying it would reserve inordinate local power to the President and to the Institutional Revolutionary Party, which has governed for 64 years.


Core Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Bio-Dental Technologies Corp. (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Calendar: Tours by Day and Night
All-Night Tour  92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue; (212) 996-1100.
Warren Shaw, a historian, will lead a walking tour and candlelight procession in lower Manhattan on July 4, from 2 to 6 A.M.
The tour, which will include the site of George Washington's inauguration and the first United States Capitol, will be followed by a sunrise cruise on the Staten Island ferry.
Fee is $15.
Reservations are required.
Show and Tours  Urban Center Galleries of the Municipal Art Society, 457 Madison Avenue (East 51st Street); (212) 935-3960.
An exhibition of drawings from a competition for a self-cleaning public toilet, to be built at Grand Army Plaza at Fifth Avenue and East 59th Street, continues through Sept. 10.
The winning design was by Cynthia Sours and John White.
Open Monday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. (closed Thursday and Sunday).
No charge.


More Honors for Runner
Villanova middle distance runner NNENNA LYNCH added two more honors to her credentials yesterday.
She was named the women's GTE academic all-America team member of the year in the university division.
Lynch, who was a star runner at Hunter College High School in Manhattan, was the Big East conference scholar-athlete of the year and is a Rhodes scholar recipient.
She is a sociology major with a 3.92 grade point average and a member of Villanova's National Collegiate Athletic Association cross-country champion team.(AP)


The Quiet Decision Maker With Crown Hts. Report
The racial disturbances in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, which have come to dominate Richard H. Girgenti's two years as the State Director of Criminal Justice, occurred when he had been on the job for only a few weeks.
But he did not get the assignment to review them until more than a year later.
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo appointed Mr.
Girgenti to be his chief adviser and policy maker on criminal justice in July 1991.
In the $100,528-a-year job, the 42-year-old Brooklyn-born lawyer oversees agencies like the state police, the Department of Correctional Services, the Division of Parole and the Crime Victims Board.
Reputation as a Fighter
He remains a quiet decision maker who some say resembles the young Thomas E. Dewey, complete with glasses and mustache, and seems eager to please, even though he has a reputation as a tough, well-prepared courtroom fighter.


Let's Look Again at This Fernandez Legacy
To the Editor:
"A Fernandez Legacy to City Schools" (editorial, June 12) fails to reflect the reality in New York City schools.
As Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez did bring us the concept of school-based management, which he supposedly designed in Florida.
Unfortunately, he sold his proposal from the steps of his headquarters on Livingston Street, but never allowed it to enter through the front door.
His administration has been characterized by a top-down philosophy, in which no opinions were requested, few considered, and fewer yet accepted.
Those of us who worked in the system under his leadership were struck by the contrast between what he said and what he did.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
A ROUTINE visit to a doctor or dentist raises anxieties in almost all children.
While most take the necessary pokes and needle sticks in stride, or become upset only on occasion, a few children are truly terrified.
They burst into tears, squirm, fight and do other things that actually make their visits more uncomfortable and traumatic for both them and their parents.
Helping a child overcome a fear of seeing a doctor or dentist requires understanding the child's perspective, which is unlike an adult's.
"Visiting a physician can help a child feel masterful or like a failure, depending in part on how the child handles his anxiety and how the parents and physician help," said Dr.
Donald Brunnquell, a child psychologist at the Minneapolis Children's Medical Center.


Abraham Kaplan, 75, Author and Teacher
Abraham Kaplan, an author and teacher of philosophy, died Saturday in Los Angeles.
He was 75 and had lived in Haifa, Israel, since 1972.
He died of a heart attack while visiting a friend, said Allan Casebier, an associate professor at the University of Southern California.


Trying to Blend Swagger and Sensitivity for the Right Masculine Image.
MADISON AVENUE seems no more able to figure out what women want than Freud was.
Since most advertising executives are male, perhaps they will fare better at divining what men want.
Two campaigns being introduced soon try the tricky task of presenting the man of the 1990's.
Like the bather who adjusts the hot- and cold-water faucets for just the right mix to soak in comfortably, creative executives at two agencies are seeking to blend swagger and sensitivity, and materialism and idealism, for just the right mix of masculine imagery.


Agency Faults New York in Bus Crash
The New York State Department of Transportation shares responsibility with Federal highway officials and the driver-owner of a bus involved in an accident last July that killed six people and injured 48, the National Transportation Safety Board found today.
The Brooklyn-based charter bus was carrying families to an amusement park when it veered out of control going down a steep hill in Vernon, N.J.
The bus collided with two cars and burst into flames.


The Art of Handling Garbage
THE city of Phoenix decided that artists, working with engineers, could make a solid-waste management plant that is progressively functional and not bad to look at.
So in 1989, the city's Arts Commission hired Linnea Glatt, a sculptor from Dallas, and Michael Singer, a sculptor from Wilmington, Vt., to help design a new garbage transfer and recycling center.
The two artists were chosen from slides of their work and their experiences collaborating with other designers, said Gretchen Freeman, the art program's manager.


Accounts
*
Bassett Furniture, Bassett, Va., to Trone Advertising, Greensboro, N.C., to handle its account, previously handled by Hawley Martin Partners, Richmond.
Billings were estimated to exceed $1 million.


EA Engineering, Science &amp; Technology Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Serb-Croat Plan to Split Up Bosnia Worries Mediators
The two international mediators for the Balkans expressed concern today over initial Serbian and Croatian proposals for dividing Bosnia and Herzegovina into three loosely federated ethnic states.
After talks here with leaders of the warring factions, Lord Owen, representing the European Community, said that he and the United Nations representative, Thorvald Stoltenberg, had been "rather disappointed" by the vagueness of the proposals President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia and President Franjo Tudjman of Croatia presented to them for partitioning the country.


Goodbye, Adirondacks?
This is the moment of truth for the Adirondacks.
The future of New York's greatest public natural resource is at stake.
In the next few days, the Republican majority of the State Senate will decide whether one man's zealotry to kill the Adirondack Park will prevail.


Cutback in U.S. Funds to Reduce Summer Jobs for New York Youths
With a belated package of Federal financing about to be approved by Congress, government agencies and community groups in New York City are gearing up for a summer jobs program for teen-agers that promises fewer jobs and shorter periods of employment than in recent years.
The Federal program, a cornerstone of the nation's efforts to give poor young people their first exposure to the workaday world, is more critical than usual this year in New York, where unemployment among young people has recently soared.


CHRONICLE
After months of speculation that he was being courted by ABC, ED BRADLEY has decided to remain at CBS, it was announced yesterday by ERIC OBER, president of CBS News, and HOWARD STRINGER, president of the CBS Broadcast Group.
Mr.
Bradley, who became a correspondent on "60 Minutes" in 1981, has also been the anchor of "Street Stories," the news magazine that began broadcasting in January 1992.
He has decided to leave that program, which will go off the air in the fall to be reformulated and renamed, said Tom Goodman, a spokesman for CBS News.


The Lightness Of Being a Lamp With a Difference
LAMPS do more than cast light.
Whether designed for reading or simply for a gentle, romantic ambiance, lamps can be witty, whimsical or sculptural.
Several new lamp designs -- with function often subordinate to charm -- use materials like strands of bamboo, skeins of braided straw and strings of transparent nylon wire.
The lamps, all of which take incandescent bulbs, are sensuous and lighthearted, unlike the hard-edged, angular halogen lamps of the 1980's that so often featured metal shades and ramrod straight arms.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-12  THE END OF A JAPANESE ORDER  Declaring the governing Liberal Democratic Party a corrupt relic of the cold war, former Finance Minister Tsutomu Hata proclaimed the end of Japan's postwar political order amid signs that his new party of Liberal Democratic defectors may also force the breakup of the largest opposition movement, the Socialists.
A1  Japanese turmoil had been brewing for years.
A7


Fernandez Departs to Praise and Posse
Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez sat through his last public hearing at the New York City Board of Education yesterday, listening impassively to the same raucous mix of praise and vilification that he encountered in scores of meetings during his tempestuous tenure.
Mr.
Fernandez's face reddened only slightly as a lawyer who has been a vocal opponent faced him at the podium to criticize, one more time, a controversial AIDS curriculum and to conclude: "Chancellor Fernandez is leaving us a lot of disgusting legacies."


Ethel Hausman, 89, Benefactor Of Cerebral Palsy Organizations
Ethel Hausman, a founder and major supporter of United Cerebral Palsy of New York City and North Shore University Hospital-Cornell University Medical College in Manhasset, L. I., died on Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 89.
She died after a brief illness, her family said.


U.S. Suspends Aid
The Clinton Administration called the Nigerian military's decision to cancel the election results "outrageous" today and suspended America's non-relief aid to the West African country.
In addition, the United States began talks with European countries and other African nations about concerted actions against Nigeria, including the possibility of halting joint aid.


Nigerian Military Rulers Annul Election
The Nigerian military Government today annulled the presidential elections held 11 days ago and abandoned its promise to hand power back to elected civilians anytime soon.
The announcement was made in a decree signed by the military leader, Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida, who said "these steps were taken to save our judiciary from being ridiculed and politicized locally and internationally."


3 Arrested in Protest Of Mass at St. Paul's
A mass at St.
Paul the Apostle Roman Catholic Church in midtown Manhattan was disrupted yesterday by protesters who said they opposed homosexuals' participation in the service, the police said.
At 5:15 P.M., a dozen protesters moved to the altar at the church, at West 59th Street and Columbus Avenue, and grabbed the microphone that the assistant pastor, the Rev.
Steven Harris, was using to conduct the service, witnesses said.
One man wrestled Father Harris into a headlock, the witnesses said, as several other protesters yelled slogans from the congregation.


AT WIMBLEDON WITH: Ion Tiriac; Tennis's Grandest Bad Boy
The photographer asks Ion Tiriac to smile.
He does not smile, because he has an image to protect.
His friends say they have never seen his teeth.
But Count Dracula, as the Transylvania-born Mr.
Tiriac is known in the tennis world, wants to be cooperative, so he glowers a bit more gently.
Before he became a Svengali to Boris Becker, a multimillionaire tennis manager, a touted prospect for high office in Romania and the Donald Trump of fledgling Romanian capitalism, Ion (pronounced Yon) Tiriac played here two decades ago against such stars as Rod Laver, Clark Graebner and Stan Smith.


Zephyr Journal; Guiding a Roar Across the Heartland
Inside the California Zephyr, Amtrak's transcontinental train between Chicago and Oakland, Calif., America is on vacation.
It's a full house.
School is out and there are a lot of families on board, maybe 300 passengers all told, and they're exchanging stories with strangers about the weather in their home towns, coddling babies, visiting the snack bar, passing judgment on the views of Rush Limbaugh.
There are a lot of video cameras pointed out the windows and almost everyone, it seems, is carrying a paperback by John Grisham, including a Baptist clergyman from Springfield, Ill., named John Grisham.


It's Shave and Volley As Agassi Advances
A little bit fiction, a little bit superstition and, according to him, a little more aerodynamic now that he has taken drastic depilatory measures on everything but his scalp, defending Wimbledon champion Andre Agassi's moves -- and midriff -- are getting smoother all the time.
The Las Vegan, whose mere presence at this staid site creates chaos reminiscent of Beatlemania, left himself just five matches away from untold personal glory this afternoon by eliminating Portugal's Joao Cunha-Silva from the second round, 5-7, 6-3, 6-2, 6-0.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Air Products and Chemicals Inc., Allentown, Pa., an industrial gases concern, is offering through Lehman Brothers $100 million of 6.25 percent notes due in 2003 at 99.135 to yield 6.368 percent.
The noncallable notes are rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service and A+ by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


Corrections
A picture caption in some editions yesterday about a demonstration at Community Board 3 in Manhattan referred incorrectly to the board chairman.
He is Luis Soler.


Small Business Wants More In Clinton Economic Plan
Convinced they have been outlobbied by big business, the nation's small businesses began pressing today for changes in President Clinton's economic plan, complaining that the Senate Finance Committee wiped out most provisions that would help them.
Representatives of the nation's 20 million small businesses, once optimistic about the President's original package, have soured on the plan because the Finance Committee dropped a capital-gains tax cut for small business and other investment incentives.


Mandela and Buthelezi Unite to End Violence
After their first meeting in more than two years, Nelson Mandela and Mangosuthu Gatsha Buthelezi, one-time liberation comrades who now preside over the deadliest political rivalry in South Africa, promised tonight to travel together through war-torn regions in a joint appeal for peace.
Meeting reporters after 10 hours together at a Lutheran conference center outside Johannesburg, the two men said they had not resolved their differences at the talks on a nonracial constitution, where Mr.
Buthelezi's group, the Inkatha Freedom Party, is the most important holdout.


Budget Debate: A Primer; Cutting Through Claims and Counterclaims As Senate Ponders Ways to Curb the Deficit
Those watching the budget debate in the Senate on television today must have been numbed by the claims and counterclaims.
There were the Democrats, with their four-color charts, arguing that their budget would turn around the nation's economy by slashing Government spending, taxing the rich and lowering the deficit by more than $500 billion over the next five years.


CHRONICLE
CAB CALLOWAY, the legendary singer and band leader, was to have led the bill for an unusual concert, "The Jazz Connection: The Jewish and African-American Relationship," at Avery Fisher Hall tonight.
But Mr.
Calloway, 85, was sidelined by a fall in his kitchen on June 5 and is in the hospital recuperating.
To say that someone could replace Mr.
Calloway at the concert would be unthinkable, said GEORGE WEIN, producer of the JVC Jazz Festival, which is sponsoring the program.
"There is no substitute for him," he said.
"He is one in a lifetime. So instead, we will play a record of him singing 'Minnie the Moocher.' " The song, a Calloway classic, contains the famous "Hi-De-Ho" chorus.


Ban Anachronistic Arms Tests
Ever since World War II the planet has lived with the threat of nuclear war.
Thirty years ago, the Limited Test Ban Treaty drove U.S., Soviet and British nuclear testing underground.
But a total ban on nuclear tests has eluded the world's grasp.
President Clinton is now in a position to help achieve that goal.
During his campaign, Mr.
Clinton called for "a new national security policy equal to the challenges of the post-cold-war era." Testing new nuclear arms was not among the challenges he cited.
Stopping nuclear proliferation was.


Sports of The Times; It's Put Up Or Shut Up In A.L. East
BECAUSE this is the American League, with its balanced schedule and knack for putting off what is important to almost midseason, the really good bouts on the fight card usually do not start until June.
Well, it's here, and the heavyweights of the American League East, at last, are having at it.
The Tigers, the Blue Jays, the Yankees and the Orioles -- the Big Four to the rest of the division's Little Three -- are in a stretch where, more likely than not, one of the enemies they care most about will be staring at them from across the field.


Jacob Burns, Patron Of Yeshiva's Schools And Law Leader, 91
Jacob Burns, a Manhattan lawyer and businessman who gave millions of dollars to charitable causes, died on Sunday at his home in Atlantic Beach, L.I.
He was 91 and also had a home in Manhattan.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Home Video
Closed-Captioning
Beginning next week, television sets with screens larger than 13 inches manufactured for sale in the United States must have a built-in decoder to unscramble the closed-caption part of the signal that provides dialogue and other information about the soundtrack for the deaf and hard of hearing.
The integrated decoder, which is activated with the flip of a switch on the set, has several creative and commercial advantages over the separate decoders now in use.


Milk Board Selects Goodby
The California Milk Processor Board in Emeryville, Calif., said yesterday that it had selected Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein in San Francisco as the first agency to handle its account.
Billings were estimated at $20 million to $23 million.


No Headline
"It's the most exciting thing that's happened in -- geez -- maybe ever, in mathematics." -- DR.
LEONARD ADELMAN, of the Univeristy of Southern California, on the discovery of a proof for a 350-year-old mathematical theorem.  [ A1:2. ]


Blue Chips Lead Retreat as Dow Falls 30.72
Stocks retreated broadly yesterday led by a sharp drop in blue-chip issues that pulled the Dow Jones industrial average down 30.72 points, to 3,466.81.
Investor concern over corporate profits was again a factor, traders said.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was heavy, with 278.3 million shares changing hands, up from 260 million on Tuesday.
Losing stocks were narrowly ahead of gainers, 1,073 to 845, as the Big Board composite slipped 1.17 points, to 244.92.


Garden Events: Tours, Photos and an Auction
Flowers Through a Lens  Gottesman Exhibition Hall, New York Public Library, Fifth Avenue at East 42d Street; (212) 869-8089.
"Flora Photographica: The Flower in Photography From 1835 to the Present," an exhibition of 180 works in color and black-and-white, starts Saturday and runs through Aug. 21.
The show is divided into sections that explore the history of flowers as photographic subjects.


Ex-Officers Shot in Queens
Two retired police officers were shot and wounded in Maspeth, Queens, last night during what appears to have been a robbery by an undetermined number of men, the police said.
The incident occurred shortly before 10 P.M., when the two men, who were working for Copstat Security Company, approached a Chemical Bank at 49th Street and Grand Avenue to make a bank drop, said Officer Andrew McInnis, a police spokesman.
The two men, who were not immediately identified, were listed in stable condition at Elmhurst Hospital.
He said officers were told that a gray van had been seen fleeing the scene.


Domestic Vehicle Sales Rose 5.5% in Mid-June
Bolstered by continued strong sales of mini-vans, pickups and sports utility vehicles, auto makers reported today that sales of domestically built cars and light trucks rose 5.5 percent in mid-June compared with the corresponding period last year.
The improvement was not as strong as other recent reports.
Car sales were basically flat during the June 11-20 period, while sales of light trucks, which include mini-vans and sports utility vehicles, rose 13.4 percent.


Essay; Political Spouse
The only time I saw Pat Nixon get testy with her husband was when he invited their Irish setter, King Timahoe, to climb up on a newly recovered couch in his White House office; it offended her frugal soul and she let Richard Nixon know it.
What I did not know at the time was their experience with another dog.
During the two years in the 1940's when Nixon was trying to get her to marry him, she took care of his Irish setter, also named King; the young naval officer gave her a small china statue of an Irish setter by way of thanks.
Years later, in the White House, she put that piece on the desk in his private office, where he kept it as a reminder of the old days.


Washington Talk; Some Old Hands Shape A New Research Group
In Washington, old bureaucrats never fade away. They just incorporate.
Some of the leading lights of George Bush's foreign policy team popped up on the Washington stage today, calling a news conference to try to recapture the spotlight they enjoyed when they were helping to break up the Soviet Union and putting together the coalition against Saddam Hussein.


PANEL BACKS BILL TO PROTECT CLINICS
With significant bipartisan support, the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee approved legislation today to make it a Federal crime to blockade or damage abortion clinics or to threaten or harm abortion providers.
Three of the committee's seven Republicans joined the 10 Democrats on the panel in voting for the bill.
The four Republicans who opposed it argued that it was unbalanced because it would not protect anti-abortion demonstrators from attacks that threatened their right to free speech.


Nigerian Military Rulers Annul Election
The Nigerian military Government today annulled the presidential elections held 11 days ago and abandoned its promise to hand power back to elected civilians anytime soon.
The announcement was made in a decree signed by the military leader, Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida, who said "these steps were taken to save our judiciary from being ridiculed and politicized locally and internationally."


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a report in the Company News column of Business Day yesterday about actions taken by the U.S.
Home Corporation to raise capital referred incorrectly to the timing of the company's emergence from Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
The company left bankruptcy on Monday.


Executive Changes
AIR LIQUIDE AMERICA CORP., Walnut Creek, Calif., a unit of L'Air Liquide S.A., a Paris-based producer of industrial gas, named Robert D. Cadieux president and chief executive.
CANADIAN IMPERIAL BANK OF COMMERCE, Toronto, named Robert W. Stuart managing director of a new telecommunications group based in New York.


Robbins &amp; Myers Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Senate Democrats rejected the Republicans' budget alternative as the formal debate over President Clinton's budget package got under way.  [ Page A1. ]
The House endorsed the troubled Freedom Space Station by a hairline margin, putting space research and jobs ahead of cutting the budget deficit.  [ A1. ]


U.S. Widens Investigation Into Bonds And Trenton
The Securities and Exchange Commission has widened its investigation into the dealings of two New Jersey bond firms whose owners have political links to Gov.
Jim Florio, subpoenaing records from a host of county and municipal agencies and asking some bond dealers for detailed information about their political contributions.
Officials in three counties -- Gloucester, Passaic and Mercer -- confirmed reports today that they had been served subpoenas for documents relating to bond deals involving Armacon Securities and Consolidated Financial Management.


RESULTS PLUS
BOXING  Coggi Defends W.B.A.
Title  Juan Martin Coggi of Argentina successfully defended his World Boxing Association junior welterweight title by knocking out Hiroyuki Yoshino of Japan at 2 minutes 15 seconds of the fifth round yesterday in Tokyo.
Coggi knocked Yoshino down twice in the round before a straight left ended the scheduled 12-round bout in Coggi's 37th knockout.
The 31-year-old champion was making his second defense.
Coggi now has 62 victories to go with 2 losses and 2 draws.(AP)
Moorer Preserves Rating: Michael Moorer, a Detroit heavyweight, preserved his No. 1 challenger rating with the World Boxing Association by scoring a third-round knockout over James Pritchard of Louisville, Ky., Tuesday night in Atlantic City.
Referee Arthur Mercante halted the scheduled 10-round contest at 2:36 of the third when Pritchard, having already been floored twice in the round, was trapped in a corner and unable to defend himself.
Moorer is now 33-0 with 30 knockouts.(AP)


Nurturing Technology in Ohio
This city in the heart of the Mahoning Valley may be better known for defunct steel mills than high technology and international competitiveness.
But Youngstown is home to a technology outreach office that may be the prototype for a nationwide system, if the Clinton Administration's technology policy proceeds as planned.
The Technology Development Corporation is a strange beast, organizationally.
Legally, it is part of Youngstown State University and is in a Victorian-era house on its campus.
But it is also one of five outreach offices across the state sponsored by the Great Lakes Manufacturing Technology Center in Cleveland.
The other four are in Akron, Canton, Elyria and Toledo.


Empire Blue Cross Suspends Chief Financial Officer Without Pay
The board of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield suspended the company's chief financial officer without pay yesterday because of questions about his role in submitting misleading figures to state officials.
The board had previously put the official, Jerry Weissman, on a paid leave after finding that the figures were in error.
Saying that he had not yet determined what Mr.
Weissman's role was, Otto G. Obermaier, the former United States Attorney who was hired by the company last week to investigate the matter, said he nevertheless wanted Mr.
Weissman off Empire's payroll because of the situation's "enormous uncertainty.".


Fuller (H.B.) Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Fernandez's Statistics Change With the Scenery
Twelve days ago, Tony Fernandez escaped from baseball's version of hell, the place where a team cannot win two straight games, where a pitcher has lost 23 straight and where both the manager and general manager who started the season are now unemployed.
No longer muddling along with the last-place Mets in Flushing, Fernandez returned to the defending World Series champion Blue Jays in Toronto in a trade for outfielder Darrin Jackson.
But the improvement in scenery has not improved his demeanor, at least not today.
There was no smile emanating from Fernandez when he was asked about being back in the city where he began his major league career at shortstop 10 years ago.
There were no wonderful stories from him about playing before a sellout crowd every night at the Skydome and no theories about why he is playing remarkably better for the Jays then he did for the Mets.
There was mostly gruffness as a player reputed as aloof was exactly that.


Theater in Review
The Merchant of Venice  Intar Theater 420 West 42d Street Clinton  Through Sunday By William Shakespeare; directed by Peter Royston; assistant director, Rebecca Shroyer; original music by William Catanzaro; lighting by Diana Arecco; costumes by Steven L. Birnbaum; set by Ron Meadows.
Presented by the Royston Theater Company.
WITH: James R. Bianchi, Kevin Alfred Brown, Tom Byrne, Joanne Comerford, Jack DiMonte, Kevin Elden, Sally Goodwin, John Haggerty, Ted Hewlett, Jeremy Johnson, Jacqueline Lucid, Daniel Marcus, William D. Michie, Gregory St.
John, Catherine Walter, Warren Watson and Jeffrey Eugene Williams.


Garden Q.&amp; A.
Counting the Drops
Q.
After a rain, I find it frustrating to wait until the television or radio reports say how much fell.
How can I figure this out myself? -- Abraham Leonard, Fredericksburg, Va.
A.
Just as farmers have done for centuries, home gardeners glance at the heavens hoping for rain.
But afterward, the question is how much moisture reached the soil.


Under Public Fire, Triple Crown Reconsiders Format
Racing officials, reacting to public concern over fatal injuries to star horses in the Preakness Stakes last month and the Belmont Stakes three weeks ago, are exploring a landmark change that would provide more spacing between the races in the Triple Crown series.
No new format has been developed, but one racing executive reported that one sequence under discussion was this: The Kentucky Derby would still be run on the first Saturday in May, but the Preakness would be run one month (instead of two weeks) later and the Belmont Stakes one month (instead of three weeks) after that.
So, instead of three demanding races in five weeks' time, the races would be spread over eight weeks' time.


U.S. Reports Setback On Russian Aid Plan
The Clinton Administration said a $4 billion international fund it proposed to help state enterprises in Russia convert to private businesses would have to be scaled back because Japan and West European allies were too squeezed for cash to join.
"We are doing some serious arm-twisting" to save the plan, a senior Administration official said.


Economic Scene; Does the American trade deficit reflect U.S. success or failure?
THE American trade deficit in April, the largest in four years, is:
(a) Evidence of Japanese perfidy.
(b) Proof the American economy is in decline.
(c) A $10.5 billion misunderstanding.


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about the adoption of New Jersey's budget misstated the scope of a change proposed in the income tax on nonresidents, and a correction in this space yesterday repeated the error.
The proposal, which would change the method of computing the tax, would affect all nonresidents who work in New Jersey except those from Pennsylvania; it is not directed just at New Yorkers.


Unifirst Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


How Mexican Jobs Ease U.S. Burden
To the Editor:
In "Reaganomics, With a Mexican Accent," (Op-Ed, June 11), Michael Lind accuses President Clinton of confusion because he supports revitalizing the economy and the North America Free Trade Agreement, but Mr.
Lind's arguments are confused.


Alton Journal; Savage 'Horse Ripper' Panics English Countryside
This is lush country.
Gently rolling hills and valleys are bathed in the blossoms of foxglove and honeysuckle and Jacob's ladder, and the green of the fields is so bright it shimmers over everything -- the sheep, the winding wooden fences, the stone farmhouses and red-brick cottages.
But something is wrong in Hampshire.
Over the last three years, more than 30 horses have been savagely attacked.
The attacks, which actually date back more than 10 years but are now occurring more often and turning fatal, have happened in open fields and inside stables, in broad daylight and on moonlight nights.


Bears Vice President Quits
BILL TOBIN, the Chicago Bears' vice president of player personnel, resigned yesterday, citing differences with the team's management.
"When I saw that there were going to be changes I couldn't go along with on how to structure the personnel office and how it should be operated, it was time to make my exit," Tobin said.
Tobin said he had received several signals from team officials that they wanted him out of the post.
He said his future in football is up in the air.


Home With the Children
To The Home Section:
As the mother of year-old twin boys, I read Lawrence Kutner's Parent &amp; Child column about baby sitters (June 10) with interest.
My husband and I have no relatives in the area.
Few baby sitters, we find, can safely watch 1-year-old twin boys, certainly not 10-year-old sitters.


As Brooklyn School's Graduation Nears, Shooting Trial Opens


Theater in Review
The Gut Girls  Cucaracha Theater 500 Greenwich Street TriBeCa  Through Saturday By Sarah Daniels; directed by Maria Mileaf; set by Vincent Mountain; lighting by Jeremy Stein; costumes by Mary Larson; original music and sound by Eric Liljestrand; dialect coach, Howard Samuelsohn.
Presented by Cucaracha Theater.
WITH: Joseph Fuqua, Pamela Gray, Lauren Hamilton, Deirdre Harrison, Kate Malin, Mollie O'Mara, Elizabeth Woodruff and Damian Young.


People
*
Jed Bernstein was named to the new position of senior vice president and account group head on the I.B.M. account at Wells Rich Greene BDDP, New York.
He was previously a senior vice president and director of new business at Ally &amp; Gargano, New York. *
Thomas Nelson, senior vice president and associate creative director at Ammirati &amp; Puris, New York, was named to the new position of chairman and creative director at Ammirati &amp; Puris Canada, Toronto, a full-service office being opened in September to serve clients like United Parcel Service and Compaq Computer.


Science Needs the Supercollider
To the Editor:
In "Atom Smasher Is Super Nonsense" (Op-Ed June 17), John Lukacs attacks not only the supercollider in Texas, but also the enterprise of particle physics.
One can debate how scarce public funds should be spent on research, but this nonsensical article shows a shocking ignorance and a dangerous antiscience bias.


To a Land Loved and Left, Sam Spiegel's Art
In the early 1920's, barely past his teen-age years and far from being able to dream that he would become an Academy Award-winning producer, Sam Spiegel dug ditches and sewers as a "young pioneer" in Palestine.
He didn't make it.
Life as a "drainage expert," as he later described it, was not for him, and before long he left.
Eventually, he found his way to Hollywood, a short, domineering man who made his share of enemies over the years but also filled more than his quota of film masterpieces, including "The African Queen," "On the Waterfront," "The Bridge on the River Kwai" and "Lawrence of Arabia."


Dinkins Is Questioned On Violence
The state official preparing a long-awaited report on the racial violence in Crown Heights met with Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday to question him further about his administration's handling of the disturbances.
But the official said he would not speed up his inquiry despite a call by Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly for the quick release of the findings and the issue's growing prominence in the New York City mayoral campaign.


Review/Dance; Balanchine Celebration Lightens Up
Entering the home stretch, the New York City Ballet's very serious Balanchine Celebration turned to humor on Tuesday night.
The festival's final week at the New York State Theater opened with a spirited revival of "Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme."
It is easy to see why this frolicsome ballet is too slight to become a repertory staple.
Based on an episode in Moliere's "Bourgeois Gentilhomme," the work is essentially a divertissement that pretends to have an outline of a plot.
Balanchine, despite such pitfalls, choreographed three versions of "Le Bourgeois Gentilhomme": in 1932, 1944 and 1979, on commission for the New York City Opera.
The last staging was conceived as a vehicle for Rudolf Nureyev, who portrayed the 17th-century parvenu attempting to learn the arts of a gentleman.


Sheffield Pleads Not Guilty
Attorneys for GARY SHEFFIELD yesterday entered a not guilty plea on behalf of the San Diego third baseman on a misdemeanor assault charge.
Sheffield was not present at the hearing; the Padres are in San Francisco playing the Giants.
Sheffield was arrested June 16 in front of an International House of Pancakes restaurant near the Astrodome.
He spent almost 13 hours in the city jail while his team was in Houston for a series against the Astros.


A Year Later, Death's Echoes
More than a year has passed since the February morning when Khalil Sumpter pulled a gun from under his jacket, fatally shot two fellow students and turned Thomas Jefferson High School into a symbol of the ruthless penetration of street violence into the lives of young people and the places once considered safe havens.
Since then, there have been marches for peace, congressional hearings on youth violence, efforts to lobby for gun control and added security measures, like extra guards and metal detectors, installed at New York City's public schools.
And Thomas Jefferson, or "Jeff" as the Brooklyn school is known, has made peace with itself.


Reeds Jewelers Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Panel Takes First Steps, Modestly, in Closing Bases
In the first of a set of decisions that will cause economic disruption in scores of communities nationwide, a Presidential commission voted today to close one small Army installation and shrink another Army base but spared two big bases in New Jersey and Alabama.
Beginning today through Sunday, the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission is deciding to close, shrink or spare 88 major military bases and 150 smaller installations that in most cases are the economic engines in their regions.


Corrections
A picture with the Sports of The Times column yesterday, about the Mets and Joe McIlvaine, the leading choice to be their next general manager, was published in error.
It showed Jerry Hunsicker, the team's assistant vice president of baseball operations.


I.R.S. Accord With Macy
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company, the bankrupt retailer, said yesterday that it had reached an agreement with the Internal Revenue Service about Federal income taxes it owes from its 1984 through 1991 fiscal years.
Under the agreement, which is subject to the approval of the bankruptcy court, Macy will pay $162 million in back taxes.
This amount is substantially less than analysts expected, and the price of Macy's junk bonds rose when the settlement was announced.


Corrections
A chart yesterday listing last week's top 10 television shows included erroneous ratings supplied by A. C. Nielsen &amp; Company.
A corrected chart appears today on page C20.


Purina Mills, A B.P. Unit, To Be Sold
The British Petroleum Company said yesterday that it had agreed to sell Purina Mills Inc., the largest American supplier of animal feed, to an investor group for $425 million in cash as part of its plan to focus on its core operations.
BP Nutrition, a Cleveland-based B.P. subsidiary, acquired Purina Mills from the Ralston Purina Company seven years ago for $545 million.
Purina Mills, based in St.
Louis, operates 54 feed mills and has about 2,600 employees.
The Sterling Group, a Houston financial firm that acts as an investment banker in leveraged and management buyouts, will lead the investor group, which includes Purina Mills management.
The transaction also calls for an employee stock ownership plan to be put in place.


FUND FOR BUSINESS IN RUSSIA TO BE CUT
The Clinton Administration said today that a $4 billion international fund it proposed to help Russian state enterprises convert to private businesses would have to be shrunk because Japan and the Western European allies are too squeezed for cash to join.
"We are doing some serious arm-twisting on the Japanese and Europeans to try to salvage as much as possible," a senior Administration official said.
"People understand that the idea is not a bad idea, but they keep saying to us: Where are we going to come up with this dough?"


Pratt &amp; Whitney Unions Approve Concessions Pact
Putting the final piece of a major economic puzzle for the Northeast in place, union workers at Pratt &amp; Whitney agreed last night to a package of concessions that are aimed at keeping the company from moving a large portion of its operations out of Connecticut.
The vote is expected to save more than 2,000 jobs in the state.
The agreement gives Pratt &amp; Whitney what it demanded -- tying wages to productivity and freezing raises until late 1995 -- in exchange for a promise not to use sub-contractors and to keep open its five plants in Connecticut open.
After the state Government offered a package of tax cuts and grants worth $32 million, Pratt, a jet-engine manufacturer that is Connecticut's largest private employer, agreed not to move on the condition that the union accept the concessions package.
Sacrifice for Security
Economists and politicians warned before the vote that a departure by Pratt would have been disastrous for Connecticut's fragile economy, endangering Pratt subcontrators and costing millions of dollars in lost taxes.
The company's employment in the state has already fallen to 17,200 from 28,800 in 1986.


Kuwait to Seek Arrest of Sheiks Over Lost Funds
Kuwait has asked Interpol to arrest two members of the royal family in connection with an investigation into the mismanagement of public funds.
The two are Sheik Fahd Al Mohammad Al Sabah, who was last known to be in Bermuda, and Sheik Khalid Al Nasser Al Sabah, who is living in London.
Both are close relatives of the Emir of Kuwait and ranking members of the Al Sabah family that has ruled Kuwait for nearly 200 years.


U.S. Judge Upholds Search of a Suspect In Bombing Inquiry
A Federal judge in Manhattan yesterday upheld the search of a man arrested as part of the investigation into the World Trade Center bombing, saying detectives had information linking him to the explosion.
The defendant, Ibrahim A. Elgabrowny, who is not accused of aiding in the blast itself, contended that he was assaulted by members of a Federal anti-terrorist squad and then illegally searched outside his apartment at 57 Prospect Park Southwest in Brooklyn on March 4.
His arrest came one week after the the Feb. 26 explosion, which killed six people and injured more than 1,000.


AN ASTEROID BELT NEAR EARTH'S PATH
Scientists believe they have discovered a belt of asteroids in orbits so close to the earth's orbit that many of them are bound to hit the planet sooner or later.
But fortunately, most of these space bullets are so small that they will probably explode in the earth's upper atmosphere without causing any damage or injuries on the ground.
This mixed message was reported in two papers published in today's issue of the British journal Nature.
It comes a month after one asteroid, Object 93KA2, zipped past the earth only 90,000 miles away, the closest near collision ever observed.
This chunk of debris, 15 feet in diameter, was far too small to create a hazard, but if it had hit the atmosphere instead of skimming past, people might have been treated to a spectacular fireworks display as it exploded.


Mr. Clinton Beats the Haitians
The Supreme Court has upheld the Bush-Clinton policy of taking to the high seas to force fleeing Haitians to return home.
In doing so, it has given the executive branch a legal victory and a moral black eye.
Revolted by episodes of forced repatriation of political refugees, the United Nations and Congress prohibited the practice -- but not, says the Court, on the high seas.
Why didn't the law mention the high seas?
Probably because the lawmakers "may not have contemplated that any nation would gather fleeing refugees and return them to the one country they had desperately sought to escape."


Bridge
Playoffs to determine the 1993 United States teams for world championship play in Chile in September began here this morning.
After 16 deals in the open series, the Reisinger team, including David Berkowitz, Larry Cohen and Sam Lev from the New York area, were exactly tied with the Vanderbilt team, which includes Neil Chambers of Schenectady, N.Y.
In the other match the Spingold team, headed by Michael Becker of Tenafly, N.J., led by 15 imps against the Grand National team, one from the Chicago area.
In the women's series, the team including Gail Greenberg of Manhattan led by 54 against one with Judge Amalya Kearse of Manhattan; Rozanne Pollack of Englewood, N.J., and her team led by 9 against Karen Allison of Jersey City and hers, and the squad with Kerri Shuman of Manhattan led by 24 against Renee Mancuso of Los Angeles and her team.


Finding a Signature Style For a Picnic in the Park
HERE are two picnic baskets, one heavy, the other light, that cater to different picnickers with different needs.
William-Wayne &amp; Company sells both.
A smaller, handmade one (left), is made of myrtle, with copper handles and leather hinges.
It is $185 and is made in Spain.
The larger, suitcase-like basket (right), is made of stripped willow, has leather straps, brass hardware and a table inside that unfolds to stand 29 inches high.
The basket is imported from the Philippines and costs $500.
William-Wayne is at 850 Lexington Avenue, at 64th Street, (212) 288-9243.


METRO DIGEST
FEWER SUMMER JOBS EXPECTED
With a belated package of Federal funding about to be approved by Congress, government agencies and community groups in New York City are gearing up for a summer jobs program for teen-agers that promises fewer jobs and shorter periods of employment than in recent years.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  EMPIRE SUSPENDS FINANCIAL OFFICER
The board of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield suspended the company's chief financial officer without pay because of questions about his role in submitting misleading figures to state officials.
The board had previously put the official, Jerry Weissman, on a paid leave after finding that the figures were in error.
B5.


Hannah Troy, Fashion Designer, Inventor of Petite Size, Dies at 93
Hannah Troy, an influential women's fashion designer and manufacturer who invented the petite size and introduced modern Italian styles to the United States, died on Tuesday at a hospital in Miami Beach, where she lived.
She was 93.
The cause was a heart attack, her family said.


Former Executive Is Arrested
The former managing director of Young &amp; Rubicam Italia, the Italian subsidiary of Young &amp; Rubicam Inc., was arrested yesterday on charges of bribing Italy's former Health Minister, the Bloomberg Business News service reported, citing the Italian news service Ansa.
Alessandro Incecchi, who ran Young &amp; Rubicam's Rome office until last year, reportedly paid 50 million lire, or $33,000, to win a role in a four-year anti-AIDS advertising and public relations campaign sponsored by the Health Ministry.
Richard McGowan, a Y.&amp; R. spokesman in New York, said yesterday that Mr.
Incecchi had been questioned by police and was scheduled to be released.


A Shed for Every Intention
IF you think all sheds are alike, you may be ready for a shed revelation.
"Sheds: The Do-It-Yourself Guide for Backyard Builders," a recent book by David Stiles (Camden House, $17.95), proves with color photographs, illustrations, text and diagrams that a play shed is a different animal than, say, a tool shed.
Indeed, for expanding families who can't afford a larger house, a shed can be a backyard blessing.
Mr.
Stiles's book is written for the person who wants to build one, whether it be plain (without windows, for example) or modish (cedar-shingled with a sauna).
It helps to be reasonably handy with a hammer and saw; most sheds require no insulation or foundation, just four walls, a roof and a floor.
Mr.
Stiles's instructions are sufficiently explicit, and the accompanying drawings enhance the detailed steps.


SENATORS TAKE UP CLINTON'S BUDGET WITH ACID DEBATE
The grand debate over President Clinton's package of tax increases and spending cuts opened at last in the Senate today, and Democrats and Republicans, well aware that the outcome is predetermined, seized the occasion to paint the economic differences between them in the starkest political terms.
The two sides suspended the invective long enough for the Republicans' alternative to the Democratic plan to be rejected.
The Republican proposal would have capped spending on Federal benefit programs, frozen most other Federal spending and kept taxes at current levels.
Republicans cast it as a tax-free way to reduce the Federal deficit; Democrats called it a sham because it simply decreed a halt to the explosive growth in benefits spending, without specifying how to halt it.
A Turncoat in Each Camp
The vote against the Republican plan was 55 to 43.
One Democrat, Richard Shelby of Alabama, voted for it, and one Republican, James Jeffords of Vermont, joined the Democrats to vote against it.


FDP Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Bart Without Cable TV: Nothing but a T-Shirt
Children's Discretion Advised: Some parts of the following article may contain subject matter unsuitable for parents who believe your grades would be higher if you watched less television.
A COUPLE of years ago, Megan and Weston Cadwell desperately wanted Bart Simpson T-shirts.
After all, it was the height of "The Simpsons" television fame and lots of the Cadwell twins' friends had the shirts.


Pretty Swing, Pretty Streak, Ugly Ending
The prettiest swing in baseball had produced the prettiest hitting streak of the season, but it all vanished in an ugly manner tonight after 26 games for John Olerud.
No line drive, no deep fly ball, not even a bunt single.
The streak ended on an artifical turf chopper.
Ugly.
After 95 at-bats, 40 hits, 8 homers and a .421 average, it was Olerud against Steve Howe in the eighth inning of a 4-3 game.
There were men on first and third so Olerud could have extended his hitting streak to 27 and also helped the Jays win and move into a first-place tie.
He did neither.
He hit a chopper.


Fresh Air in the Air
The air that circulates through jumbo jets isn't as fresh as it used to be.
To economize on fuel, the newer planes change cabin air less frequently than older models -- every six minutes or longer, versus every three minutes.
The effect on health and comfort is not known with any certainty, but the risk is such that the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta are investigating whether infected passengers can transmit tuberculosis.
Broader study of all possible effects is needed as well.
Passengers and crews have complained of headaches, nausea, double vision and -- not least -- the discomfort of less-than-fresh air.


Ameron Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Team Limits Recommended
A National Collegiate Athletic Association committee looking into the financial condition of college athletics yesterday recommended limits on the size of football squads, 105 players for Division 1-A and 90 for Division 1-AA.
Recommendations from the special committee, headed by Big Ten Commissioner JIM DELANY, will go to the N.C.A.A.
Presidents Commission, which meets in Kansas City next week.
The report by the 22-member committee said its work was impeded by lack of reliable and comparable data because some schools were hesitant to share financial information.


The Daughter of Eatonville
ZORA NEALE HURSTON is coming to Corona, Queens.
An exhibition about the writer opens Saturday at the Langston Hughes Community Library.
But, as in her work, much of the focus will be on her childhood home of Eatonville, Fla.
"Jump at the Sun: Zora Neale Hurston and Her Eatonville Roots" will offer photographs, clippings and memorabilia.
Eatonville, a municipality incorporated by blacks, gave Miss Hurston the extra backbone she needed as a black woman to "jump at the sun," an expression her mother used.


F.C.C. Postpones Deciding if Cable Systems Must Carry Shopping Stations
In a last-minute wrestling match with its conscience and its critics, the Federal Communications Commission announced today that it had postponed a decision that would have given 24-hour home-shopping television stations the right to demand that cable systems carry their programming.
The decision, which had been expected Thursday, would have greatly extended the reach of Home Shopping Network, which pioneered round-the-clock sell-a-thons less than a decade ago and now sells more than $1 billion a year in merchandise.
The network's programming is carried by about 100 small over-the-air stations and many cable systems.


Reaction to Harazin Is a Very Mixed Bag
As Al Harazin's legacy bumbled toward another loss yesterday afternoon, there was a mixed reaction at Shea Stadium to the Tuesday resignation of the Mets' general manager.
Howard Johnson and John Franco, though not necessarily critical of the departed general manager, saw positives in the change.
Other players like Bret Saberhagen and Chico Walker expressed remorse at Harazin's fate.
And Manager Dallas Green didn't think his players really had an opinion.


Lasting Israeli Peace Means Compromise
To the Editor:
A group calling itself Pro Israel, in a June 10 ad, assailed the Israeli Government's peace initiatives, attacked the Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations and distorted the record of Americans for Peace Now.


B.C.C.I. JURY TOLD OF FUND SWITCHES
An important prosecution witness in the fraud and bribery trial of Robert A. Altman has told the jury of helping transfer hundreds of millions of dollars from the Bank of Credit and Commerce International to First American Bankshares, the Washington holding company that New York prosecutors say was controlled, with Mr.
Altman's knowledge, by B.C.C.I.
But the witness, Imran Imam, a former B.C.C.I. officer, testified he never dealt directly with Mr.
Altman on the transfers.


Review/Television; Armistead Maupin, Not Dreamt Up but Inspired
Public television is taking note of Gay Pride Month with three outspoken specials concerning gay people and gay issues.
Perhaps not surprisingly, two programs, profiles of American writers, were produced for the BBC: "Larry Kramer," broadcast last weekend on PBS, and "Armistead Maupin Is a Man I Dreamt Up," on PBS tonight at 10.
Sunday at 11 P.M. on PBS, there's "Lives in the Balance: The Lesbian and Gay Movement in the 1990's," a documentary centered on April's march on Washington by gay men and lesbians, their friends and their families numbering about 300,000, as reported by the United States Park Police.
"Larry Kramer" captures an unusually balanced portrait of the novelist ("Faggots") and playwright ("The Normal Heart," "The Destiny of Me"), who is best known for raging against an American establishment he accuses of neglecting "the 20th-century plague, AIDS."


Unlicensed Driver Arrested for 420 Suspensions
A Staten Island man who was stopped for a minor traffic infraction on Tuesday was arrested when a police officer discovered that he had 420 suspensions on his driving record, even though he had no license at all, the police said yesterday.
The driver was identified as Paul Gagliardo, a 26-year-old auto parts deliveryman.
The New York State Department of Motor Vehicles said the suspensions arose from his failure to answer summonses given on 131 occasions for one or more traffic violations over a seven-year period.


Theater in Review
Diminished Capacity  New Group 432 West 42d Street Clinton Through July 1  By Tom Dulack; directed by Scott Elliott; design director, Zaniz; technical director, Kurt S. Nelson; sound by Tom Kochan; production stage manager, Michelle Malloy McIntyre.
Presented by the New Group, Sam Schacht and Mr.
Elliott, artistic directors.
WITH: Hayley Barr, Chris Delaney, James DeMarse, Neal Jones, Mitchell McGuire and Isiah Whitlock.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.98
3.81
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.11
3.08
3.63
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.21
3.17
3.71
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.53
5.53
6.77
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.76
6.77
7.82
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.70
7.70
8.75
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.78
5.79
6.53
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Income Tax Is Answer
To the Editor:
Mirror, mirror on the wall,
What's the fairest tax of all?
The income tax.


German Opposition Party Chooses a New Leader
Hoping to end more than a decade in opposition, the Social Democratic Party has designated a new leader, but not yet a new strategy, to try to oust Chancellor Helmut Kohl in general elections next year.
Rudolf Scharping, the 45-year-old Governor of Mr.
Kohl's home state of Rhineland-Palatinate, won more than 40 percent of the votes in a poll of Social Democratic Party members on June 13 to pick a new chairman.


Games Museum Opens
With the two-time figure skating gold medalist, KATARINA WITT, lighting the flame, Olympic leaders yesterday inaugurated a $65 million museum in Lausanne, Switzerland.
The museum, a five-story, white marble building set on the side of a hill overlooking Lake Geneva, is devoted to the history of the ancient and modern Games.
Twenty German protesters were detained in two minor incidents for throwing eggs and shouting slogans against Berlin's bid to stage the 2000 Summer Olympics.


Jail Threat Ends 13-Month Sit-In To Save Church
A group of 45 middle-age men and woman walked out of St.
Joseph's Church today, ending a 13-month sit-in, after their Bishop obtained a court order to evict them from the 65-year-old building, which he says is unsafe.
The parishioners, who had taken turns sleeping on the pews and floors for more than a year to protest the closing of the church, left only after their long legal battle with the Diocese of Worcester came to a close.
Judge Thomas Connolly of Superior Court found them in contempt of court earlier in the day and threatened them with fines or jail sentences if they did not leave.
The judge said he was saddened to have to intervene in what he called an "unbelievably unfortunate and sad situation."


U.S. Won't Send Troops To Seek Croats' Bodies
The United States has rejected a request by the United Nations to send military engineers to help dig up evidence of possible war crimes in Croatia because Washington does not want to put American soldiers at risk, State and Defense Department officials said today.
Instead, the Administration will donate $180,000 in medical supplies and equipment, including body bags, surgical instruments, hand tools and cleaning solvents, to Physicians for Human Rights.
The group, based in Boston, is aiding an investigation into what is believed to be one of the worst massacres in the Balkan war.


Helene Curtis Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Jays Find All Good Streaks Must Come to an End
Forget Jimmy Key and his return to Toronto for now.
He becomes part of the story later, but he was just an extra by the time Steve Howe and John Olerud faced each other in the bottom of the eighth inning.
It was the at-bat to decide the game.
Howe and Olerud were the co-stars.
The Blue Jays trailed, 4-3, they had runners on first and third with one out and their .400 hitter batting.
Olerud was hitless in his first three at-bats against Key and was desperately trying to maintain his 26-game hitting streak.
Howe had been summoned to replace Bobby Munoz.
The stage and all its players were in place at the Skydome.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Signed Jimmy Walker, pitcher, and assigned him to Albany of the South Atlantic League.
BOSTON RED SOX -- Named Al Nipper pitching coach for Fort Myers of the Gulf Coast League.
Placed Luis Rivera, infielder, on the 15-day disabled list, retroactive to June 21.


Healthtrust Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Rivals in Azerbaijan Continue to Struggle for Leadership


Split in Japan's Ruling Party Is Rearranging Political Map
Declaring the governing Liberal Democratic Party a corrupt relic of the cold war, former Finance Minister Tsutomu Hata proclaimed the end of Japan's postwar political order today amid signs that his new party of Liberal Democratic defectors may also force the break-up of the largest opposition movement, the Socialists.
Mr.
Hata, who led a walkout of 44 Liberal Democratic members of Parliament on Tuesday, announced the formation of the new party at a raucous news conference this afternoon, saying the aging leaders of the ruling party had no more than "a hope and a fantasy" of continuing their 38 years of one-party dominance.
The conference was held in a packed hotel function room, overheated with banks of television lights.
Security was unusually tight.


Newspaper-Studio Clash: Not Exactly a Boffo Finish
The clash of titans -- Columbia Studios and The Los Angeles Times -- fizzled today.
Their dispute, which promised to be as exciting as "Jurassic Park," ended up more like "Last Action Hero," Columbia's disappointing big-budget adventure.
At issue was Columbia's demand last week that The Times bar a freelance writer, Jeffrey Wells, from covering the studio.
Unless the newspaper relented, Columbia said, the studio would make the newspaper's reporters and editors personae non grata.


Music Notes; Thomas to Head San Francisco Symphony in '95
Michael Tilson Thomas has been listed as a contender for the directorships of several American orchestras in recent years.
But although he is still youthful at 48 and has been famous since his 20's, when he was regarded as the young American conductor mostly likely to follow in Leonard Bernstein's footsteps, Mr.
Thomas has never been tapped for any of the posts for which he was presumed to be a candidate.
And although his prolific recording activities, television appearances and guest conducting have kept him in the public eye, he has not held an American directorship since 1979, when he ended an eight-year association with the Buffalo Philharmonic.
That changed on Tuesday, when the San Francisco Symphony announced Mr.
Thomas's appointment as its music director, starting in September 1995.
The orchestra had been searching for seven months to find a successor to Herbert Blomstedt, the Swedish conductor who will step down after the 1994-95 season.
Mr.
Blomstedt, who has done much to promote the orchestra's international reputation through tours and an extensive series of recordings, will become conductor laureate.


Council Needs Action More Than a Hero
The last action hero terminated himself as chairman of the President's Commission on Physical Fitness and Sports several months ago, and this week he was replaced by two former Olympic athletes, which will make a difference in the shape of our future only if they do what Arnold Schwarzenegger didn't -- translate all that energy and discipline into a national program of healthful, joyful, inexpensive and accessible play.
One hopeful sign was the First Jogger's evident understanding of sports as symbol.
At the White House reception for the first National Sports Awards on Sunday, President Clinton, his face dangerously sun-red, declared that the 18 holes of golf he had just played with Arnold Palmer was his best presidential perk so far.
Later that night, at Constitution Hall, he looked properly humble as Muhammad Ali asked him for his autograph.


Bosnian Leadership Struggle Turns on Accepting Partition
A simmering quarrel within the Bosnian Government's 10-member collective leadership erupted into a full-scale power struggle today, creating new opportunities but also new difficulties for efforts to end the 14-month war in the former Yugoslav republic.
The seven members who had defied President Alija Izetbegovic by coming here for talks with Serbian and Croatian leaders on partitioning the country, declared in effect that they now constitute the legitimate government of Bosnia and Herzegovina.


Brauns Fashions Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


F.C.C. Split May Imperil Post Waiver for Murdoch
A potential division has emerged among the three members of the Federal Communications Commission over whether to grant Rupert Murdoch a waiver that he needs to acquire the bankrupt New York Post.
While the disagreement could be resolved, it casts new doubt on whether Mr.
Murdoch will be able to proceed with his plans to permanently regain control of the newspaper he was forced to give up in 1988.


For Children
'Tar Beach'
Children's Museum of Manhattan  212 West 83d Street  Manhattan  (212) 721-1223  Recommended ages: 3 and up  Through December
"Tar Beach" is the dreamlike book by Faith Ringgold whose main character, the 8-year-old Cassie Louise Lightfoot, flies.
As Cassie says, "I will always remember when the stars fell down around me and lifted me up above the George Washington Bridge."


U.S. SETS PENALTY FOR RUSSIAN FIRMS
The United States has imposed sanctions on Russian companies for selling missile technology in violation of international export controls, Clinton Administration officials said today.
But the sanctions have been waived until mid-July while Washington and Moscow make a last-ditch effort to resolve their differences.


Big Powers' Free-Trade Talks Stall
The leading industrial nations failed today to agree on how to liberalize trade, dealing a setback to hopes of successfully completing negotiations for a comprehensive global accord late in the year.
Trade ministers from the United States, Canada, Japan and the European Community had hoped to forge an ambitious agreement in a two-day session here that would reduce tariffs and other barriers on hundreds of products, with the intention of announcing the accord at the economic summit meeting here next month of the Group of Seven industrial nations.


Books of The Times; Rites of Passage Toward Great Unhappiness
The Infinite Plan
By Isabel Allende
Translated by Margaret Sayers Peden
382 pages. HarperCollins. $23.
In her latest novel, "The Infinite Plan," Isabel Allende abandons the hot, politically turbulent Latin American milieu of her earlier fiction for a generic American setting.
She also exchanges the strong, beautiful heroines of "The House of the Spirits" and "Eva Luna" for a prideful, strutting male protagonist and trades in the softly accented magical realism of such previous books for a more leaden-footed brand of naturalism.
This results in a Bildungsroman-cum-family saga that owes more to Judith Krantz than to Gabriel Garcia Marquez.


Executive Changes
FIRST FIDELITY BANCORP., Lawrenceville, N.J., appointed Michael A. Gallagher an executive vice president.
PARAMETRIC TECHNOLOGY CORP., Waltham, Mass., named Mark J. Gallagher and Louis J. Volpe senior vice presidents.


Accounts
*
Hyde Athletic Industries, Peabody, Mass., to Doyle Advertising, Boston, to handle advertising for its Saucony brand of athletic footwear, previously at Pedone &amp; Partners, New York.
Doyle was awarded the account, with billings estimated at $8 million, without a review.


Jabil Circuit Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Nichols Research Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Humanitarian Gestures Meet the Human Will
FROM the murky moral jungle of the war in the former Yugoslavia, a 38-year-old Croatian truck driver from Tuzla with an ankle shattered by shrapnel arrived here two months ago at St.
Raphael's Hospital with an eager smile and an iron-willed agenda.
His name was Petar Jerkovic (pronounced YER-ko-vich), and he spoke no English, and apparently learned little except "Super!" in his months here.
His story, to a great degree, is the story of his wound, how he insisted it be treated, and how he flew home this week determined to rejoin his wife and two daughters at a refugee camp in Germany -- contrary to the wishes of his international escorts.


Benjamin Glad to Be Back With Reed
In a family reunion of sorts, BENOIT BENJAMIN, the newest Net, was welcomed yesterday at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena by WILLIS REED, his former coach at Creighton University, who as the Nets' vice president and general manager engineered Benjamin's trade to New Jersey from the Los Angeles Lakers for SAM BOWIE on Monday.
"I look at him like a son," Reed said.
"I'm confident he can come in here and change some people's minds."


Review/City Ballet; Balanchine In Works Gentle And Fierce
Because George Balanchine prized the order and harmony of traditional ballet technique, he is often termed a classicist.
But ballets involve more than technique.
Many of Balanchine's works are filled with such powerful images of yearning, passion and turmoil that it is possible to argue that he was temperamentally a Romanticist.
He certainly wore his Romantic heart on his sleeve in 1980 when he created "Ballade" and "Robert Schumann's 'Davidsbundlertanze,' " both of which were presented by the New York City Ballet on Wednesday night as part of its Balanchine Celebration at the New York State Theater.


New Cable TV Rules Proposed
The Federal Communications Commission proposed new regulations today that would restrict the size of cable television companies and limit their control of programming.
The restrictions, drafted to put into effect part of the cable television law passed by Congress last year, are intended to limit the power of companies that own large numbers of cable systems and produce many of the popular channels.


Integrated Systems Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Short Sales Outstanding Rise to Record Level
A decline in price among a number of over-the-counter issues in the last month brought big profits for some short-sellers as the number of shares sold short and not yet covered rose to record highs.
For the monthlong period that ended June 15, short interest in Nasdaq stocks climbed 2.5 percent, to 537.7 million shares, up from 524.4 million in the previous month, which was also a record, the National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday.
While short sellers saw profits in a number of issues, the Nasdaq composite index still rose 2.9 percent, to 697.34.


SPECTER OF TERROR: The Suspects; Arrested in Yesterday's Raid
SIDDIG IBRAHIM SIDDIG ALI
Mr.
Siddig Ali, 32, arrived from the Sudan about seven years ago.
The authorities called him the leader of the plot.
He lives at 112 Brunswick Avenue in Jersey City.
A member of the al-Salaam Mosque in Jersey City described Mr.
Ali as a "religious activist who's outspoken" and who was a leader in helping raise money to pay for the legal fees of the six defendants charged in the World Trade Center bombing and for the defense of El Sayyid Nosair, who was convicted of a gun charge in the murder of Rabbi Meir Kahane.


Time to Eat So Don't Mind Holyfield, He'll Just Pick
Wearing sneakers, sweat pants and a T-shirt, Evander Holyfield weighed in today for his comeback fight Saturday at 218 pounds, the heaviest of his career.
Even with his weighty outfit -- he said he was cold because of a walk on the boardwalk -- Holyfield still was 10 pounds lighter than his opponent, Alex Stewart.
But the former heavyweight champion claimed: "It doesn't really make a difference. It's my ability, not my weight. My condition is great."


Perfectdata Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Art in Review
'Picasso'  'The Unpublished Graphics'
Jan Krugier Gallery  41 East 57th Street  Manhattan  Through July 26
This show is a gem of the waning art season, reminding us powerfully, if anyone needed to be reminded, of Picasso's restless and dazzling energy.
It includes prints made between 1914 and 1961 that Picasso for one reason or another kept and never published, and that eventually ended up in the hands of Marina Picasso, his granddaughter, whose estate is represented by Krugier.


Bridge
Both semifinal matches were close today in the open playoffs here to decide the United States representation in the world championships in Chile in September.
In one match the Reisinger team, which includes Michael Becker of Tenafly, N.J., led by 29 imps against a Chicago squad that recruited Jeff Meckstroth of Tampa, Fla.
He replaced Peter Nagy, who recently suffered a heart attack and had a bypass operation.
Forty-eight deals of a scheduled 128 remain to be played.


Sports of The Times; The Players Turn Backs On Caution
IN times of trouble, one defiant act can change the world.
In a Goya painting, one Spanish patriot brandishes a fist at Napoleon's executioners, as if urging his countrymen not to lose heart.
The optimistic gesture at Wimbledon is to turn a chair sideways, back where it always used to be.
First one chair was shifted 90 degrees, then another.
At first, these marching chairs could not be heard on the lush lawns of London SW19, but then most of the players began moving their chairs in a noisy demonstration, turning their backs on the closest strangers in the crowd.


Cliff Curtis's Grandson to Young: Win!
The grandson of CLIFF CURTIS, who set the major league pitching record for most consecutive games lost, has some advice for the player who might break it.
"Keep your good sense of humor and keep your focus, and let's get a no-hitter next time out so we can keep the record in the family," CURTIS CREE of Hackensack, N.J. said.
In 1910-11, Curtis lost 23 consecutive games for the Boston Braves.
ANTHONY YOUNG of the New York Mets has tied the record and is scheduled to pitch on Sunday. (AP)


Nu Horizons Electronics Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Art in Review
Not Vital
Baron/Boisante Editions  50 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through July 16
Not Vital, a Swiss artist who emerged in the recent heyday of the East Village, is an idiosyncratic sculptor with a great feeling for materials and a certain attraction to the absurd, and his work is getting better.
The centerpiece of his charming show is a large and rather wonderful sculpture, a white plaster cylinder five feet tall that flares gently outward and upward.
Inside, a little lamblike creature, also made of white plaster, stares up at the viewer, its face a mixture of animal and human, vulnerability and curiosity.
In their snowy whiteness, animal and container almost blend, creating an apparitional effect and the sense that the animal is more spirit than flesh, a stand-in for the human soul and perhaps a reflection of the viewer.


Albany's Environmental Blinders
Just over a century ago, the New York State Legislature, mindful of generations yet unborn, created a treasure: the Adirondack State Park.
There is no comparable vision among today's lawmakers, who have trouble seeing beyond the end of the day.
Albany's habit of leaving important business until the last minute threatens a noble effort to protect the Adirondacks and may postpone action on two other important environmental issues.
One is to bring New York into compliance with the 1990 Federal Clean Air Act, which obliges states to impose stricter air quality controls on cars and factories.
Failure to act could cost the state $800 million a year in Federal highway aid, and Washington is losing patience with Albany's sloth.


Los Angeles Bans All Restaurant Smoking
Beginning a month from today, Angelenos who want to smoke while eating out will have to drive to Beverly Hills or Burbank.
In one of his final official acts as Mayor of Los Angeles after 20 years, Tom Bradley today signed a bill making the city the largest in the country to ban smoking altogether in restaurants.
The action came less than a day after the 15-member City Council voted to extend the ban, which already applies to theaters, grocery stores, public buildings and elevators, to the city's 7,000 restaurants.


Demagoguery on Taxes
The muddle-headed spirit of Ronald Reagan stalks Washington this week.
Mr.
Reagan promised Americans they could maintain their society without taxing themselves to do it.
The theory went like this: Limit revenues, and spending will come down.
But under Presidents Reagan and Bush, spending went up, especially for defense.
The limits on revenue didn't stop that; the country just went into the red to pay for it.
Meanwhile the underclass grew, social divisions sharpened and attitudes toward suffering took on a Dickensian hardness.


The Gap Narrows in Talks on Gay Ban, but Can It Be Bridged?
After months of negotiations, the Clinton Administration, Congress and homosexual rights groups have narrowed their differences over homosexuals' service in the military.
Nevertheless, officials say, two major hurdles remain: defining precisely the extent to which homosexuals in uniform may speak about their sexual orientation, and whether to declare homosexuality incompatible with military service.


Review/Film; When Sam Met Annie, Or When Two Meet Cute
Nora Ephron's "Sleepless in Seattle" is a feather-light romantic comedy about two lovers who meet for the first time in the last reel.
It's a stunt, but it's a stunt that works far more effectively than anybody in his right mind has reason to expect.
Not since "Love Story" has there been a movie that so shrewdly and predictably manipulated the emotions for such entertaining effect.
Be warned, though: "Sleepless in Seattle" is a movie you may hate yourself in the morning for having loved the night before.
The situation is this: the recently widowed Sam Baldwin (Tom Hanks), a successful architect, has moved to Seattle from Chicago to try to assuage his sorrow.
One night, his 8-year-old son, Jonah (Ross Malinger), calls a late-night radio talk-show psychiatrist.
It is Christmas, and the boy is worried about his dad.
The furious, embarrassed Sam then gets on the phone.
Before he realizes it, he's talking about his perfect marriage before a large portion of the United States population.


James R. Pierce, 71, Magazine Consultant
James Robinson Pierce, a publishing consultant to Sports Afield magazine and brother of Barbara Bush, the former First Lady, died on Tuesday at his home in Katonah, N.Y.
He was 71.
He died after a long illness, said his son Scott Pierce 3d.


Ousted Speaker In Albany Wins Case on Appeal
A Federal appeals panel yesterday unanimously overturned the fraud conviction of former Assembly Speaker Mel Miller of Brooklyn, agreeing that a tangled real-estate deal in which he and his former law partner netted $200,000 did not constitute a crime.
Mr.
Miller, who as Speaker was the second most powerful Democrat in the state, was stripped of his position but spared a prison term after his conviction in 1991.
The conviction effectively ended the political career of a man who for years had cast a dominating, and often domineering, presence over New York State politics.


Maradona, in Argentina, Says He's Done
DIEGO MARADONA returned to Argentina yesterday and said he would not play soccer again.
Maradona, who returned from Spain following the expiration of his one-season contract with Sevilla in the Spanish first division, said that "after the match with Burgos, I realized it was the end for me." During the June 13 match, Maradona was substituted for by coach and longtime mentor CARLOS BILARDO, whom he insulted while talking to TV interviewers.
The striker threw his captain's arm band on the ground and stormed off the field. (AP)


On Stage, and Off
The Indefatigable Abbott
Bracing birthday news from George Abbott, the writer, director and producer who celebrates his 106th birthday today: "Damn Yankees," the musical he directed and co-wrote, will be coming to Broadway in March.
Bebe Neuwirth will be Lola (as in whatever the lady wants, she gets), and Victor Garber will play the Devil (as in, sell your soul to).
Jack O'Brien is the director, and Rob Marshall of the "Kiss of the Spider Woman" team is the leading contender for choreographer.
"The show's as relevant as it ever was, but I've done some reworking," said Mr.
Abbott, who brought "Damn Yankees" to Broadway in 1955.
The Faustian tale (of a Washington baseball fan who sells his soul to the devil so his team can whip the New York Yankees) won the Tony Award.


A Job With a River View


Ace Beats Wild Card in Five-Set Poker
Goran Ivanisevic's case of five-set fever continued to plague him tonight at Wimbledon, where the stormy Croat needed to take the ultimate gamble, shut his eyes and hurtle a second-serve ace down the middle of the court to stave off a fifth-set match point against 263d-ranked Chris Bailey, a British wild card who played with the sort of reckless abandon Ivanisevic admires -- in himself.
The savior of a shot came only after Ivanisevic's initial attempt at a second-serve bullet smacked the net and somehow forced itself over into legal territory for the let that allowed him a chance to throw the service dice one more time.


Brian C. Campbell; Artist, 43
Brian C. Campbell, an artist and former gallery director, died on Sunday at his home in Provincetown, Mass.
He was 43.
The cause was complications of AIDS, his family said.


Yale Professor Is Injured by Blast; Mail Bomb Tied to Terror in 70's
A prominent computer science professor at Yale University was critically injured yesterday by a mail bomb that Federal officials said marked the re-emergence of a mysterious bomber who terrorized campuses and high- technology companies around the country in the 1970's and 80's.
The package exploded shortly after 8 A.M. at the computer science center at Yale in New Haven.
The authorities said they believed it had come from the same person who sent a bomb to a professor at the University of California at San Francisco on Tuesday and who has sent 12 other similar packages since 1978.
A Group Called 'FC'
Scores of law-enforcement officials have tried for years to track down the bomber, whom they called Unibom, for University Bomber.
The authorities have never been able to establish a motive or precise pattern to the bombings, but officials said yesterday that the bomber's distinct signature was clear from the material used to make the bombs.
They also made the connection to the earlier incidents from a letter received yesterday by The New York Times.


Fernandez Haunts 2 Teams
Buck Showalter did not want John Olerud hitting with runners in scoring position.
Who could blame the Yankee manager?
Olerud is merely hitting .405.
So twice tonight Showalter had Olerud walked intentionally in order to face Tony Fernandez.
And in those situations, Fernandez hit 1.000 tonight.
Fernandez ruined Showalter's strategy by slapping run-scoring singles each time, fetching home a run in the third inning and another run in the fifth.
He also smacked a triple.


Methode Electronics (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Yonkers School Game or Sex Abuse?
After nine elementary school students were charged last week with sexual abuse of a classmate, school officials tried to explain what happened by saying the children were involved in a game of "let's play rape" that got out of hand.
That characterization of the events June 11 in the schoolyard of Public School 23 has caused as almost much consternation and controversy as the episode itself.


Cantel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with a Critic's Notebook article about design versus the environment misidentified the exhibition at which the lithograph "Highways of the Future" is being shown.
It is "Chicago Architecture and Design 1923-1993: Reconfiguration of an American Metropolis," at the Art Institute of Chicago.


Deal Maker Picked to Run Smith Barney Shearson
The Primerica Corporation, bidding to add investment banking firepower to the vast brokerage forces being mustered at Smith Barney Shearson, hired Robert F. Greenhill, the former president of Morgan Stanley, as the unit's chairman and chief executive yesterday.
Mr.
Greenhill plans to scour Wall Street for more deal makers and try to lure clients including General Motors and I.B.M. away from Morgan Stanley.


Senate Democrats Block Efforts To Alter Clinton's Budget Plan
Democrats held ranks in the Senate Thursday and early today in the face of solid Republican opposition and defeated all Republican efforts to change a five-year budget package that follows President Clinton's approach in most important respects.
The measure, the subject of one of the most belligerently partisan debates of any major legislation in years, is the most crucial bill of the year to the President.


Results Plus
GOLF  2 Share Seniors Lead  Jim Albus and Bob Charles each shot six-under-par 66's to share the first-round lead in the Senior Players Championship at the sun-drenched TPC of Michigan yesterday in Dearborn, Mich.
They were one stroke ahead of Jack Nicklaus, who designed the 6,876-yard course, and Jim Colbert.
The top of the leader board was a familiar spot for Albus, who stunned the golf world by winning this tournament in 1991 while still working as a club pro at Piping Rock Club in Locust Valley, L.I. (AP) Stadler and Maltbie Fire 65's: Craig Stadler and Roger Maltbie came within a shot of the course record as they shot five-under-par 65's to share the first-round lead in the Canon Greater Hartford Open in Cromwell, Conn.
John Huston, Keith Clearwater and Dan Forsman are a shot back and nine players, including Nick Price and Corey Pavin, were at three under.
A day after only six players broke par on the TPC at River Highlands course during a celebrity pro-am because of wind gusting to 25 miles an hour. (AP) YACHT RACING  New Winners in Day 4  Shifting winds off the Rhode Island coast yesterday stirred up a new set of winners in the fourth day of Block Island Race Week.
Merrythought, the 62-foot sloop owned by Jack King of Annapolis, Md., edged the 50-foot Infinity out of the overall big-boat lead.
Sailing aboard Merrythought was Gary Jobson, an America's Cup veteran.
Both boats were designed by Bruce Farr of Annapolis, but Merrythought is 10 years older.
Racing for the first time this month, Infinity, owned by John Thomson, of Port Washington, L.I., has been the favorite to win its class at Block Island.
In another upset, Blue Yankee, a 43-foot sloop owned by Robert Towse, of Stamford, Conn., took over the lead in Class 2 from the 43-foot Barrister III.
Eddie-Warden Owen, the top-ranked match-racer from England, sailed on Blue Yankee.
BOXING  Knockout for Snipes  Renaldo Snipes, a 36-year-old former heavyweight contender on the comeback trail, made his fourth payday in the last three years pay off last night at the Paramount, where Madison Square Boxing staged its next-to-last program.
The 215-pound Snipes raised his career record to 39-7-1 by scoring his 22d knockout, stopping Eddy Curry, a 193-pound cruiserweight, at 2 minutes 16 seconds of the third round.
Snipes, a popular local fighter out of Yonkers, is hoping to be invited back to the last Garden-promoted card, scheduled for July 8.
He floored Larry Holmes in his only title shot, a World Boxing Council challenge in 1981.
But a controversial long count allowed the champion to get up, and then Holmes knocked out Snipes in the 11th round.
In last night's featured bout, Lamar Parks, ranked among middlweight contenders by the W.B.C., came back from a first-round knockdown to win a unanimous decision over Danny Garcia of San Juan, P.R.
Vasquez Keeps Title: Wilfredo Vasquez of Puerto Rico retained his World Boxing Association super-bantamweight title last night by knocking out Thierry Jacob of France 45 seconds into the 10th round in Bordeaux, France. (AP)


Endeavour Grabs Satellite Easily But Bringing It Home Is Tougher
The space shuttle Endeavour dashed through the darkness today to snatch a valuable European scientific satellite from its orbital perch for a scheduled trip back to Earth, but two loose antennas delayed the completion of the retrieval.
Space agency officials said that the capture of the big satellite had gone flawlessly but that the help of space-walking astronauts would be needed to tuck it securely away in the shuttle's cargo bay for the trip home.


Corrections
The Market Place column in Business Day on Monday about American auto makers' operations in Europe misattributed an estimate that the Ford Motor Company would lose $500 million in Europe this year.
Ford has said it expects to be unprofitable in Europe in 1993, but the amount was the estimate of a financial analyst.


Reno and F.B.I. Chief Meet But He's Still Got His Job
The protracted discussion about William S. Sessions' tenure as Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation took another awkward turn today when Attorney General Janet Reno met again with Mr.
Sessions but apparently failed to reach a decision on his fate.
Although the latest meeting was private, F.B.I. headquarters hummed with speculation about the outcome.
Officially, spokesmen at the bureau and the Justice Department would not comment on the meeting.


SPECTER OF TERROR: The Links; Suspect in Bomb Plot Linked To World Trade Center Blast
Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, the 32-year-old Sudanese immigrant whom Federal authorities have placed at the center of a conspiracy to bomb the United Nations and other targets in New York City, confided to an F.B.I. informer that he had helped test the bomb for the World Trade Center blast in February, according to Federal officials.
That explosion, Mr.
Siddig Ali was quoted in a Federal complaint as saying, was a message that "we can get you anytime."


Dow Surges on Program Buying and Bonds
The major stock indexes were swept higher yesterday, helped by program buying and gains in bond prices.
Traders said buyers also took advantage of lower prices after two days of selling.
The Dow Jones industrial average gained 23.80 points, to 3,490.61, bouncing back from a 30.72-point drop on Wednesday.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was 267.5 million shares, down from 278.3 million in the previous session.
Rising stocks outpaced losers, 1,139 to 771.


Review/Film; Loving Portrait of a Director's Roots
"Jacquot" was shown as part of the 1991 New York Film Festival under its original title, "Jacquot de Nantes." Here are excerpts from Vincent Canby's review, which appeared in The New York Times on Sept. 25, 1991.
The film, in French with English subtitles, opens today at Lincoln Plaza Cinemas.
Agnes Varda, who made her first feature, "Cleo From 5 to 7," in 1961, remains one of the most long-lived, productive and difficult-to-categorize directors associated with France's New Wave.


Visser Fractures Hip While Jogging
LESLEY VISSER, the CBS Sports reporter, fractured and dislocated a hip Wednesday while jogging in Central Park.
She underwent surgery and was listed in stable condition at a New York hospital, where she will remain for several days. (AP)


LINKED TO FUGITIVE
Prime Minister John Major's Government was dealt another blow today as the Minister for Northern Ireland resigned in a burgeoning scandal over a fugitive businessman with close ties to the Conservative Party.
The minister, Michael Mates, was the target of critical news coverage for two weeks, ever since it was learned that he and other Conservative Party members attempted to intercede on behalf of the businessman, Asil Nadir.


Art in Review
Abelardo Morell
National Arts Club  15 Gramercy Park South  Through Wednesday
The quirks of the photographic process itself are the subject of many of Abelardo Morell's black-and-white images.
Mr.
Morell often depicts commonplace objects from unusual angles or framed in surprising ways.
Two eggs in a pan of water, ready to be boiled, look like ghostly ovals when seen in closeup; the mouth of an open paper bag, photographed from directly overhead, becomes an irregular black maw.


Security Was Stepped Up At Two Tunnels and Bridge
The Port Authority of New York and New Jersey tightened its guard over the George Washington Bridge and the Holland and Lincoln Tunnels this week after investigators warned it that those structures had been targeted for bombing by the suspects arrested yesterday.
But an official at the United Nations declared that the international agency had not been alerted before the arrests.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation did not return calls about a possible discrepancy in alerting officials from the two organizations, thought to be the principal targets of what the authorities have termed a conspiracy.


On Abortion, Judge Ginsburg Backs Democracy
To the Editor:
Kathleen Quinn's criticism of Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg's position on Roe v.
Wade in "Treat Judge Ginsburg Like a Man" (Op-Ed, June 20) exemplifies the distortions that come from arguments by anecdote.
Ms.
Quinn disputes the belief of the Supreme Court nominee that liberalizing forces were at work in state legislatures when the high court's sweeping abortion decision abruptly mooted these democratic processes.


Anthony Standen Is Dead at 86; Chemist Who Deflated Pomposity
Anthony Standen, a chemist and an author of irreverent books about fellow scientists, died on Tuesday at the Sharon (Conn.) Hospital.
He was 86 and lived in South Kent, Conn.
The cause was complications from Alzheimer's disease, his family said.





Intermetrics Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Short Sales Outstanding Rise to Record Level
A decline in price among a number of over-the-counter issues in the last month brought big profits for some short-sellers as the number of shares sold short and not yet covered rose to record highs.
For the monthlong period that ended June 15, short interest in Nasdaq stocks climbed 2.5 percent, to 537.7 million shares, up from 524.4 million in the previous month, which was also a record, the National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday.
While short sellers saw profits in a number of issues, the Nasdaq composite index still rose 2.9 percent, to 697.34.


There's No Safety About Nuclear Tests
To the Editor:
Your June 16 front-page report that Democratic lawmakers will oppose any plan to resume nuclear testing is encouraging.
If the United States resumes testing, so too will France, Britain, Russia and China.
This will no doubt encourage other countries to join the nuclear arms race, which will damage the security of the United States and the entire world.


Whitney Names Curator For Its Next Biennial
The Whitney Museum of American Art announced yesterday that Klaus Kertess, the adjunct curator of drawings at the museum, would be in charge of its next Biennial Exhibition, which will open in the spring of 1995.
The announcement comes in the final week of the museum's widely criticized 1993 Biennial, which was selected by Elizabeth Sussman, a curator at the museum.
The announcement means that the Whitney intends to continue to give one curator authority over the show, providing a distinct point of view.
Until this year, the artwork for the Whitney Biennials, which began in the 1920's, was chosen by a group of the museum's curators.


Judge Permits Student-Led Prayer at Graduation
One year to the day after the United States Supreme Court banned school-instituted prayer at public-school graduations, a Federal District judge today refused to block a student-led prayer at graduation exercises at Highland High School in Blackwood.
The American Civil Liberties Union sought an injunction on behalf of Edward Ross, a senior who had objected to having a prayer at the graduation next Monday.


Bullets Get Duckworth for Grant
KEVIN DUCKWORTH, who went from All-Star center to disgruntled reserve in Portland, was traded by the Trail Blazers to the Washington Bullets for forward HARVEY GRANT.
The Bullets also acquired "other considerations" neither club would identify.


Vanbiesbrouck First Pick, May Haunt Rangers
John Vanbiesbrouck, a first-string goalie who played his first game with the Rangers in 1981, was the first player chosen in the National Hockey League's expansion draft today.
His selection was a coup for the Florida Panthers and a twofold blow to the Rangers, who traded him to Vancouver four days ago.
Now they not only have hardly anything to show for him, but they also face the nightmare of having him as a divisional opponent.
Vanbiesbrouck was the biggest name among 48 players claimed by the league's two newest franchises, the Panthers and the Anaheim Mighty Ducks.
Another was Glenn Healy, the goalie who led the Islanders to the third round of the playoffs.
Healy was chosen by the Ducks.


Corrections
An obituary headline on Wednesday about Anthony E. Fahnestock misstated his occupation.
As noted in the article, he was an investment manager.


Time-ABC Specials Set
ABC Entertainment and Time Warner Entertainment have agreed to develop and produce four one-hour special programs for prime time.
The programs will be derived from Time Inc. magazines.
The specials and a two-hour program based on the 20th anniversary of People magazine will be broadcast on ABC.
The network will develop the programs with Time Telepictures Television, a Time Warner Entertainment unit formed less than a year ago.


Azerbaijan's Parliament Votes to Strip Elected President of Power
The Parliament of Azerbaijan voted today to strip President Abulfez Elchibey of all his authority, after rejecting his last-minute offer to hand over most of his powers to the chairman of the Parliament, Heydar Aliyev.
Mr.
Elchibey will remain in office until a Government report determines whether he is responsible for the fighting between rebels and Government troops that set off the country's two-week political crisis.


City Begins Effort to Clean Up Tire Dumps


HOUSE DEALS BLOW TO SUPERCOLLIDER
In a stinging defeat for high-priced scientific research, the House voted overwhelmingly today to halt construction on the superconducting supercollider, the $11 billion proton-smasher in Texas.
Coming a day after the House voted by a razor-thin margin to continue an even more expensive big-science project, the space station, the defeat of the supercollider provided dramatic evidence of the way budget pressures were forcing lawmakers to choose among projects that in better times might all receive Government funds.


Might It Help to Be a Star? Well, It Couldn't Hurt
ONCE, the Regency Hotel was Hollywood East.
The hotel was crammed with visiting movie stars and studio executives who found the Regency comfortably luxurious, smoothly discreet and reasonably convenient at 540 Park Avenue, at 61st Street.
On top of all that, the hotel invented New York's power breakfast.
Since people in Hollywood enshrine power, those breakfasts at the Regency made all the visiting producers, agents and movie executives feel as if they were just down the road at the Bel-Air Hotel.
But trends -- like studio executives -- fade.
The folks from Hollywood are fickle.
"They're like lemmings," said one film company executive.
Another said, "Someone says the toasted bagel is better at the Mark, and they'll all move." Well, the toasted bagels are just fine at the Regency.
But the hotel, while quite luxurious, has become like one of those Hollywood studios that churn out predictable, profitable and not entirely satisfying films.
And the Hollywood crowd, which is never content, has been defecting, bit by bit, to the Mark, the Ritz-Carlton, the St.
Regis, the Royalton and the newly opened Four Seasons.


Day of Reckoning at Northwest
The board of Northwest Airlines' parent company is scheduled to meet Friday in a special session to discuss two fateful issues: the terms of a final proposal to the Air Line Pilots Association and, if it is rejected, when the airline will file for bankruptcy protection.
The meeting of the NWA Inc. board will help set the stage for the brief, final act of the yearlong drama that has been played out by the fourth-largest United States airline and its many labor groups.


Alcide Corp. (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Kaufman &amp; Broad Home Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


The Spoken Word
"DIRECTORS: ACTION!" Long Island University, Flatbush and DeKalb Avenues, Flatbush, Brooklyn.
The Hughes Brothers, the directors of "Menace II Society," discuss their work with the director Spike Lee, part of the Spike Lee 40 Acres Film Institute lecture series.
Saturday at 11 A.M.
Admission: $25; $15 for college students; $10 for high school students.
Information: (718) 858-9620.
"A CELEBRATION OF GAY AND LESBIAN WRITING," Cornelia Street Cafe, 29 Cornelia Street, West Village.
Christopher Bram, Jenifer Levin, Sarah Schulman, Terry Diamond and Achim Nowak read from their work.
Sponsored by Three Hots and a Cot.
Tonight at 6.
Free.
Information: (212) 387-9278.


Virginia Voters to Referee Feud of Robb and Wilder
Taking one of the nation's nastiest political feuds to the voters, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder of Virginia announced today that he would oppose Senator Charles S. Robb for the Democratic Senate nomination next year.
Mr.
Wilder's candidacy is certain to add fuel to a long-running, highly public battle between the state's two leading Democrats and draw further attention to a Senate race in which Oliver L. North, who became a national figure virtually overnight as a result of the Iran-contra affair, is expected to seek the Republican nomination.


Review/Jazz Festival; The Pain and Joy in Jimmy Scott's Voice
Intense pain and great joy are indistinguishable in the voice of Jimmy Scott.
Yet the paradox would mean little were it not for the thoughtfulness behind his singing.
At the World Financial Center Winter Garden on Wednesday night, Mr.
Scott treated a succession of ballads and uptempo tunes to the discursive style that connoisseurs, if not the general public, have admired for many years.
The concert was part of the JVC Jazz Festival.
The songs ranged from "All the Way" to "All of Me" with some Gershwin in between.
The melodies themselves rarely escape Mr.
Scott's lips.
He sings about them.
Interpretation becomes annotation, gloss, a series of footnotes to the tune in question.
Implication and allusion is all in this mysterious style.
Mr.
Scott has little patience with the obvious.


MMI Medical (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


METRO DIGEST
EMPIRE IS FAULTED IN INQUIRY
United States Senate investigators have determined that the financial problems of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the nation's largest nonprofit health insurer, are largely a result of its own mismanagement.
A1.
A Senate subcommittee will address a number of issues when it opens hearings on Empire.
B6.


TV Weekend; 'Front Page': Light News for the Small Screen
The spirit of MTV strikes again!
The youngish hosts, the flashy graphics, the with-it sounds, the smart-alecky tone stamp "Front Page" as a news magazine for people who grew up on television.
This offering from Fox Broadcasting, which is not in the habit of straining attention spans, bops along on the line between information and entertainment.
To judge by tomorrow night's sprightly debut, the latest television news magazine will cause no loss of sleep over Bosnia or health coverage.
Ron Reagan possibly apart, the program's regular reporters -- Andria Hall, Tony Harris, Vicki Liviakis and Josh Mankiewicz -- are not household names.
But all are personable, energetic and younger than Mike Wallace and Barbara Walters.


U.S. MEMO REVEALS DISPUTE ON BOSNIA
A top State Department human rights official has privately challenged Secretary of State Warren Christopher's public assertions that all three sides share responsibility for atrocities in Bosnia.
In recent testimony to the House Foreign Affairs Committee, Mr.
Christopher asserted that Muslims, Serbs and Croats were all to blame for attacks on civilians.


Corrections
A picture caption in Business Day yesterday with an article about a technology-development program in Youngstown, Ohio, misidentified the people and the factory shown.
The people were Henry E. Bertolini Jr., engineering manager of General Extrusions Inc., and Lee Krum, an employee; they were at the company's aluminum-extrusion plant.


Tokyo Party Still Hunts Business Cash
Faced with the most bitterly contested national elections in four decades, the rapidly unraveling Liberal Democratic Party has apparently begun turning to banks and the business community for financing, even though polls show that the Japanese are fed up with the influence of money in politics.
The governing party's tactics have created a quandary for big corporations and banks over whether to continue to finance a party that has always put their interests and patronage ahead of consumer interests.


CSM Environmental Systems Inc. reports earnings for Year to Dec 31


Corrections
A chart in Business Day yesterday with an article about the financial default of the owner of the Palm Beach Polo and Country Club misstated estimated values in some editions for the former owner's six country club properties now held by the Resolution Trust Corporation.
The figures represented hundreds of millions of dollars, not millions.


Summer Job in the Public Interest Means Sacrifice
Like many of her classmates at Georgetown Law School, Haydeh Behbehani has started her summer law internship.
But for Ms.
Behbehani, a 24-year-old second-year student, the summer promises to be tenser than most.
While many of her classmates are earning $1,000 to $1,200 a week at private law firms, Ms.
Behbehani is driving her mother's Honda, sharing a two-bedroom apartment with three roommates and relying on $1,000 from her parents to help cover her living expenses.
She has taken a job with a civil rights organization, the Los Angeles NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund, whose own funds are so limited that it encourages students to seek money from other sources.


SPECTER OF TERROR: The Overview; 8 SEIZED AS SUSPECTS IN PLOT TO BOMB NEW YORK TARGETS AND KILL POLITICAL FIGURES
A suspected terrorist organization that had planned a horrific campaign of bombing and political assassination in New York City this summer was smashed early yesterday with the arrest of eight men, all said to be Muslim extremists, at raids in Queens, Brooklyn, Yonkers and Jersey City, Federal authorities said.
After nearly five months of surveillance by an Arabic-speaking confidential informer -- apparently an insider who tape-recorded the group's plots -- heavily armed Federal and city law-enforcement officials swooped down before dawn on a suspected bomb factory and other locations even as some of the men mixed vats of chemicals for bomb strikes that were apparently to begin in a few days. 'Mixing the Witches' Brew'
"The subjects were actually mixing the witches' brew," James M. Fox, the head of the F.B.I.'s New York office, said of five men caught, he said, as they stirred 55-gallon drums of explosive nitrates and diesel fuel in a hideout in Jamaica, Queens.
"We entered so fast some of the subjects didn't know we were in the bomb factory until they were in handcuffs."


John C. B. Moore, An Architect, 96; Schools Specialist
John Crosby Brown Moore, the architect and designer of many university buildings, churches and civic institutions, died on Tuesday at the North Hill retirement home in Needham, Mass.
He was 96.
Mr.
Moore was a founding partner of Moore &amp; Hutchins, Manhattan architects, in 1937, remaining active in the firm until his retirement in 1972.
The firm became a leader in designing campuses and schools, including buildings for Goucher College, the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., the Graduate School of Business at Columbia University, Princeton University and St.
Lawrence University.


C. Mikolaycak, 56, Artist and Designer Of Children's Books
Charles Mikolaycak, an illustrator of children's books and a book designer, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 56.
His wife, Carole Kismaric, said the cause was cancer.


Cuomo Criticizes Panel's Proposal To Close or Scale Back 2 Bases
Calling a Presidential commission's recommendations to close one Air Force base in New York State and partially dismantle a second "not rational," Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said today that he would ask President Clinton to reject the plan and keep both bases open.
Mr.
Cuomo said the closing of Plattsburgh Air Force Base and cutbacks at Griffiss Air Force Base would be "devastating" to the state's economy, costing as many as 8,000 jobs and more than $400 million in revenues.


International Multifoods Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Broderbund Software (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Critic's Notebook; Films Inspired by a Master of Literary Delicacy
WHEN Henry James's play "Guy Domville" was produced in 1895, he appeared on stage for an opening-night bow and was hit with jeers, boos and catcalls that drowned out his friends' polite applause.
It was not the last time an audience decided James wasn't much of a showman, and he soon returned to what he did best: writing novels and tales of exquisite subtlety.
But he always longed for large public acclaim, and finally, curiously, belatedly, James found his mass audience on film.
There is nothing Hollywood would call high-concept in his fiction.
His characters' most dramatic moments often exist in what they see or think or sense, or think they possibly might have seen or sensed.
Isabel Archer's wedding in "The Portrait of a Lady" is an absolute nonevent that takes place between chapters, nothing compared to the quiet moment when she realizes her husband has deceived her.
And James's career is filled with heroes whose most energetic action is running from their own emotions.
Yet film makers as different as William Wyler, Francois Truffaut, Jacques Rivette and James Ivory have been gloriously inspired by James, in unpredictable ways.


Thomas Duane, 75; Won Highest Honor For Ophthalmology
Thomas D. Duane, an authority on ophthalmology who discovered the cause of the blackouts suffered by wartime pilots, died Sunday at a nursing home in Newtown, Pa.
He was 75 and lived in Bedminster, Pa.
The cause of death was complications of Parkinson's disease, his family said.


Fleetwood Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Year to April 25


Fedders Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Pocklington Ready to Pack. Again.
PETER POCKLINGTON, owner of the Edmonton Oilers, is scheduled to speak with the National Hockey League Board of Governors in Quebec today regarding his renewed threat to move the team, possibly to Hamilton, Ontario.


Restaurants
The charms of the neighborhood restaurant are well known, or at least well imagined.
The warm welcome, the cadre of familiar faces, the table that is always available, the waiter who anticipates every need, the feeling of belonging.
There's only one thing missing from this fantasy: the food.
There's a reason.
Most neighborhood restaurants are more clubhouse than dining room, with food that is more earnest than surprising.
The point of a neighborhood restaurant is its proximity.


10 Years and 5,000 Miles for a Drug Conviction
When Isaac Kirman was stopped last winter by the Israeli police for driving in reverse on a Tel Aviv street, no one received the news with more interest than a Long Island prosecutor named Mark Cohen.
It was not Mr.
Kirman's driving habits that drew Mr.
Cohen's attention.
It was the re-emergence of Mr.
Kirman himself, an Israeli who had jumped bail in Suffolk County 10 years earlier, after he was charged with selling three ounces of cocaine to an undercover police officer in a Huntington clam bar.
Although Suffolk officials knew he had fled to Israel, his trail, they said, had gone cold long ago.


Terrorism on Two Continents; In Europe, Kurds Injure Themselves
Despair and anger contributed to the attacks yesterday by Kurdish militants against Turkish embassies and businesses in five European countries.
But ignorance and zealotry were also at work in a wave of terrorism that tarnishes the Kurdish cause.
The Kurds won no friends by threatening to kill some 20 hostages in Munich unless Chancellor Helmut Kohl ordered Ankara to cease attacking Kurdish villages in southeastern Turkey.
Mr.
Kohl held his ground and the hostages were freed.
Even so, such acts can hardly help Kurdish causes, including that of the Kurds seeking political asylum in Germany.
Worse still is the moral irony: Kurds who attack Turks because they are Turks put themselves on the same level as Germany's racist skinheads who firebomb Turkish guest-workers because of their nationality.


Sheldahl Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


A Man of Letters, Some Even Printable
I've been savaged, bloodied and insulted, preached to, scorned and condescended to.
I feel like a soccer referee who is fleeing angry fans.
I did the unthinkable: I admitted to having snoozed during ABC's telecast of the United States-Germany game on June 13 during U.S.
Cup '93 and then had the gumption to remark that soccer does not play well on TV.
I made no friends by suggesting that my posterior hurt from watching action that was unbroken by commercials.
Comparing soccer with basketball on TV won me little acclaim.


Miffed, Germans Cancel Talks With the French
Amid a flurry of unusually sharp disagreements between France and Germany, Western Europe's closest allies, the Bonn Government today snubbed officials in Paris, canceling a high-level economic meeting after a French minister suggested that it might lead to a drop in European interest rates.
The decision -- made after Economy Minister Edmond Alphandery had said in an interview that the talks planned Friday would "look at the conditions necessary for launching a concerted cut in interest rates" -- inflamed existing tensions between the two allies over European economic troubles and the Bosnian war.


Terrorism on Two Continents; In New York, a Catastrophe Averted
New Yorkers are grateful for the story they didn't have to read in their newspapers or experience firsthand.
Bomb attacks on the Hudson River tunnels, the United Nations and F.B.I. headquarters . . . assassinations of local and international public figures . . . mayhem, chaos, terror.
The city owes thanks to Federal and local antiterrorist units for yesterday's pre-emptive arrests of eight suspects.
Thirteen years of close cooperation between Federal and local antiterrorism units paid off yesterday morning.
Using an informant, authorities had patiently tracked these suspects for months as they allegedly discussed targets, carried out reconnaissance and acquired a safe house, vehicles and bomb ingredients.
When the agents heard that the suspects had begun to mix diesel fuel and fertilizer in 55-gallon drums and that several were preparing to flee the U.S., they quickly moved in.


Panel Wages First Skirmish on Abortion
Anti-abortion forces won the year's first legislative skirmish over Federal financing of abortions today, but they won on a position they would have considered a major defeat only a year ago.
The House Appropriations Committee voted to allow the Government to pay for abortions for poor women in cases of rape, incest and a threat to the life of the pregnant woman.
It soundly defeated an attempt to broaden the terms to include a threat to the health of the mother; that vote was 27 to 18.


Lojack Corp. (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Merger Will Create Big Shop in Virginia
Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot of Boston said yesterday that it would acquire Hawley Martin Partners of Richmond from Fahlgren Martin.
Hawley Martin would then be merged with Finnegan &amp; Agee, an Arnold Fortuna division also based in Richmond.
Terms of the deal, which was expected, were not disclosed.
The new shop, Arnold Finnegan Martin, would be Virginia's second-largest agency with billings estimated at more than $45 million.
Heading it as senior partners will be Tim Finnegan, 59, the former chairman and chief executive of Finnegan &amp; Agee, and David N. Martin, who declined to disclose his age, the former chairman and creative plans director of Hawley Martin.
Mr.
Finnegan will be chief executive and Mr.
Martin will be chief planning officer.


The Silence Of the Slam: Lendl Fails
For Ivan Lendl, the haunted Lear of Wimbledon, his 14th attempt to conquer the only tournament to elude his Grand Slam appetite was no charm.
It was even more tragic than usual.
With the silent grimace that has turned into his trademark here, and has lately seemed to accompany him everywhere, the 33-year-old Lendl today absorbed his worst defeat at Wimbledon since a first-round exit in 1981.
But today's second-round upset on Court 1 came without soliloquy: Lendl was so distraught after his 4-6, 7-5, 6-3, 6-4 loss to Arnaud Boetsch, a 24-year-old, 24th-ranked Parisian, that he marched off the grounds, commandeered a courtesy car, and departed Wimbledon without a word -- for perhaps the last time.


Mark IV Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Review/Film; The Self Stays Strong Amid Shades Of Prejudice
Kathe Sandler's documentary film "A Question of Color" begins with a sequence in which a group of black men and women of varying complexions recite many of the terms, from "high yellow" to "chocolate" to "blue-black," that are used to describe differences in skin tone.
From this formal opening, the film plunges bravely into the ticklish subject of color consciousness among blacks.
What it finds is the prevalence of a subtle caste system in which those whose looks come closest to approximating white European standards of attractiveness tend to fare better in American society than those who look more African.
It also finds that the tensions generated by this system, which is really an internalized expression of white racism, leave almost everybody feeling insecure.
While those who are darker skinned are made to feel less desirable as mates and tend not to do as well economically, light-skinned blacks can find themselves accused of being pretenders to their African heritage.


A Saxophonist Re-Emerges, Invoking Coltrane's Voice
Charles Lloyd emerged spectacularly as a tenor saxophone virtuoso in the 1960's, preaching Coltrane to huge summer-of-love audiences.
Some hailed him as the new hope of jazz, others dismissed him as Coltrane Lite.
Then he dropped out of sight, isolating himself in Big Sur in California.
Over the last decade he has been re-emerging as an artist of more intimate aims, seemingly more substantial as well.
At a JVC Jazz Festival event at Merkin Concert Hall on Wednesday night, Mr.
Lloyd was joined by two artists associated with the ECM label -- Bobo Stenson, a pianist, and Anders Jormin, a bassist -- together with the drummer Billy Hart.
In "Blessing," the players intoned a darksome three-note motif around the minor triad, then moved elegantly into still-solemn major a few minutes in.
Melodies derived from a triad figure strongly throughout, often of a classical stripe.


Economic Analysis; Yen Strategy: What the U.S. Is Expecting
WASHINGTON, June 24 -- When the Japanese yen soared against the dollar in the mid-1980's, it put only a minor dent in Japan's huge trade surplus with the United States.
But the Clinton Administration -- and many economists -- are confident that this time the yen's recent rise will prove far more successful in cutting Japan's bulging trade surplus.


Clinical Data Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


InterVoice Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Community Health Computing (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Runs in the Ruins: Blue Jays Bury Kamieniecki
It was not a good night to be Buck Showalter.
His eyes were puffy, his throat was sore and he looked as if he might not make it through the game.
It was a worse night to be Scott Kamieniecki.
His eyes were bulging and his throat was unfurling profanities after the Toronto Blue Jays insured that he would not make it beyond the third inning.


Unico American Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


No Headline
"The subjects were actually mixing the witches' brew. We entered so fast some of the subjects didn't know we were in the bomb factory until they were in handcuffs." -- JAMES M. FOX, who heads the F.B.I.' New York office.  [ A1:6. ]


Reviews/Jazz Festival; Bird Lives! And So Does Monk!
Charlie Parker and Thelonious Monk didn't write easy music.
Their jagged melodies and extended harmonies separated adepts from also-rans, and gave those adepts a new vocabulary of emotion and technical display.
"Aspects of Monk" and "Bird Lives," the two halves of the JVC Jazz Festival concert on Tuesday night at Town Hall, gathered experts for a jam session on each composer; Parker was better served than Monk.
"Bird Lives" featured Red Rodney (who worked with Parker's quintet) on fluegelhorn, alongside Charles McPherson on alto saxophone and Barry Harris on piano.
Two younger alto saxophonists, Greg Abate and Jesse Davis, also sat in, all backed by Bob Cranshaw on bass, Mickey Roker on drums and, for a few tunes, Walter Bishop Jr. on piano.


Wacoal Consol reports earnings for Year to March 31


Diner's Journal
Musical Chairs and Table
Pino Luongo is busy reshuffling the deck in his restaurant empire.
The tenure of Marta Pulini as chef has just ended at Le Madri, 168 West 18th Street, and Gianni Scappin, who comes from the Venice region with a long resume, has replaced her.
Ms.
Pulini has been named executive chef of the new uptown Barneys at Madison Avenue and 61st Street by Mr.
Luongo, who has the food-management contract for the store.
When it opens in the fall, the store will have Mad 61, a food complex on the lower level with an espresso bar, a wine bar, a retail food shop, a catering service, a cafe and a 100-seat restaurant.
Mr.
Luongo said he would like the restaurant to offer "Manhattan cuisine," an American-French-Italian fusion.
The second floor will have the Chelsea Cafe, emphasizing salads, and on the ninth floor there will be a 50-seat American restaurant with a buffet.


Vivra Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


At The New Yorker, They Take Their Fact Checking Seriously
To the Editor:
A footnote on the Janet Malcolm-Jeffrey Masson libel case:
That Janet Malcolm rolled scenes together does not mean that the checking department at The New Yorker is a sham.


Inquiry Said to Cite Empire's Own Errors As Cause of Its Woes
United States Senate investigators have decided that the financial problems of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, the nation's largest nonprofit health insurer, are largely a result of its own mismanagement and not unfair competition.
Investigators for the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations have found that Empire's management problems are so chronic and deep-seated that they have rendered it incapable of performing the basic tasks of an insurance company, according to interviews with people familiar with the subcommittee's work and those questioned by investigators.


I'm the Same Old Bob Dole
Don't worry, the "old Bob Dole" is still on the job.
And I can still spot a phony deficit package a mile away.
I appreciate Alice M. Rivlin's nice comments on this page Wednesday about my record on staying tough on the Federal deficit, but I can also appreciate that as deputy budget director she is doing her best to put some happy hype on a terrible product: President Clinton's tax-infested $347 billion deficit-reduction package.


New Jersey Base Is Backed at New York's Expense
In a decision that helps New Jersey at New York's expense, a Presidential commission today rejected a Pentagon recommendation and voted to create a large East Coast troop-staging base at McGuire Air Force Base in New Jersey and to close Plattsburgh Air Force Base in upstate New York.
Defense Secretary Les Aspin had recommended shrinking McGuire and Griffiss Air Force in Rome, N.Y., and moving many of their missions to Plattsburgh, making it the Air Force's main transportation hub for cargo, soldiers and refueling planes on the East Coast.


Herley Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 2


Corrections
A chart in some copies yesterday headed "Tracking Down Parents," about child support payments, misstated the amount owed by parents in Nassau County.
It is $2.035 million.


At the Bar; Coming to a Theater Near You: Tom Cruise, Gene Hackman and Some Thrilled Memphis Lawyers.
"The Firm" opens next week, and millions of Americans will now be able to see what they've already read: how a young lawyer named Mitch McDeere outwits the malevolent firm for which he works.
But to the lawyers of Memphis, the film promises a kick of another kind: it will be a chance to see themselves and their friends.
All of Memphis was caught up for three months last winter in the filming of the John Grisham novel about a newly minted Harvard lawyer, played by Tom Cruise, who sells himself to the highest bidder, a firm known as Bendini, Lambert &amp; Locke, only to learn that if he sticks around the place too long he will end up as either a criminal or a corpse.


Pricor Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Amelia Earhart Doesn't Go Uncelebrated
To the Editor:
Re "Put More Women on a Pedestal" (Op-Ed, June 14): Perhaps Lynn Sherr and Jurate Kazickas should have looked a little harder for statues of "authentic American heroines."


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Senate Democrats held ranks in the face of solid Republican opposition and defeated all efforts to change a five-year budget package that closely follows President Clinton's plan.  [ Page A1. ]
A day after the House decided to continue the space station, it voted overwhelmingly to halt construction on the $11 billion Superconducting Supercollider.  [ A18. ]


Jet-Engine Workers Accept Harsh Reality
Having reluctantly agreed to a package of work-rule changes and wage concessions, unionized workers at Pratt &amp; Whitney reported to work here today amid a sober recognition that they had lost an unwinnable battle with a company, and an industry, mired in recession.
The workers, faced with a virtual certainty that the jet-engine maker would move at least 2,000 jobs to lower-cost plants in Maine and Georgia, voted by a ratio of 4 to 3 on Wednesday to accept concessions that once would have been considered unthinkable: no wage increases for two years and up to $2 in hourly wage cuts if productivity does not improve.
An Incentive Package
By accepting the Pratt &amp; Whitney proposal, the workers put the final pieces in place for an unusual incentive package in which Connecticut will provide the company with $32 million in grants and tax breaks.


Sounds Around Town
Sam Pilafian Quartet
Travelin' Light, Sam Pilafian Quartet, J's, 2581 Broadway, at 97th Street, (212) 666-3600.
The quartet led by the versatile tuba player Sam Pilafian will be the final attraction at J's, which will close after tomorrow night's performance.
During the last eight years, J's became one of the most distinctive jazz clubs in town, providing a showcase for musicians and singers who were still close to the roots of jazz.
Many of them will return tomorrow night to join Mr.
Pilafian's quartet (with Frank Vignola, guitarist; Don Keiling, guitarist and vocalist, and Joe Ascione, drummer) for what promises to be a very lively wake.
The festivities start at 9 P.M.
There will be a $12 minimum at the tables or $7 at the bar; no cover charge.
In the Swing
John Colianni's Classic American Swing Orchestra, Michael's Pub, 211 East 55th Street, Manhattan , (212) 758-2272.
The pianist John Colianni, who is heard at Michael's Pub every fall as Mel Torme's musical director and accompanist, is showing another side of his talent there, leading his 16-piece Classic American Swing Orchestra.
The group not only plays celebrated arrangements associated with Jimmie Lunceford, Count Basie, Duke Ellington and Harry James, but it also includes a singer, Sara Zahn, who has been getting rave reviews on her own for her superb presentation of the songs of Carolyn Leigh, Charles Strouse and Leonard Bernstein.
Shows tonight and tomorrow night are at 9:30 and 11:30, with a cover charge of $20 and a two-drink minimum.
Phoebe Legere
Phoebe Legere, the Ballroom, 253 West 28th Street, Chelsea, (212) 244-3005.
Phoebe Legere, the unfettered pianist, singer, composer and painter who has been compared to Bette Midler and Dorothy Donegan, is performing a program of her original songs from her first CD, just released on Ripe and Ready/Dead Dog Records.
They include the title song of her first musical comedy, "Hello, Mrs. President," which was staged briefly last year, "Made 4 U" and "Marilyn," an homage to Marilyn Monroe.
Her performance is counterpointed by more than a dozen slides of her paintings, which include landscapes and nude lovers.
Shows are tonight and tomorrow night at 9.
Tickets are $20 and $25 for ringside seats.


Step Right Up! Take a Chance!; Players Face Long Odds in Atlantic City Boardwalk Games
Standing in the long shadow of the onion domes, purple turrets and epic staircases of the Trump Taj Mahal casino, the colossal gambling emporium that blocks the late afternoon sunlight on the boardwalk, Bill Ustick is not one to make comparisons.
Donald J. Trump's casino rakes in millions of dollars in bets, while Mr.
Ustick presides over the dollar-a-game ring-toss under a canvas canopy on the Steel Pier, just a long roll of the dice from the Taj Mahal's gaudy entrance.
But strip away the trappings and move the bottom-line decimal point a few places and you have two concessionaires who invite the public to step right up, put their money down and try their luck.


There's Kent at Third, 90 Feet From Norfolk
Jeff Kent's demotion to the minors is not certain.
It is, however, under active consideration by the Mets.
The infielder clearly needs to find a permanent position, and he definitely requires playing every day at that position to develop into a reliable part of any puzzle the Mets put together for 1994.
Al Harazin's resignation may have cleared the final obstacle to sending Kent to Class AAA Norfolk, for with the general manager gone, there is no political fallout for conceding that the David Cone trade of last August is at its very best a very delayed success.
Kent and center fielder Ryan Thompson were acquired from Toronto in exchange for Cone, and Thompson was returned to the minors after less than a month with the Mets this season.


Cruguet Gets Stiff Sentence: 20 Days
JEAN CRUGUET, who won the Triple Crown of racing in 1977 aboard Seattle Slew, was suspended for 20 days yesterday by the stewards at Belmont Park for rough riding.
The New York Racing Association stewards said that it was the longest suspension they had imposed in 22 years.
Cruguet, now 54 years old, was punished for his ride in the third race last Monday when he finished third aboard Tara's Trumpet.
During some jostling down the homestretch, his horse bumped Onda Flora, who finished in front of him in second place.
Cruguet lodged a claim of foul against JORGE CHAVEZ, the rider on Onda Flora.
But the claim was not allowed, and Cruguet instead was suspended from today through July 14.


International Jensen Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Amelia Earhart Doesn't Go Uncelebrated; Military Women
To the Editor:
No, there are not enough women represented in statuary in the United States (Op-Ed, June 14), but we want to alert readers about a big step in the right direction.


Hughes Resources reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Quick &amp; Reilly Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Plan by Procter &amp; Gamble May Cut Thousands of Jobs
Procter &amp; Gamble, the nation's largest maker of household goods, is expected to act on a strategy that could eliminate thousands of jobs around the world.
But it is unclear just how many employees would be affected.
A company spokeswoman yesterday dismissed a published report that as many as 10,000 Procter &amp; Gamble jobs would be involved.
The company employs 102,600 people worldwide, including 47,600 in the United States.


Review/Film; What the Heart Craves, the Body Must Seek
In "Chain of Desire," Temistocles Lopez's contemporary version of "La Ronde," characters from various strata of Manhattan society rub elbows at an imaginary nightclub tucked inside the spire of the Chrysler Building.
The opening scene, in which the club's resident diva (Linda Fiorentino) moans a dreary imitation of a Kurt Weill song, sets the heavy-handed tone for Mr.
Lopez's contemporary update of the much admired 1950 Max Ophuls film.
That film, adapted from a classic play by Arthur Schnitzler, evoked the spiritual emptiness of an urban society through a daisy chain of exploitative sexual encounters.
In Mr.
Lopez's up-to-the-minute version, the players include gay and bisexual men, and the couplings take place in the shadow of AIDS.


CHRONICLE
Another real estate executive, JERRY I. SPEYER, president of Tishman Speyer Properties, has been elected chairman of the New York City Partnership and the New York Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
The partnership is an umbrella group that includes the Chamber of Commerce.
He succeeds Preston Robert Tisch, president and co-chief executive officer of the Loews Corporation.
David Rockefeller founded the partnership in 1979 and was chairman of both groups from 1980 to 1988.


Investors Protest Government Seizure of Private Company in China


When a Play or Musical Has a Gay Theme, Campaigns Often Tell It As It Is.
THEATRICAL productions with gay and lesbian themes are coming out of the closet.
Just as more gay men and lesbians are openly acknowledging their sexual identities, so too are the growing number of plays and musicals about gay life making that known in their marketing efforts.
In some cases, like "The Night Larry Kramer Kissed Me," a gay-themed one-man show, the content becomes the entire focus of the sales pitches, while in others, like "Angels in America" and "Jeffrey," there is a mix of messages with varied emphases.


Time Plans Data Network
Time Warner Inc.'s new cable television unit in California has asked state regulators for permission to offer telephone, high-speed data transfer and other telecommunications services to large corporations.
If Time Warner receives state approval, the company -- the nation's second-largest cable-television operator -- will offer an alternative to California's dominant telephone carriers: Pacific Bell and GTE.


Attacks Focus the Spotlight On Kurds' Tangled Affairs
The attacks by Kurdish separatists on Turkish installations in Europe today reflected a tactical shift by a Marxist group that has been fighting a little-heeded, but violent, guerrilla war in remote southeastern Turkey for more than nine years.
The assaults in Western Europe propelled the separatist message to a far broader audience.
They also evoked the tangles of expediency and ethnic passions that have been molding the destinies of some 20 million Kurds who form minorities in parts of Turkey, Iran, Syria and Iraq, the heart of one of the world's most volatile regions.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
do6.0
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.24
3.87
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.09
3.11
3.61
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.18
3.21
3.69
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.50
5.53
6.71
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.73
6.76
7.77
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.68
7.70
8.70
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.77
5.78
6.52
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Review/Film; The Loss of a Child Who's Still Present
"You spent seven and a half months shoring up that old pyramid, and I bet you haven't had a good cry yet," a friend says to Ruth Matthews (Kathleen Turner) near the beginning of "House of Cards," a decidedly serious but utterly opaque movie about an autistic child.
The friend is trying to raise Ruth's spirits after her return to the United States from Mexico, where her husband was killed in an accident at an archeological site.
Ruth, an architect, is not the sort to cry easily.
She doesn't even acknowledge that there may be something more than culture shock behind the fact that her 6-year-old daughter, Sally (Asha Menina), has stopped talking.


Trial by Adversity Shapes Jurist's Outlook
Long before Justice Byron R. White announced his retirement, President Clinton spoke of wanting a Supreme Court nominee with a big heart.
And in the 11 days since since he chose Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg, the questions most often asked about her have to do with her heart: whether she is steely or just cold, a passionate fighter or a dry proceduralist, aloof or simply shy.
Among friends and colleagues, including people who have known her since she was Kiki Bader, their pretty blond bunkmate at Camp Che-Na-Wah in the Adirondacks, there is no debate about the goodness of her spirit or the size of her intellect.
"Her talent has been there for anyone to see forever," said Richard Salzman, a judge on the District of Columbia Superior Court who attended James Madison High School in Brooklyn and Columbia Law School with Ms.
Ginsburg.


Sounds Around Town
Hasil Adkins
Hasil Adkins, Maxwell's, 1039 Washington Street, Hoboken, N.J., (201) 798-4064.
Hasil Adkins could have crawled out of the muck and slime of rock-and-roll's illegitimate past: his crazy swagger, hoarse holler and ruckus-raising rhythms hark back to a pre-Elvis era when the music was just a raw, rural urge.
Menster Phip and the Phipsters, a ragged bunch of three-chord stompers who eviscerate oldies like "Roll Over Beethoven" and "Mashed Potatoes," are to open the show.
Shows are tomorrow at 10 P.M. and Sunday at 9 P.M.
Admission is $7.
From Monsterland
Monsterland, CBGB, 315 Bowery, at Bleecker Street, East Village, (212) 982-4052.
With its classic combination of punk and pop, Monsterland brings out the sweetness in distortion.
In songs like "Peanut Butter Karma" and a version of Blondie's "(I'm Always Touched by Your) Presence, Dear," the guitars are layered on thick and cymbals crash calamitously, but the melodies have an airy prettiness.
Monsterland may not have invented the formula, but its rushes of guitar noise come close to the essence of melancholia.
The show is tonight at 1:30 A.M.
Admission is $8.
Love and Longing
Chris Stamey and Syd Straw, Fez, under Time Cafe, 380 Lafayette Street, at Great Jones Street, Greenwich Village. (212) 533-2680.
With its narrow stage, red-and-gold curtain backdrop and healthful menu, Fez feels more like a cabaret than a rock club; it's a comfortable, grown-up place to see a singer and songwriter like Chris Stamey.
His literate, well-made tunes are little epiphanies that capture moments of love and longing, and although he's not the most emotive performer in the world, his words often betray more than he's letting on.
The folk-pop chanteuse Syd Straw floats easily between jazzy standards and tongue-in-cheek readings of AC/ DC hits.
Shows are tomorrow night at 9:30 and 11.
Admission is $10.


SPECTER OF TERROR: The Scene; Newcomers Mistaken For Police
For almost two months, Jose Verez watched the mysterious group of men and women come and go from the graffiti-covered garage near the corner of 139th Street and 90th Avenue in Jamaica, Queens.
They arrived at all times of the day and night.
They unloaded boxes and bags from unmarked vans.
Some of them carried guns tucked in their waistbands.
Like many of his neighbors, Mr.
Verez concluded that the newcomers who rarely said hello must be the police or narcotics officers who were keeping tabs on drug traffic in the area.
"I thought, 'Oh, they're Federal agents, so we'll be safe,' " he said.


Caramoor Opening
The Caramoor Festival opens this weekend with concerts tomorrow and Sunday on the festival grounds in Katonah, N.Y.
Tomorrow's concert, at 8:30 P.M., features Julius Rudel conducting the Orchestra of St.
Luke's in an all-Beethoven program, including the "Creatures of Prometheus" Overture, Symphony No. 3 ("Eroica") and the Third Piano Concerto, with Misha Dichter as guest soloist.
On Sunday at 5:30 P.M., Mr.
Dichter, joined by Cipa Dichter, will give a two-piano recital featuring works of Brahms, Milhaud and Ravel, including Brahms's rarely performed transcription of his Fourth Symphony.
This concert celebrates the 20th anniversary of the Dichters' first appearance as a piano duo.
Tickets are $10 to $37.50 for tomorrow's performance and $22.50 for Sunday.
Information: (914) 232-1252.


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Widen Trial Rules on Mental Competence
The Supreme Court ruled today that once a criminal defendant is found fit to stand trial under the longtime test of mental competency, he is also competent to dismiss his lawyer and plead guilty to a crime as serious as capital murder.
The 7-to-2 decision overturned a lower court's ruling that because a guilty plea or a waiver of legal counsel "requires a higher level of mental functioning" than standing trial with a lawyer's assistance, the Constitution requires a heightened standard of competency for those actions.


On My Mind; Fear of Compassion
At last, the Government of the United States is pulling itself together -- White House, Congress, Supreme Court -- to show how determined and target-minded it can be when it comes to handling a social crisis.
Well, not all social crises -- not things like controlling the gun epidemic that sickens American life, or helping the mentally ill to get the care to take them off the streets, or pushing the war against drugs to the victory in sight.


Rykoff-Sexton Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 1


HomeCall Inc. reports earnings for Year to March 31


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend
"WILD MEN," Westside Theater, 407 West 43d Street, Clinton.
A comedy with music about five men on a weekend retreat in the woods.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 7 and 10 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Information: (212) 307-4100.
"DOWN THE ROAD," Atlantic Theater, 336 West 20th Street, Chelsea.
A drama by Lee Blessing about criminals who become tabloid celebrities.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today and Sunday at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 7 and 10 P.M.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 645-1242.
"THE NIGHT LARRY KRAMER KISSED ME," Perry Street Theater, 31 Perry Street, West Village.
A one-man show by David Drake about contemporary American gay culture.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today and tomorrow at 7 and 10 P.M.; Sunday at 7 P.M.
Tickets: $30 and $32.50.
Information: (212) 564-8038.
"WRONG TURN AT LUNGFISH," Promenade Theater, 2162 Broadway, at 76th Street.
A comedy-drama by Garry Marshall and Lowell Ganz about a cranky college professor and a young streetwise couple.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $35 to $39.50.
Information: (212) 580-1313.
"FALSETTOS," Golden Theater, 252 West 45th Street, Clinton.
A musical about a contemporary New York family.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $47.50 to $60.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"HELLO MUDDAH, HELLO FADDUH," Circle in the Square Downtown, 159 Bleecker Street, East Village.
A comedy featuring the musical parodies of Allan Sherman.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 3 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 and 5:30 P.M.
Tickets: $35.
Information: (212) 254-6330.


Ex-Washington State Official to Get AIDS Post
After being turned down by several other candidates, President Clinton will name Kristine Gebbie, a nurse who was the top health official in the State of Washington, to become the country's first Federal AIDS coordinator, White House officials say.
The officials said Mr.
Clinton is also expected to nominate Harold Varmus, a Nobel Prize-winning molecular biologist from the University of California, to take over the National Institutes of Health.


Abroad at Home; Test of Leadership
The Soviet-American treaty banning all but underground nuclear tests is nearly 30 years old now, and we tend to take it for granted.
We forget that it exists only because a President was courageous enough to lead.
June 1963 was a time of high tension in the cold war.
Less than eight months before, we had come to the brink of nuclear war over Soviet deployment of missiles in Cuba.
The American political mood was overwhelmingly hawkish.


Heico Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Sport Chalet reports earnings for Year to March 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  KURDS HIT TURKISH SITES IN EUROPE  Kurdish rebels staged attacks on Turkish diplomatic missions and businesses across Europe, seizing hostages and battling the police to call attention to their struggle for independence from Turkey.
A1  Kurdish separatists propelled their message to a wider audience.
A10


Art in Review
Haim Steinbach
Sonnabend Gallery  420 West Broadway  (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through July 30
Of the artists dealing with commodity culture in the 1980's, Haim Steinbach and Jeff Koons were by far the most interesting, although they have followed divergent paths in the last few years.


Inquiry Will Check Air Quality on Airplanes
Transportation Secretary Federico F. Pena today ordered a preliminary inquiry into the air quality of airplane cabins.
Airlines in the United States have been circulating less fresh air into the cabins of many newer airplanes to cut costs.
As a result, flight attendants and passengers have complained of headaches, nausea and other health problems, especially after long flights.


In a Tokyo Hotel Room, The Swords Came Out
In the samurai dramas that attract millions of Japanese television viewers, crafty warriors from Japan's feudal past always meet at some out-of-the-way inn, plotting the overthrow of their masters.
The modern reprise came the other night.
Masayoshi Takemura and nine colleagues in Parliament slipped into a hotel near the Imperial Palace, took a room with a well-stocked mini-bar and decided that the moment had arrived to ambush the old men who had ruled Japan for 38 years.


Concord Fabrics Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Jefferies Has Finally Grown Up, All the Way to .327
To listen to Gregg Jefferies, he hasn't had much time to study the New York Mets' precipitous plunge in the standings.
The St.
Louis Cardinals' first baseman is simply glad that he will arrive in New York on Friday as a young man finally at peace with himself.
Far back in the rearview mirror now are three-plus largely unfulfilled seasons with the Mets, ending after the 1991 season when he was traded to Kansas City.


More Dinosaurs! Stalk On
BEAUTY and charisma are not the same thing.
Bogart proved it.
So did Jean-Paul Belmondo.
And now Tyrannosaurus rex, a stomping, flesh-eating star of "Jurassic Park," has served notice that the dinosaurs who ruled the earth for 165 million years developed something even more precious than seven-inch incisors and armor plating: genuine star quality.
They're big and they're bad.
They have attitude and edge.
They're the only thing huger than Arnold.
And they are undeniably here.


In Sarajevo, Silence Turns to Despair
While the Serbian guns that have blasted this city for more than a year have quieted, news reports about a peace plan that would partition Bosnia and Herzegovina have plunged many here into despair.
"Bosnia's partition is only a matter of days away," said Mustafa Spahic, a Muslim cleric, referring to the proposal by the Serbian and Croatian presidents, Slobodan Milosevic and Franjo Tudjman, to divide this country into Serbian, Croatian and Muslim territories.


Carnival Cruise Lines Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


The Art Market
Lloyd's Losers' Luck
Special to The New York Times
LONDON, June 20 -- The talk here is of the auction houses' fierce competition to cash in on the financial losses that have overwhelmed thousands of Lloyd's of London investors who are being forced to sell off sometimes choice property to pay their debts.
Among the "names," as these investors are called in England, are members of Parliament and titled families.
Sotheby's and Christie's are vying for the salable property belonging to these individuals, who as investors in the three-century-old insurer are personally responsible for its obligations.
Lloyd's has been reporting huge losses for the last three years now, and the situation appears to be getting worse.
As a result, the insurer's investors must raise cash to make the payouts on insurance policies.


Lone Star Steakhouse &amp; Saloon Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 15


THREE RADIO CHAINS PLAN A MERGER
Stoner Broadcasting Systems, Atlantic Radio and Multi Market Communications, which operate radio broadcasting stations in the Northeast, Atlantic coast and Midwest regions, said yesterday that they were completing negotiations to merge.
The new company, which would be one of the 20 largest radio companies in terms of revenue, would have an initial capitalization of more than $100 million and control 17 stations.
Steve Dodge, chairman and chief executive of Atlantic Radio, would become chief executive of the new company, which would be named American Radio Systems Inc. and based in Boston.


Market Place; A Small Mississippi Company Gets a Big Boost from the F.C.C.
MISSISSIPPI is not usually a hotbed for new technology.
But a small company in Jackson got a big boost yesterday when the Federal Communications Commission recognized it as a pioneer in advanced paging technology and decided to give it a nationwide license to offer new services.
Mobile Telecommunications Technologies, more commonly known as Mtel, has developed a two-way paging technology that allows people to send and receive documents on small computers, in addition to the telephone numbers or brief messages that are current paging fare.


COMPANY NEWS
MCDONALD'S CORP., Oak Brook, Ill., said it would open in Israel, avoiding a ban there on importing frozen foreign potatoes by producing its own supplies locally.
UNITED PARCEL SERVICE OF AMERICA INC., Atlanta, said it would build a $55 million data center in Atlanta to support the company's global telecommunications headquarters in Mahwah, N.J.


Review/Photography; How the Old West Was, and Wasn't
With its colorful cast of cowboys and Indians, settlers and gunslingers, farmers and ranchers, the drama of the Western expansion continues to resonate in the American psyche.
Four current photography shows, in fact, deal with the subject, as both fact and fiction.
As these shows make clear, even the earliest photographs of the land beyond the Missouri were shaped by distinct attitudes, which determined not only what was depicted, but also what form the pictures took.
David Levinthal's explicitly staged images are just particularly blatant examples of the way pictures of the West have long been influenced by the preconceptions of its photographers.


Micro Healthsystems Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
Carol Haussamen, den mother, confidante and fund-raiser for hundreds of Democratic candidates over the last quarter of a century, was enamored of the garden behind the building she owned and lived in at 40 Central Park South in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Haussamen's parents, L. Victor and Beatrice Weil, built the apartment house in 1941, and three generations have lived there.
As Mrs.
Haussamen's health declined, so did the attention she could pay to the garden.
She died of cancer of the esophagus last November at the age of 71.


Review/Film; Dennis, Mr. Wilson, Slow Burns And Cats
It's not easy turning comic strips into movies, especially comic strips that are short on narrative and include no more than a gag or two per strip.
If you are desperate for confirmation of that woolly thought, you can see "Dennis the Menace," the new screen incarnation of the Hank Ketcham comic strip, written and produced by John Hughes and directed by Nick Castle.
This "Dennis the Menace" isn't a comic strip, but then it's not really a movie, certainly not one in the same giddy league with the two "Home Alone" movies, written and produced by Mr.
Hughes and directed by Chris Columbus.
"Dennis the Menace" invites comparisons if only because, like "Home Alone," it's about a mischievous little boy with a gift for the potentially lethal prank.


San Pedro de Tiquina Journal; Landlocked Navy's Dream Is to Go Down to Sea
Senior officers here at Bolivia's largest naval base, tucked along a peninsula that juts into Lake Titicaca, admit they would prefer life on the high seas.
The mission of their 250 cadets, many of whom do not know how to swim, is to police the 150-mile length of the lake with five tiny patrol boats, hoping to catch the occasional Shining Path guerrilla passing by boat from Peru to Bolivia.


Made to Order
The Fingerhut Companies, one of the nation's largest catalogue retailers, may have an opportunity to expand now that Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company is leaving the catalogue business.
Fingerhut recently sold its Comb Corporation unit to Damark International to focus on its core business of branded-merchandise catalogues.


Reporter's Notebook; Preening Perot Likes Ruffling Feathers at the Edge of the Fray
Racing up and down the sidelines at major events, flaunting a finely honed heckle that draws belly laughs even as it unnerves the opposition, Ross Perot is the San Diego Chicken of politics.
And sure enough, as the Donkeys and Elephants squared off in the Senate this afternoon for the big budget battle, Mr.
Perot posted himself right at the edge of the legislative arena, feathers flying.
Flanked by about 100 supporters of his group, United We Stand America, Mr.
Perot presided over what he called the preliminary delivery to Congress of petitions, said to be signed by 2.5 million people, demanding that lawmakers cut Federal spending before they raise taxes.


Jim Hjelm's Private Collection Ltd. (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Bond Yields Continue to Decline
Bond yields declined yesterday for the seveth consecutive day, putting the 30-year Treasury issue, with a closing yield of 6.73 percent, within striking distance of its 20-year-low yield set in mid-April.
There was no particular catalyst for yesterday's drop in bond yields, just a general sense among traders and investors that lower inflation and a sluggish economy have combined to create an era of good feeling about fixed income securities.


INSIDE
Nurse to Be AIDS Czar
The President chose a former Washington State health official to be the Federal AIDS coordinator.
Page A17.
New Jersey Bests New York
A commission voted to expand McGuire Air Force Base in New Jersey by closing Plattsburgh Air Force Base in New York.
Page A12.
Wilder vs.
Robb, Again
Reviving a Virginia feud, Gov.
L.
Douglas Wilder will challenge Senator Charles Robb for the Democratic Senate nomination.
Page A12.
Atom-Smasher Voted Down
The House voted to kill an $11 billion science project in Texas, the Superconducting Supercollider, and proponents said they were pessimistic that the Senate could save it.
Page A18.


Hans Lehfeldt, 93, Doctor and Leader In Family Planning
Dr.
Hans M. Lehfeldt, a New York gynecologist who was one of the earliest proponents and practitioners of family planning, died last Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 93.
He suffered a long illness, his family said.


Joseph Talese, 89, Immigrant Whose Son Chronicled His Life
Joseph F. Talese, who was one of six immigrants honored when Ellis Island reopened as a museum in 1990 and whose assimilation as an American was chronicled in the 1991 best-seller "Unto the Sons," by his son, Gay, died of lymphoma on Wednesday night at his home here.
He was 89 years old.
Trained as an apprentice tailor in his native village of Maida in southern Italy, where his relatives had been tailors for generations, and later an assistant cutter in a shop in Paris that employed an older cousin, Mr.
Talese passed through Ellis Island in 1920 in quest of prominence and affluence in the world of male fashion.


Review/Pop; Haggard, Down Home In Manhattan
Country-music icons are wary about New York City.
It's unfamiliar turf, where audiences are smaller but expectations are higher, since country shows are comparatively rare here.
The standard 60-minute set always seems too short.
Merle Haggard, the latest down-home icon to perform at the 800-seat Tramps, received a hero's welcome from a rowdy, sold-out early-show audience on Wednesday night.
But fans shouted so many requests, between and sometimes during songs, that Mr.
Haggard looked perturbed, his timing thrown off.
Timing is a good part of Mr.
Haggard's music.
He sings in a stone-faced deadpan, his mouth barely moving.
Dignity, pain and a sense of loss come through his singing in subtleties: a stretched syllable, a suddenly broadened vibrato, a dip to a deep baritone note, a bluesy downward slide.
In "Mama Tried," Mr.
Haggard's classic song about turning "21 in prison doing life without parole," he sang as if still humbled by remorse over his sins.


CHRONICLE
JEAN KENNEDY SMITH reported for duty yesterday as the United States Ambassador to Ireland, presenting her credentials to President Mary Robinson in Dublin, The Associated Press reported.
Mrs.
Smith noted that it was 30 years ago that she accompanied her brother President John F. Kennedy on a trip to Ireland, their ancestral homeland.


Subcommittee's Path Runs Into Layers of Complexity
The Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations will address a number of complex issues Friday when it opens hearings on the management and financial practices of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield.
The hearings are the latest in a series examining the operation of Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans around the country.
Empire, with more than 8 million policy holders, is the largest of the organizations, which are nonprofit.


United Colors of the Mets: Goodies Are Gathering Dust
As the New York Mets march sullenly into baseball ignominy, they will find no solace in learning that sales of their licensed goods are sinking, too.
Only six years ago, the Mets ranked first among 26 teams in retail sales of their licensed goods.
The ranking fell to ninth last year, which has climbed slightly to eighth this year based on preseason sales figures that may have indicated an optimism that has now been dashed.


N.B.A. Investigating Esquinas
FREDERICK B. LACEY, a former Federal court judge and United States attorney, will handle the National Basketball Association's investigation of RICHARD ESQUINAS, a San Diego businessman who claims to have won more than $1 million in golf bets from the Chicago Bulls' MICHAEL JORDAN.
According to a league spokesperson, Lacey will soon meet with Esquinas's representatives, to discuss the allegations Esquinas made in a self-published book released earlier this month.
The league also wants to determine whether Esquinas has any other gambling connections.


A Professor Is the Favorite As Chancellor
Only one candidate, Bernard R. Gifford, among the 10 finalists under consideration as New York City's next schools chancellor appears to be seeking the job, has support on the board and is unburdened by debilitating factors, interviews with board members and school officials indicate.
As a result, Mr.
Gifford, an education professor at the University of California at Berkeley who was a finalist in the 1988 chancellor search, has emerged as the front-runner as successive candidates have withdrawn from consideration and board members have privately voiced criticism of the others.
Praise From Board Members
The surge by Mr.
Gifford, who is black, appears to work to the advantage of Rudolph W. Giuliani in the racial politics of the unfolding mayoral race.
Though neither candidate has expressed a preference, city and school officials have said Mayor David N. Dinkins, struggling to keep the Hispanic support that helped elect him in 1989, would like another Hispanic chancellor.


Amelia Earhart Doesn't Go Uncelebrated; Also in California
To the Editor:
Lynn Sherr and Jurate Kazickas bemoan the lack of women on a pedestal (Op-Ed, June 14).
But decrying the lack of a statue for Amelia Earhart is Eastern chauvinism.
A few miles from my Burbank home, the grounds of North Hollywood's Public Library boast a very imposing statue of the dauntless Amelia Earhart.


SPECTER OF TERROR: The Investigation; As Plot Built, Agents Watched and Waited
As late as Wednesday night, members of an antiterrorist task force had trouble believing what they were seeing and hearing.
Even though, months before, bombers had blown a hole under the World Trade Center, another bombing plot was quickly taking form -- right under the eyes of investigators.
Video cameras and tape recorders hidden in a Queens garage were transmitting the pictures and sounds of conspirators mixing a "witches' brew" of diesel fuel and fertilizer -- ingredients, authorities said, for bombs to blow up the United Nations, the Federal building in Manhattan, Hudson River tunnels and public officials.
"Can you believe it?" one official said law-enforcement agents were asking one another.
"They're going to go through with it." Eased by Informer
But moments later, their entry apparently eased by an informer in the group, the agents slipped into the garage and, before the targets were aware of the interlopers, slapped handcuffs on them and hauled them away under arrest.


On Abortion, Judge Ginsburg Backs Democracy; Conscience Protection
To the Editor:


Where Indian Tribes Get Gambling Rights
To the Editor:
"Issue of Indian Sovereignty Behind Gambling Case" (Law page, June 11) incorrectly states that the 1988 Indian Gaming Regulatory Act "grants tribes broad powers to issue and regulate gambling licenses."


I.B.M. Fills a Top Post From Ranks
I.B.M. yesterday tapped a longtime employee, M. Bernard Puckett, for the new position of senior vice president for corporate strategy and development.
Mr.
Puckett will report directly to the new chairman of the International Business Machines Corporation, Louis V. Gerstner Jr., joining the outsiders that Mr.
Gerstner has brought in recently as the inner circle of his top management team.


Aristide and the Haitian Military Expected to Open Talks Sunday
Talks between Haiti's exiled President and the army leaders who overthrew him are to begin Sunday at the United Nations, diplomats involved in the negotiations said today, one day after the planned meeting appeared to have been derailed by a dispute over its agenda.
If successful, diplomats said, the meeting would set the stage for the President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, to return to office after 21 months in exile and to spell out conditions for replacing the military leaders who overthrew him.
The talks are also expected to determine the mandate for an international police force that the United Nations and the United States have said must be deployed in Haiti to insure a peaceful transition.


A Nation's Growing Role as Staging Ground for Islamic Extremists
Sudanese passports held by eight Muslim fundamentalists charged with planning terrorist acts in New York cast a spotlight on the growing role of the African country as a staging ground for radical Islamic extremists.
Since coming to power in a 1989 coup, the military government of General Omar al-Bashir and its partner in government, the Islamic National Front led by Sheik Hassan al-Turabi, have instituted one of the strictest Muslim fundamentalist social orders in the world.
Exporting Revolution
Two years ago Sudan struck a strategic alliance with Iran.
Western and Egyptian security experts say Iran supplies the Sudan with free oil, sells some arms and trains Sudanese and Arab fundamentalists to form vanguard Muslim militias.


Portrait of a Serial Bomber Emerges After Parcel Blasts
Federal investigators who have spent years trying to crack the case of a serial bomber who they say struck again twice this week think he is an obsessive-compulsive white man who was reared in the Chicago area and probably has had menial jobs.
They believe he is a neat dresser who leads a meticulously organized life, the kind of person who likes to make lists.
He is likely to be quiet and would be an almost ideal neighbor.
He has had at least a high school education, and possibly more.
His self-esteem is low -- and most likely he has had problems dealing with women -- because of his physical flaws, either real or perceived.


Uwe Brinkmann, 53, Expert in Tropical Ills
Dr.
Uwe K. Brinkmann, a Harvard epidemiologist and an expert in tropical diseases and health care in developing countries, died last Saturday while traveling on field research in Fortaleza, Brazil.
He was 53 and lived in Brookline, Mass.
He died of a heart attack, according to the Harvard School of Public Health, where he had been an associate professor for the last three years.


Earnings and Economy Hold Back Stock Prices
Stocks eked out small gains yesterday as Treasury bond prices jumped.
Equities were held back by concerns about the strength of second-quarter earnings and the economy.
A late burst of computer-driven selling ended what could have amounted to a modest gain for the Dow Jones industrial average.
It rose 0.28 point, to 3,490.89; for the week, the average declined 3.88 points.


Court Again Rejects a Limit on Punitive Damages
The Supreme Court today upheld a $10 million award of punitive damages for a $19,000 injury in a ruling that once again dashed the hopes of critics of the civil justice system who wanted the Court to place a meaningful constitutional limit on punitive damages.
The 6-to-3 ruling made little if any new law and was not supported by a single majority opinion.
It was the fifth time in recent years that the Justices did not issue a definitive ruling on punitive damages after suggesting that they were troubled by the issue.


Scott F. Runkle, 77; Promoted Puerto Rico
Scott F. Runkle, a journalist and longtime publicist for the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, died on June 16 while on vacation in Vezelay, France.
He was 77 and lived in Chevy Chase, Md.
He died suddenly at his hotel, said his daughter, Dr. Beatriz Runkle.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about the annulment of the Nigerian presidential election referred incorrectly in some editions to Lagos.
It is the former capital; Abuja is the new one.


Corrections
Captions on Wednesday with illustrations of two competing Suffolk County housing plans were reversed in some copies.
The larger illustration was of Norman E. Blankman's plan; the other showed Wilbur Breslin's.


Review/Jazz Festival; Torme and Laine, Like Love and Marriage
Had it been a contest instead of a friendly collaboration, the dual appearance of Mel Torme and Cleo Laine at Carnegie Hall on Wednesday evening might have been billed as a battle of two evenly matched jazz singing giants.
In perfection of vocal tone and polish of phrasing, Mr.
Torme and Ms.
Laine are supreme technicians who share deep similarities.
Both singers delight in shaping notes and phrases with classical precision.
Both produce beautifully rounded tones that are softened with an airy intonation.
And because Mr.
Torme's baritone is pitched just slightly above Ms.
Laine's contralto, when harmonizing they can sound almost like the same voice split in two parts.


Long-Bond Yield 6.70%; New Low
The interest rate on 30-year Treasury bonds fell to a record low of 6.70 percent yesterday amid widespread forecasts that the rate could drop further in coming weeks.
There has been no single catalyst for the steady decline in bond yields the last week, but investors and economists said yesterday that the accumulating evidence of a sluggish economy and low inflation seemed to have overpowered the fear of higher inflation that gripped the bond market just five weeks ago.
As recently as May 21, the yield on the closely watched 30-year Treasury bond was 7.03 percent.


Observer; Stop The Presses
I telephoned Taffy's house.
Naturally a machine answered.
"If it is dinnertime, press 1," said the machine.
It was 3:13 P.M., so I did not press 1.
The machine said, "If it is not dinnertime, press zero."
I pressed zero and immediately heard an unremitting electronic tone.
I had been disconnected.


Panel Votes to Close Staten Island Base; Spares New London
Virtually ending any significant Navy presence in New York City, a Presidential commission voted today to close the Staten Island Homeport and move its ships and sailors to Virginia and Florida.
The decision by the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission appears to put an end to one of the Navy's most modern installations, which until 1991 had been the focus of a debate over allowing nuclear-armed ships to be based in New York Harbor.
The panel rejected, however, a Pentagon recommendation to shrink the submarine base at New London, Conn.
Other Major Closings
In a body blow to California and South Carolina, the seven-member commission also voted to close the Navy base and shipyard in Charleston, S.C., and a large shipyard and two Navy bases in the San Francisco Bay area.
Combined, they employ more than 14,000 civilians, and community officials estimate the closings could indirectly cause the loss of two to three times that many jobs.


Half a Tour de France Isn't Enough for Eddie B.
Eddie B. insisted he was not crushed.
"I am tough guy," he said.
"Long time in this business. I'm not crying." Eddie B. insisted he was not even mad.
"I'm not mad, no, I am not."
What exactly was Eddie B. after the Subaru-Montgomery bicycle team he coaches rejected an invitation to share a berth in the Tour de France?
The word, he agreed, was determined.


9 Principals Are Removed In the Bronx
With less than a week left before his contract runs out, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez said yesterday that he was removing nine principals and an assistant principal from their South Bronx schools, imposing a final sanction on a school district plagued by corruption.
Mr.
Fernandez said his order, though it might cause "disruptions" in individual schools, was necessary because the principals had been hired through a process tainted by bribery and political dealing.


Rookie Tips His Nervousness
After his first major league hit tonight, the kid made his first rookie mistake.
Jeffrey Hammonds had just lifted Jim Abbott's pitch into left field for a run-scoring single in the sixth inning.
The hit sliced Baltimore's deficit to 6-3 in a game they would eventually take from the Yankees, 7-6.
The 46,312 fans at Camden Yards rose and cheered Hammonds's achievement.
Hammonds did not know what to do.
He looked around.
He stared at the ground.
Finally, Davey Lopes, the first base coach, told him to tip his helmet.
Hammonds did.
The fans roared again and then they finally sat down.


Sports of The Times; Paying The Cost To Be Boss
AS the flustered taxi driver scratched and clawed his way through Manhattan's snarled midday traffic, Lonnie Bradley, a promising young middleweight fighter, and his manager, Dave Wolf, debated how up-and-coming fighters land on the undercards of big fights.
Evander Holyfield and Alex Stewart are fighting in Atlantic City tonight.
I wondered out loud what it would take for a fighter like Bradley to get the exposure of an Atlantic City fight?


Equivalency Diploma Still Has Value; Wide Sampling Used
To the Editor:
Your otherwise accurate June 15 article on the low value accorded to the General Education Development diploma by most American institutions relies on an advocacy organization that promotes G.E.D. test taking to summarize our scholarly research.


Hamilton Group reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


South African Artists on Show at the Biennale
For the first time in over two decades, the Venice Biennale, one of Europe's premier contemporary art exhibitions, invited South Africans to display their work this year, and the artists brought some of their nation's dilemmas with them.
As much as in sport and business, South Africa's re-emergence in the arts is part of the land's return to a wider world that has come with the Government's formal retreat from apartheid and the subsequent withering of the boycotts and barriers that consigned many artists and musicians to years of isolation.


'You're Under Arrest For Trash Removal'
To the Editor:
Upon leaving the Long Island Rail Road at Pennsylvania Station in Manhattan the morning of June 10, I briefly picked up a newspaper from the top of a green recycling bin, scanned a headline and replaced it.
Suddenly, a uniformed police officer of the L.I.R.R. accosted me and smugly remarked: "Not the paper you're looking for? You're under arrest for 'unauthorized trash removal.' " Sound like something out of "Nineteen Eighty-Four"?
It happened to me.


Moving Cross-Country Without Professionals
Jonathan Elias, a TV news reporter living in Sacramento, Calif., lands a job with a Minneapolis station.
He and his wife, Holly, both 29, solicit bids to move their belongings and a car.
The bids, including cartons but not packing, range from $3,500 to $4,300, with insurance.
The couple decide to rent a 24-foot van and a car trailer from U-Haul International Inc. and move themselves, for a total of $2,053 -- including the one-way truck rental and expenses.


3Com Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


U.S. Says More Bomb-Plot Suspects Are at Large
Federal investigators said yesterday that several men still at large were believed to be part of the terrorist group seized this week on the brink of carrying out a spectacular Islamic-radical plot to assassinate political leaders and bomb the United Nations, two Hudson River tunnels and other targets in New York.
The suspects have not been arrested, the investigators said, because Federal prosecutors need additional evidence and a more complete picture of their role to bring charges against them.
But they said the suspects' identities were known to authorities and, unlike the eight men arrested in raids in the metropolitan area early Thursday, they were not regarded as dangerous.


German Officials Call for Ban of Kurdish Group


7 Bodies of Asian Immigrants Unidentified After 3 Weeks
Nearly three weeks after a ship crammed with Chinese immigrants ran aground off Queens, 7 of the 10 bodies of those who perished trying to swim ashore are still unidentified.
Community organizations, trying to help families concerned that a relative may be among the victims, complain that the Immigration and Naturalization Service has been unwilling to release photographs or other vital information needed to identify the bodies and bury them properly.


Kennedy Quotes in New Book Are Invented
Joe McGinniss's forthcoming book about Senator Edward M. Kennedy, "The Last Brother," includes a riveting description of Mr.
Kennedy and his sister Eunice Shriver standing at their father's bedside in November 1963, struggling to break the news that President John F. Kennedy had been shot.
The father had suffered a crippling stroke two years earlier, and the Senator hesitated.
"He was going to speak," Mr.
McGinniss writes.
"He just needed one more moment to think of how to begin. And so he stood at the foot of the bed, as mute as his father, his hands clasped behind his back, unable even to look the old man in the eye.


Progress Software (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Beliefs
Although Kathryn Bishop teaches at a Roman Catholic university, she used to attach little importance to its religious identity.
A few weeks ago, the young assistant professor of special education at the University of San Diego changed her mind.
"Now I'm proud to be at a Catholic university," she said.


The Images of Horror That Wouldn't Go Away
IN common dread the city came together.
Suddenly, everywhere, a brand-new apocalyptic vision was being shared, one that exposed the vulnerability of this island long reaching for the sky.


Pettibone Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Clinton Bluntly Warns Iraq To Yield to Arms Inspectors
President Clinton warned Iraq today that its continuing refusal to allow United Nations inspectors to monitor missile test sites could have "quite serious" consequences, and he said the matter must be resolved soon.
The blunt statement reflected increasing American impatience with the renewed Iraqi intransigence.
Despite a similarly strong warning from the United Nations Security Council, Iraq has given no sign that it will back down from its refusal to permit the inspections.


CHRONICLE
It was a scholarly ceremony in Los Angeles on Thursday when GEORGE BURNS was awarded an honorary doctor of humane letters degree from Brandeis University.
But the comedian and actor, 97, couldn't resist injecting his own humor into the occasion.
"He said he was going right home to tell his parents because they always wanted a doctor in the family," said Dr.
SAMUEL O. THIER, the president of Brandeis, which is in Waltham, Mass.
"He pointed out that his father would have been 142 and his mother 119, demonstrating that his father liked younger women."


Portrait of a Serial Bomber Emerges After Parcel Blasts
Federal investigators who have spent years trying to crack the case of a serial bomber who they say struck again twice this week think he is an obsessive-compulsive white man who was reared in the Chicago area and probably has had menial jobs.
They believe he is a neat dresser who leads a meticulously organized life, the kind of person who likes to make lists.
He is likely to be quiet and would be an almost ideal neighbor.
He has had at least a high school education, and possibly more.
His self-esteem is low -- and most likely he has had problems dealing with women -- because of his physical flaws, either real or perceived.


Casinos' Newest Draw Is Old Favorite: Poker
Art Donovan, the Baltimore Colts All-Pro defensive tackle from the team's glory years, matched two down treys with two more on the flop and won the first hand of live poker in New Jersey casino history today.
Mr.
Donovan hunched his beamy shoulders over a poker table at the Sands Hotel and Casino with some other invited sports stars -- and some nobodies from the press -- to open the state's newest game of chance.


Buying Reaches Well Beyond the Old Folks
Although the main buyers of variable-rate annuities are 50 or older, some younger people also find the investments appealing.
Some are job-hoppers who are not vested in pension plans and are providing their own retirement savings.
Others calculate that even if they tap the annuity before retirement, to buy a house in 10 years, for example, they may come out ahead.


Success Blooms on Madison Avenue


Capriati and Agassi Getting the Bounces
That green shadow-striping of Wimbledon's grass courts, the sign of a healthy lawn and the low-slung bounce favored by the dying breed of serve-and-volley players that flourishes here, has begun to give way to the scars of use after a rainless week.
The lawns are parched, the bounces are higher, the bomb alerts have begun and topspin artisans like Jennifer Capriati and Andre Agassi are finding it easier to dominate, manipulate and dictate from the baseline.
Comfortable at last, the seventh-seeded Capriati, an ardent Wimbledon champion wannabe, chopped away this afternoon at the giantess who owns the most powerful serve and strokes in the women's game, Brenda Schultz of the Netherlands.
Capriati's makeshift grass-court machinations on Center Court undid the traditional serve-and-volley tactics of Schultz in a 7-5, 4-6, 6-2 victory.


Executive Changes
LEADING EDGE PRODUCTS INC., Westboro, Mass., a computer marketing subsidiary of Daewoo Telecom Ltd., named H. Michael Morond president.
NIKKO SECURITIES CO.
INTERNATIONAL INC., New York, a unit of Nikko Securities Co., named Robert Knutson senior vice president and national fixed-income sales manager.
PRICE WATERHOUSE, New York, appointed James L. McDonald co-chairman.
SONY MUSIC ENTERTAINMENT INC., New York, named Robert Bowlin executive vice president.
He was also named senior executive vice president of Sony Music International.
TIG HOLDINGS INC., New York, the holding company for the Transamerica Insurance Group, appointed Edwin G. Pickett senior vice president and chief financial officer.


Bernard Evslin, Writer And Mythologist, 77
Bernard Evslin, a playwright, screenwriter and mythologist from New Rochelle, N.Y., died on June 4 in Kauai, Hawaii.
He was 77.
He died of cardiac arrest while swimming in a pool, said his wife, Dorothy.


Protest Resolution at U.N.
A group of Muslim and other countries in the Security Council is sponsoring a resolution aimed at lifting the arms embargo against Muslim-led Bosnian troops in Bosnia and Herzegovina and authorizing United Nations forces to use air strikes against Serbian artillery positions.
The resolution is given a poor chance of passage because of the opposition of the European countries, including Britain, France and Russia, all of whom have vetoes in the council.


George Troussoff, 73, Engineer at Bell Labs
George B. Troussoff, a Bell Laboratories engineer who became a museum president in retirement, died Tuesday.
He was 73 and lived in Bernardsville, N.J.
He died suddenly while on personal business in Gladstone-Peapack, N.J., said Richard C. Simon, a fellow trustee at the Macculloch Hall Historical Museum in Morristown.
The exact cause remained undetermined.


Review/Pop; Heartfelt Reflection, Splashy Amplification
Can introspection be reborn as spectacle?
That's what Peter Gabriel attempts in his current tour, which came to Madison Square Garden on Thursday night.
Mr.
Gabriel has mounted a pop extravaganza with all the trimmings: two stages, a giant video screen, smoke machines, props, choreography.
The staging dramatizes not the cheerful come-ons and love songs of Madonna or Paula Abdul, but the private pain and interior struggles of Mr.
Gabriel's characters.
With elegiac tunes that are close to hymns and marches, the songs from "Us" (Geffen), Mr.
Gabriel's current album, mourn the end of a love affair, trying to find solace and some reason to hope.
Such material isn't unprecedented as big-budget pop spectacle; Pink Floyd and the Pet Shop Boys have both staged their own dark ruminations for mass audiences.
Like those groups, Mr.
Gabriel sets out to create unhurried, dreamlike imagery in the most prosaic of settings, a sports arena.


In a Quick Switch, Lilly Names a New Chief
The head of Eli Lilly &amp; Company, the giant pharmaceutical concern, retired unexpectedly yesterday and was replaced by a vice chairman of A.T.&amp; T.
In a company statement, Lilly said Vaughn D. Bryson, who had served as president and chief executive of Lilly since 1991, was retiring because of "differences with the board over management philosophy."


Taking Risks in the Bond Group Paid Off
All three types of bond fund risks have worked to investors' advantage so far in 1993 -- an unusual convergence that happened only twice before in the last decade.
The domestic economy has been strong enough to prop up the stock market but not strong enough to cause inflation to spike.
As a result, the credit risk built into junk bond funds has remained under control.
Convertible bond funds, which are linked to the equity markets, have turned in an admirable performance.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-5 RIGHTS FORUM BACKS U.N. ROLE
The human rights conference in Vienna ended on a surprisingly optimistic note as delegates urged the U.N. to play a larger role in denouncing abuses and endorsed a U.S. proposal for a post of High Commissioner on Human Rights.  2 WHITES STORM SOUTH AFRICA TALKS
Hundreds of armed white separatists stormed South Africa's constitutional talks to dramatize their bitterness at the approach of black majority rule and then dispersed without causing any serious casualties.  3 NIGERIAN VOWS DEMOCRACY
Nigeria's military leader insisted that a democratically elected government would be installed as scheduled in August, despite his annulment of presidential elections.  3 RUSSIANS OFFER HUGS IN CHINA
Yichang Journal: All over China, young Russian women are working in bars, restaurants and even massage parlors.
Customers pay restaurants a $33 surcharge for having a Russian woman at the table, plus a typical tip of $10.  4 RUSSIA HALTS GAS TO ESTONIA
Russia halted deliveries of natural gas to Estonia in a move seen as retribution for a new residency law that requires residents who have not applied for citizenship to apply for a residence permit within two years or else leave the country.  4 CLINTON WARNS IRAQ OVER U.N.
President Clinton warned Iraq that its refusal to allow U.N. inspectors to monitor missile test sites could have "quite serious" consequences, but officials said the U.S. was not planning immediate military action.  4 U.S.
WEIGHS MIDEAST ENVOY
The Clinton Administration expressed dissatisfaction with the Middle East peace talks and said it might send an envoy to the area to help move things along.  4 CAMPBELL TAKES OFFICE IN CANADA
Kim Campbell was sworn in as the first woman to head the Government of Canada and, in her first official step as the country's 19th Prime Minister, announced its smallest Cabinet in 20 years.  5 BOSNIA PEACE TALKS IN DOUBT
The Bosnian President's opposition to a Serbian-Croatian plan for his country is threatening to create a split in Bosnia's collective leadership and to cripple attempts by mediators to reach an accord.  5 GAINS IN EARTH SUMMIT ACCORDS
Tension between rich nations and poor ones uncommonly eased as the panel created to translate the environmental accords of the 1992 Earth Summit into action ended its first substantive session at the U.N.  5 ISRAELI PREMIER IS BELEAGUERED
Israel's Prime Minister found his Government's stability called into question once again with the looming indictment of his Interior Minister on corruption charges.  5 National 6-8 CLINTON HOPEFUL ON FINAL BUDGET
Hours after the Senate passed his economic package, President Clinton said he believed the House and Senate would be able to compromise on a final version.  1 DISCRIMINATION HARDER TO PROVE
Ruling in an important civil rights case, a divided Supreme Court made it substantially harder for employees to prove they suffered discrimination on the job.  1 COURT UPHOLDS DAMAGE AWARD
The Supreme Court upheld a $10 million award of punitive damages for a $19,000 injury, disappointing critics of the civil justice system who wanted the Court to limit awards.  8 STATEN ISLAND BASE WILL CLOSE
A Presidential commission voted to close the Staten Island Homeport and move its ships and sailors south, virtually ending any significant Navy presence in New York City.  1 SESSIONS AS FIGUREHEAD
As crises flared, the F.B.I.
Director was traveling on the West Coast, with little information about either a serial bomber or the terrorist plot uncovered in New York.  1 FOLLOWING A SERIAL BOMBER
Investigators have developed a portrait of a serial bomber they have tracked for years and who they say struck again twice this week.  6 HUMANITIES NOMINEE AGAINST 'P.C.'
The President's nominee to head the National Endowment for the Humanities denounced campus efforts to control speech.  6 President Clinton spoke to his putative half-brother by telephone.  6 NEW LEADER FOR CHICAGO SCHOOLS
A deputy schools chancellor in New York City, Argie Johnson, will be the general superintendent of the Chicago school system.  6 Beliefs: An institute is strengthening the faith of Catholic scholars.  26 Metro Digest 21 OTHERS SOUGHT IN BOMBING PLOT
Federal authorities said yesterday that they have identified more suspects in the plot to bomb buildings and tunnels in New York, but were waiting for prosecutors to decide when to make the arrests.  1 A WARTIME CONNECTION
Experience in the Afghanistan war is emerging as a fervid common denominator among the suspects arrested this week in the plot to bomb and terrorize New York City.  1 DECEPTION BY EMPIRE DESCRIBED
In testimony yesterday before a United States Senate subcommittee, two former employees of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield provided the first public evidence that the insurer intentionally misled New York State officials.  1 Business Digest35 Arts/Entertainment 9-14 AUTHOR INVENTED KENNEDY WORDS
Editorials/Op-Ed 18-19 Editorials The nomads of Albany.
Diplomacy and North Korea.
A gift and a challenge.
Dreamland, N.J.
Letters Russell Baker: Stop the presses.
Andrew Whitley: Saddam's other victims.
Jonathan Rauch: Words aren't violence.
Eugene J. Carroll Jr.: Junior R.O.T.C.?
Who needs it?
Roald Sagdeev and Michael Nacht: Space policy is foreign policy.
Chronicle 20 Bridge 12 Crossword 13


South African Artists on Show at the Biennale
For the first time in over two decades, the Venice Biennale, one of Europe's premier contemporary art exhibitions, invited South Africans to display their work this year, and the artists brought some of their nation's dilemmas with them.
As much as in sport and business, South Africa's re-emergence in the arts is part of the land's return to a wider world that has come with the Government's formal retreat from apartheid and the subsequent withering of the boycotts and barriers that consigned many artists and musicians to years of isolation.


Manor Care reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Interstate Bakeries reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Right Start Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 26


Walking Blues: Habyan Can't Find Plate in 10th
The Orioles have been playing host to raucous house parties at Camden Yards.
The rules are simple.
The Orioles provide the music, the setting and the people.
All the opposing teams have to do is stop by, play a little baseball, but make sure they leave as losers.
The Yankees almost broke the rules tonight.
After eight innings, they led, 6-4, and it looked like the resilient bunch would invade the house party, topple the Orioles and send everyone home disgusted.


Sports of The Times; Paying The Cost To Be Boss
AS the flustered taxi driver scratched and clawed his way through Manhattan's snarled midday traffic, Lonnie Bradley, a promising young middleweight fighter, and his manager, Dave Wolf, debated how up-and-coming fighters land on the undercards of big fights.
Evander Holyfield and Alex Stewart are fighting in Atlantic City tonight.
I wondered out loud what it would take for a fighter like Bradley to get the exposure of an Atlantic City fight?


Bronx Shows Success in Cutting Plea Bargains
To the Editor:
Your June 13 report on my policy to curtail plea bargains in the courts of New York's Bronx County fails to tell the whole story.


Chattem Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Words Aren't Violence
First incident: I am walking on K Street in Washington when a black man (I am white) soliciting for an AIDS charity approaches me.
When I shake my head and hurry past, he yells: "What does that mean, shaking your head? What does that mean? You're a  [ expletive deleted ]  educated redneck!"
Question: Has this man, with his apparently racist slur, violated my human rights?


F.B.I. Chief Is on the Road as Crises Flare
This morning at the Federal Bureau of Investigation's headquarters someone pinned a note on the bulletin board outside an employee changing room.
Addressed to "W.S.S.," the initials of William S. Sessions, it said, "Time to clean out your locker."
The note reflected the exasperation of many bureau employees about Mr.
Sessions, who is fighting almost alone to keep his job.
Those internal critics say he is presiding as little more than a figurehead over an agency roiled with discord five months after a harsh internal ethics report on the Director's conduct made his ultimate departure seem inevitable.


It's a Seventh-Inning Fold for Saberhagen and Mets
For a while, Bret Saberhagen had to hope for salvation.
Winless in six weeks, ineffective against nonexpansion ball clubs, Saberhagen pitched through six innings last night at Shea Stadium with a lively fastball and a reassuring lead.
Then, in a matter of minutes, it all fell apart.


9 Principals Are Removed In the Bronx
With less than a week left before his contract runs out, Schools Chancellor Joseph A. Fernandez said yesterday that he was removing nine principals and an assistant principal from their South Bronx schools, imposing a final sanction on a school district plagued by corruption.
Mr.
Fernandez said his order, though it might cause "disruptions" in individual schools, was necessary because the principals had been hired through a process tainted by bribery and political dealing.


Corrections
An article on Monday about White House mail misstated in some copies the volume of correspondence addressed to the Clintons and their cat.
They have been receiving an average of 700,000 letters a month.


Review/Jazz Festival; A Tribute Gets to the Heart of Art Blakey
"The Incredible School of Blakey," a tribute to the drummer Art Blakey at Avery Fisher Hall on Wednesday in the JVC Jazz Festival, really started with the first tune of the second half.
The concert's producer, Ira Gitler, had reassembled Blakey's last great band -- Wynton Marsalis on trumpet, Bobby Watson and Billy Pierce on saxophones, James Williams on piano, Dennis Irwin on bass -- and had Elvin Jones on drums.
Mr.
Jones went into a patented Blakey backbeat, the band went into the melody of Mr.
Watson's "Wheel Within a Wheel," and everything that was so great about Blakey and his groups appeared.
The concert had a shaky start, opening with groups made up mostly of former Blakey band members who performed endless solos, reminding the audience how dull Blakey's shows could sometimes be.
The saxophonist Jackie McLean rose above it all, tearing through a set of tunes with absolute precision.
On his "Dig," he threw every note with intent, measuring his lines and improvising with a real flow.
The trumpeter Donald Byrd, who has recently been heard to better effect singing "I Like to Party" with the rapper Guru, produced weak solos that slowly vanished.


3Com, Pounded Last Month, Rebounds on Fat Earnings
What a difference a month makes.
Shares in the 3Com Corporation, which lost a third of their value on May 28 when two analysts lowered their ratings, rebounded today in response to record fourth-quarter earnings and a positive outlook for the company.
The earnings results were released after the market closed on Thursday.
The company makes adaptor cards for connecting personal computers to networks.


Regents Keep TV Program Out of Public Schools
The New York State Board of Regents reaffirmed its ban against a nationwide satellite news program for schoolchildren in public classrooms today, asserting that the 2 minutes of commercials in the 12-minute program treat students as "commodities to be exploited."
The 14-to-1 vote means New York remains the only state to have successfully prohibited public schools from using the program, Channel One.
Channel One is shown in about 100 private schools in New York State.


Frederick J. Streng, 59; Led Religious Groups
Frederick J. Streng, a scholar of religion and leader of religious organizations, died on Monday at his home in Dallas at the age of 59.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Corrections
Because of a processing error, a picture on June 14 with the Chong qing Journal, showing a museum in China, was published in mirror image.
The crouching figure in the foreground was actually at the left.


Court Again Rejects a Limit on Punitive Damages
The Supreme Court today upheld a $10 million award of punitive damages for a $19,000 injury in a ruling that once again dashed the hopes of critics of the civil justice system who wanted the Court to place a meaningful constitutional limit on punitive damages.
The 6-to-3 ruling made little if any new law and was not supported by a single majority opinion.
It was the fifth time in recent years that the Justices did not issue a definitive ruling on punitive damages after suggesting that they were troubled by the issue.


J. Gus Liebenow, Scholar on Africa And Professor, 68
J.
Gus Liebenow, professor emeritus of political science at Indiana University and an authority on African societies and politics, died on Monday in a hospital in Bloomington, Ind., where he lived.
He was 68.
Richard Gilbert, a spokesman for the university, said Professor Liebenow died in Bloomington Hospital after a long respiratory illness.


White Separatists Storm South African Negotiations
Hundreds of armed white separatists stormed South Africa's constitutional negotiations this morning, smashing through the plate-glass front of the World Trade Center in an armored truck and holding many of the country's senior politicians under siege to dramatize their bitterness at the approach of black majority rule.
After two hours of swaggering through the convention center just outside Johannesburg, spraying graffiti and throwing punches, the khaki-clad mob dispersed without causing any serious casualties.


U.S. Expresses Dissatisfaction With Mideast Talks
In an attempt to promote progress in the Middle East peace talks, the Clinton Administration said today that it was not satisfied with the discussions and that it might send an envoy to the area to help move things along.
Michael McCurry, the State Department spokesman, said, "We're not yet satisfied that enough progress has been made or that the delegations have the authority to go beyond familiar positions."


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
President Clinton said he saw "quite encouraging" prospects that the House and Senate would blend their versions of the budget plan into a mutually acceptable bill.
But signs were mounting that the budget faces yet another legislative struggle.  [ Page 1. ]
The Supreme Court upheld a $10 million award of punitive damages for a $19,000 injury.
The ruling again dashed the hopes of justice system critics who want limits on punitive damages.  [ 8. ] Markets
The interest rate on 30-year Treasury bonds fell to a record low of 6.70 percent amid forecasts that the rate could drop further.  [ 35. ]
Stocks eked out small gains, held back by concerns about second-quarter earnings and the economy.
The Dow industrial average rose 0.28 point; it declined 3.60 for the week.  [ 36. ]
The dollar plummeted near its postwar low against the yen amid the persistent view that the U.S. favors a strong yen to narrow its trade imbalance.  [ 46. ]
Precious metals futures rose as the dollar weakened and labor talks with South African miners reached an impasse.  [ 46. ]
Companies
The head of Eli Lilly retired suddenly.
Vaughn D. Bryson, who had served as president and chief executive since 1991, was replaced by Randall L. Tobias, an executive at A.T.&amp; T.  [ 35. ]
Two former Blue Cross and Blue Shield employees appeared before a U.S.
Senate panel and gave the first public evidence that the nonprofit insurer had intentionally misled New York State legislators and regulators for years.  [ 1. ]
Shares of 3Com jumped 21 percent in response to record fourth-quarter earnings.
The stock had lost a third of its value a month ago when two analysts lowered their ratings on the company.  [ 35. ]
ESPN was once ridiculed for showing sports 24 hours a day.
Soon it will soon bring 48 hours of sports a day into living rooms, with the introduction of a youth-oriented channel, ESPN2.  [ 35. ]
Northwest Airlines' board adjourned without deciding whether to file for bankruptcy.
Some airline executives who have been through the Chapter 11 wringer offered pithy advice: Don't.  [ 37. ]
Northern Telecom said it expected a second-quarter loss.
The Canadian company is A.T.&amp; T.'s principal competitor in making specialized computers that can direct millions of calls.  [ 37. ]
Campbell Soup announced a shakeup of its senior management, shuffling seven executives in an effort to reorganize and focus on its global businesses.  [ 47. ]
Indiana regulators dealt a setback to the proposed merger of Cincinnati Gas and Electric with PSI Resources Inc.  [ 37. ]
Olsten appointed a new president of its health-care unit, which will soon become the largest U.S. provider of home care.  [ 37. ]
Luciano Pavarotti is helping Parmalat introduce its milk products in the U.S., with a free concert in Central Park.  [ 37. ] International
The chief of the bank set up to help foster free market economies in Eastern Europe resigned amid questions about his spending and his progress toward the bank's goal of promoting capitalism.
Jacques Attali's resignation from the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development followed reports about his use of private jets and his spending on a lavish headquarters.  [ 35. ]
Your Money
People nearing retirement are buying record amounts of variable-rate annuities, which mimic mutual funds but have the added appeal of tax deferral.  [ 33. ]
Brokerage firms are stepping up efforts to keep investors from sharing potentially incriminating records.
Investing.  [ 33. ]
Investors willing to sacrifice some yield for safety have a choice of Government-guaranteed investments.
Strategies.  [ 33. ]  Taxpayers confronted with an I.R.S. audit notice have to decide whether to use hired guns or face the agency alone.
Although most people do not use or need an expert, they should gauge the severity of the problem and consider their options.
Taxes.  [ 34. ]


Olsten Names President of Health-Care Unit
Robert Fusco, who has nurtured the Olsten Corporation's fledgling health-care business since 1985, yesterday was appointed president of the unit, which will become the nation's largest provider of home health care when a $600 million acquisition is completed in July.
While Mr.
Fusco's new responsibility will be to run a business three times the size of his current one, analysts say he is well respected in an industry that often lacks managers with health-care expertise.


Review/Music; Gay Chorus: Joy and Lamentation
The annual Gay Pride Week concert at Carnegie Hall on Tuesday evening by the New York City Gay Men's Chorus was part celebration and part jeremiad, an uncomfortable combination that is inevitable as long as the AIDS epidemic continues.
The celebratory section came first, in the form of the chorus's characteristically ebullient arrangements of popular songs and new works.
The angrier and more depressive side of the program was presented after the intermission, when the choir gave the New York premiere of "Hidden Legacies," a work about AIDS for chorus and a light rock band, with music by Roger Bourland and lyrics by John Hall.


Q &amp; A
Getting Stock Certificates  Q If I buy shares in a company and don't receive the stock certificate, what can I do?
GLORIA G. OKUN, Brooklyn
A When you buy shares through a brokerage firm, you can leave them in the custody of the firm or ask for delivery of the stock certificates.
Many firms are trying to discourage the use of these certificates by imposing charges for delivery.


U.S. Finds 'Cheerleading' In Monitoring of Empire
A United States Senate subcommittee examining Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield criticizes state insurance regulators, who missed even the most obvious signs of trouble, and expensive auditors, who made only the most cursory examinations of the company.
But it says that at the heart of Empire's deep financial crisis is the "gross mismanagement" of the company's own top executives.
The 200-page report offers a devastating portrait of the company that insures 8.2 million people, mostly in New York.
It charges that Empire is losing money because of service so abysmal that some of the biggest institutions in America -- from Fortune 500 companies to universities and labor unions -- have dropped their insurance policies and turning elsewhere, even if they have to pay more.


Review/Dance; Late Balanchine, Without a Letdown
The New York City Ballet's selective survey of George Balanchine's works draws to a close tomorrow with a giant coda, a six-hour program of excerpts that includes guest artists.
The home team, however, has been steadily and splendidly inching the Balanchine Celebration toward a chronological finish.
"Walpurgisnacht Ballet" (1980) and "Mozartiana" (1981) were seen for the first time in the festival on Thursday night at the New York State Theater.
The last chronological entry, this afternoon, will be Balanchine's 1981 version of the Garland Dance from "The Sleeping Beauty."


Women's Coach Signs Major Contract
PAT SUMMITT was beginning to wonder what she needed to get a contract as women's basketball coach at the University of Tennessee.
Now she knows: patience, three national titles and 499 career victories.


Dreamland, N.J.
It's every incumbent politician's dream -- an election-year tax cut.
In New Jersey, Republicans in the State Assembly fancied that a cut in the personal income tax this year would put Gov.
Jim Florio on the spot and, of course, enhance their own popularity.
But the politically astute Governor has pulled a fast one and also lobbied for a tax cut -- not as big as the G.O.P.'s, but still a cut.
A scorecard may help here: Governor Florio, a Democrat, is seeking a second term.
But the huge tax increase he pushed through the then-Democratic Legislature three years ago was so unpopular that a year later the Republicans won veto-proof majorities in both houses.
Thus chastened, Mr.
Florio is unlikely to force another showdown on taxes anytime soon.


Eileen Nic, 42, Writer Against Toxic Hazards
Eileen Nic, a lobbyist on environmental and health issues and longtime consultant to Consumers Union, died on Monday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 42.
The cause was brain cancer, said Robbin Blaine, a colleague at Consumers Union, the nonprofit organization that publishes the magazine Consumer Reports.


He Shoots, He Scores! (In 2 Languages!)
French-Canadian hockey stars have sometimes struggled to coexist in the National Hockey League with their English-speaking teammates.
The language and cultural barriers often extend to their relationships with the news media and the public.
Mario Lemieux of the Pittsburgh Penguins, fluently bilingual and currently the best player in the game, is wary of discussing his hockey skills and the crises of his private life.
Gentlemanly Pierre Turgeon, the blooming virtuoso of the Islanders, gets tongue-tied in two languages when talking about his talents: He labors even to come up with cliches.


President Finally Speaks To Man Claiming Kinship
After almost a week of getting their wires crossed, President Clinton finally spoke by telephone today with the California man who says he is Mr.
Clinton's half-brother.
But getting a White House account of the exchange was something like pulling teeth.
The press office issued only a terse three-sentence statement reporting that a 15-minute conversation had taken place.
It said the two men agreed to meet "at some point in the future."


CHRONICLE
For most newlyweds, a honeymoon is an escape from reality before they settle down to the responsibilities of everyday life.
For CROWN PRINCE NARUHITO, 33, heir to Japan's Chrysanthemum Throne, and CROWN PRINCESS MASAKO, 29, the Harvard and Oxford-educated former diplomat, it means purification rituals, offerings to goddesses, visits to burial grounds and separate bedrooms.
The couple arrived at the town of Ise by train yesterday to begin their first trip outside of Tokyo since their wedding on June 9, The Associated Press reported.
Palace officials emphasized that the trip was strictly business.


CLINTON NOMINEE DEFENDS HIMSELF
President Clinton's choice to head the National Endowment for the Humanities, who has been attacked by conservatives as an apostle of "political correctness," told a Senate committee today that he now believed that campus codes to restrict offensive speech were a mistake.
The nominee, Sheldon Hackney, president of the University of Pennsylvania, denounced political correctness, saying that "it would be a serious problem if it were to capture a campus."


Three Deaths: A Mother, a Daughter, the Truth; After Separate Funerals, Bitter Custody Battle Continues to Divide Family and Friends
Marcia Rimland and her 4-year-old daughter, Abigail, died together last week, but they were buried far apart in a final act that seemed to epitomize the family's stormy and tattered existence.
Ms.
Rimland, a 45-year-old matrimonial lawyer, took her own life and that of her daughter around midnight on June 15 by running the car engine inside her garage after looping a rubber hose from the tailpipe into the car window.
In a note she left behind she said she could no longer abide her husband's sexual abuse of her daughter, even though a court had found no substance to that charge.
Groping for Answers
Ms.
Rimland's awful act has left those who knew her groping for an explanation.
Her husband's friends paint her as an unstable, ruthless woman who would stop at nothing to keep him from their daughter.
But her many champions describe her as a loving mother who despaired of any other means of protecting her child.
The mother was buried by a Reform rabbi under a searing sun in a cemetery in Elmont, L.I.
Her two children from an earlier marriage, Jason Rimland, 23, and Marisa Rimland, 19, leaned against each other sobbing inconsolably.
An outpouring of mourners proclaimed her death another injustice of a family court system that had permitted the father, Arie Adler, to resume unsupervised visits.
Abigail, a bubbly girl who loved to sing and dance to Disney songs, was laid to rest after sundown in a small cemetery in Monsey, N.Y., that belongs to the largely Hasidic community to which her father had begun to cleave.
Car headlights had to illuminate the grave so that mourners could aim their fistfuls of dirt.
Jason and Marisa were there, even though Mr.
Adler had won the battle to bury Abigail in a cemetery of his choosing.
The separate funerals were the culmination of a two-year custody fight that has not died even with Abigail's death.
It shows how fierce and irrational battles over children can get, and how difficult it is for Family Courts to sort out the truth.
The case has galvanized several groups that feel Family Court judges are biased against women, insensitive to sexual abuse and overly secretive and insular.
However, the father's defenders see it as another example of a national hysteria over child abuse that has led to fabrication of destructive charges in a blind fury over other grievances.
But overriding any ideological issues were the consuming passions of the parents, whose bitterness lives on in their survivors.
Jason and Marisa originally wanted their mother and half sister cremated, but the Orthodox community, which opposes cremation, sent a Hatzolah ambulance worker to the coroner's officer to safeguard Abigail's body.
Jason and Marisa have already cleaned out Abigail's toys and dolls from her room in a large ranch house here to keep them from the father.
"The family doesn't let the living live in peace and it doesn't let the dead die in peace," said Anne Selinger, who put Mr.
Adler up in her family's home.
Extreme Visions
The story of Abigail's parents, like that of many custody fights, is woven of extreme visions.
Her family and supporters see Marcia Rimland as a strong, devoted mother who snuffed out her daughter's life when she felt she had no other way to protect her.
As a lawyer, Marisa said, her mother knew that appealing the Family Court decision could take a year, during which visits she considered inadequately supervised would continue.
"She would rather Abigail not be there than to have Abigail hurt," Marisa said.
"She loved her more than life."
"She felt cornered," said her sister-in-law, Deanna Rimland.
"She felt she had no more options."
But Mrs.
Selinger and leaders of the Orthodox community around Monsey see her as an unstable, calculating and litigious woman who was so obsessed with excluding her husband that she was willing to brainwash Abigail into believing she was being molested.
According to Mrs.
Selinger, Ms.
Rimland had always kept her children apart from her estranged husbands.
For many years, Mrs.
Selinger said, Ms.
Rimland had influenced Marisa and Jason to shun their father, Leonard Cohen, who died in January.
Similarly, Ms.
Selinger said, she made sure Arie Adler would never see Abigail.
"She couldn't do it through the court system so she did it by taking her life and her daughter's life," Mrs.
Selinger said.
Views of the 38-year-old Mr.
Adler are similarly stark.
Mrs.
Selinger sees only an affectionate father who tried to protect a daughter who cherished him against a ruthless wife.
But the Rimland supporters condemn him as a cold, selfish man who inspired tantrums of fear in his helpless daughter and took advantage of her.
Mr.
Adler's lawyer, Howard M. Gurock, denies that his client ever abused Abigail and accuses the mothert of brainwashing the child into making the charges.
The final act was played out swiftly.
On June 14, Judge William P. Warren of Family Court in Rockland ruled that the preponderance of evidence did not indicate that Mr.
Adler had abused his daughter.
A court-appointed social worker had testified that Abigail's "presentation is entirely consistent with that of a sexually abused child." But other witnesses found significant inconsistencies, and Mr.
Adler's Lubavitcher hosts, Mrs.
Selinger and her husband, Craig, said they had seen only a warm relationship whenever father and daughter stayed over.
The judge, concluding that the tales of abuse were the result of prompting by the mother, ordered a resumption of unsupervised visits in two days.
Desperate, Ms.
Adler drove to the Appellate Division in Brooklyn on Tuesday and won what some felt was a concession.
The Selingers would supervise the visits.
But Ms.
Rimland felt that the Selingers were too close to her estranged husband.
That night she wrote a note to her older children on a piece of memo paper and led her daughter to her red Toyota.
"You are my children and I love you more than myself," said the note that Jason found in the car.
"Abigail is also my child. I cannot knowingly allow her to be sexually abused. I have no choice. I hope you understand. Be kind to each other. I'm sorry I have to leave you alone. Love forever. Mom." Met Six Years Ago
Marcia and Arie met at a party six years ago.
He was a broad-shouldered Israeli immigrant with gold-rimmed glasses who was studying electrical engineering.
She was a small, slender woman with intense eyes who had been raised as a furrier's daughter in the Bronx.
She had two teen-age children from an unhappy first marriage and was fashioning a career as a lawyer.
They married in September 1988, but quarreled regularly, particularly with the arrival of Abigail on June 3, 1989.
Their disputes turned so violent that the police were called more than half a dozen times.
By August 1991, Mr.
Adler moved out, eventually living as a boarder in Hasidic homes, and Ms.
Rimland sued for divorce.
One issue dividing them was Abigail's religious upbringing.
Ms.
Rimland disregarded most Jewish observance, but Mr.
Adler, who once had been willing to work on Yom Kippur, began following the Orthodox path of colleagues at International Business Machines who gave him rides to work, though he did not adhere to any particular sect.
He wanted his daughter, who called him Abba, the Hebrew word for father, to eat kosher food and he forbade any phone calls on the Sabbath.
"He fills her head with Chasidic dogma," Ms.
Rimland wrote in one of several briefs she filed as her own lawyer.
Sole Custody to the Mother
Judge Warren awarded Ms.
Rimland sole custody in April 1992.
He did not give credence to Ms.
Rimland's warnings that Mr.
Adler was planning to abduct Abigail to Israel and he permitted Abigail to stay with Mr.
Adler every other weekend.
Mr.
Adler never fled to Israel, but he did fail to make support payments and was jailed for 31 days last year.
Mrs.
Selinger blamed his incarceration on Ms.
Rimland's excessive demands for money, which, she said, had impoverished Mr.
Adler.
In September 1992, Ms.
Rimland filed a brief that described what she charged was a pattern of sexual abuse.
She said she began to notice that her daughter became hysterical whenever she was dropped off for an overnight visit.
"She would scream and hold on to me so tight that I literally would have to pry her arms and legs from me," Mr.
Rimland wrote, adding that she always encouraged Abigail to go with her father.
She said she also noticed that her daughter's toilet training began to regress and that she often masturbated.
Ms.
Rimland called this to the attention of officials at the county's Child Protection Services, who wondered whether Abigail was being abused.
That was the first time she suspected that possibility, Ms.
Rimland said.
So she asked Abigail what her father wore when she slept over.
She said Abigail told her he wore nothing but an undershirt and repeatedly touched her genital area.
About the same time last summer, Cherri Varvaro, who ran a home day care center that Abigail attended, took a workshop on abused children and decided that Abigail exhibited the classic behaviors of abuse.
She asked Abigail and was told that her father sometimes "tickled" her genitals.
Ms.
Varvaro alerted Ms.
Rimland and Child Protection Services in August.
Their complaints led to an investigation by the County Attorney.
During the nine months until his decision, the judge insisted that Abigail's visits with Mr.
Adler be supervised.
The judge appointed Dr.
Virginia C. Strand, a clinical social worker, to interview Abigail and decide whether abuse had occurred.
Dr.
Strand reported in November that Abigail "demonstrated a hypervigilant attitude commonly seen in abused children and/or children who witness domestic violence." She said Abigail, with no coaxing, volunteered that her father had penetrated her with his fingers and penis.
But Judge Warren, who has been on the bench five years, said in an interview that he discounted much of Dr.
Strand's report because "Strand never considered the possibility of prompting by the mother." Indeed, he said, one of several social workers monitoring the case had asked Abigail whether anyone had told her to say such things about her father and Abigail had replied, "Mommy told me to say this."
"I did not find the mother credible," Judge Warren said.
More convincing to Judge Warren was Mrs.
Selinger, the mother of four young daughters and a son, who testified in hearings in February and March that Abigail and Mr.
Adler slept in separate beds in a basement playroom and that she saw only affectionate relations.
It was the mother whom Abigail did not want to see, Mrs.
Selinger testified, describing how Abigail became hysterical when Ms.
Rimland phoned.
"Do you think I as a mother with small children would allow something like this to happen in my house?" Mrs.
Selinger said of the abuse charges.
By the time of the hearings, the custody cases had so consumed Ms.
Rimland and Mr.
Adler that both lost their jobs.


Beliefs
Although Kathryn Bishop teaches at a Roman Catholic university, she used to attach little importance to its religious identity.
A few weeks ago, the young assistant professor of special education at the University of San Diego changed her mind.
"Now I'm proud to be at a Catholic university," she said.


Steam-Pipe Rupture Sprays Asbestos in Midtown
A steam pipe burst yesterday on West 33d Street between Fifth Avenue and Broadway in Manhattan, contaminating the immediate area with asbestos and snarling traffic in midtown, the police said.
No one was injured when the underground Con Edison pipe burst at 11:15 A.M., the police said.
The rupture occurred when a backhoe accidentally struck the 20-inch steam main during repairs, sending a plume of steam 60 feet into the air.


Oppenheimer &amp; Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


7 Bodies of Asian Immigrants Unidentified After 3 Weeks
Nearly three weeks after a ship crammed with Chinese immigrants ran aground off Queens, 7 of the 10 bodies of those who perished trying to swim ashore are still unidentified.
Community organizations, trying to help families concerned that a relative may be among the victims, complain that the Immigration and Naturalization Service has been unwilling to release photographs or other vital information needed to identify the bodies and bury them properly.


2 Tell Subcommittee Insurer Altered Data In Order to Mislead
Two former employees of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield appeared before a United States Senate subcommittee today and gave the first public evidence that the nation's largest nonprofit health insurer intentionally misled the New York State Legislature and Insurance Department for years.
The witnesses said they were told by Empire's chief financial officer that loss figures sent to the state had been "manipulated" to make them "politically correct." They said they were transferred from the company's executive suite after discovering that Empire kept two sets of books.
And one said that Empire officials joked about the two sets of numbers at a party.


Physicians Clinical Laboratory Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Corruption Scandal Involving Minister Threatens Rabin's Cabinet
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin, who in nearly a year in office has endured more perils than Pauline, found his Government's stability called into question once again this week with the looming indictment of his Interior Minister on corruption charges.
Although there seems scant chance that the Rabin Government will fall, the fault lines that the corruption scandal creates in his coalition could hurt his ability to negotiate peace agreements with the Palestinians and neighboring Arab countries.


Rights Forum Ends in Call For a Greater Role by U.N.
After dire predictions that it could mark a serious setback for the human rights movement, a World Conference on Human Rights ended on a surprisingly optimistic note tonight as delegates called on the United Nations to play a larger role in denouncing abuses.
Western delegations were particularly pleased that, after lengthy bargaining, the conference endorsed an American proposal for the creation of a new post of High Commissioner on Human Rights.


Facing the I.R.S. Audit: When to Get an Expert
WHEN an audit notice arrives from the Internal Revenue Service, taxpayers have to decide yet again whether to use hired guns or face the agency alone.
Although most people do not use or need an expert during an audit, they should gauge the severity of the problem and consider their options.


The Nomads of Albany
Talk about party animals.
Night after night, nomadic herds of Albany lobbyists can be seen wandering from one campaign fund-raiser to the next.
They keep to a tightly packed itinerary that may include as many as eight different events on some nights when the State Legislature is in town.
It's not the hors d'oeuvres the lobbyists are after, reports Kevin Sack of The Times.
Like the crowd on the Congressional fund-raising circuit, the Albany party-hoppers are out to influence legislation.
Their nocturnal rounds underscore a recent change for the worse in the already seamy political culture of the New York State Legislature -- and the critical need for reform.


Diplomacy Can Disarm North Korea
North Korea hasn't built nuclear arms, but its ambitions are worrisome.
Washington has been coaxing it to remain in the community of non-nuclear nations.
Patient and persistent diplomacy has already borne fruit: the North recently said it would "suspend" its decision to renounce the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
The next step is to gain access to all the North's nuclear sites.
That will require more coaxing when talks between the two nations resume Monday.
The Nonproliferation Treaty and a 1991 agreement with South Korea oblige Pyongyang to allow routine and special inspections by the International Atomic Energy Agency and to arrange mutual North-South inspections.
The North-South agreement also prohibits Pyongyang from reprocessing spent nuclear fuel into bomb-making plutonium.


ESPN Adding Channel and Attitude
If the sheer volume of sports on television has reached the saturation point, Steve Bornstein will not acknowledge it.
The president of ESPN Inc. is so confident of the continued insatiability of sports viewers that he has aggressively expanded the cable sports network's breadth overseas, entered the pay-per-view realm and signed a joint venture with Sony to make home videos.
And in the biggest gamble since ESPN's debut in 1979, Mr.
Bornstein will test how much more action and information viewers can take starting Nov. 2, with the introduction of the youth-oriented ESPN2.
Thus, ESPN, once ridiculed for showing sports 24 hours a day, will soon bring 48 hours of sports a day into America's living rooms.


Review/Dance; Pilobolus Demonstrates How Varied Is Its Variety
Pilobolus unveiled a lavish array of dances on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater, rather like a street merchant setting out bright-colored wares.
At their best, Pilobolus dances have a wonderfully rich simplicity.
But there was something to enjoy even in the less impressive pieces on this second program of the company's four-week engagement.
The evening opened with "Untitled," a 1975 work created by Pilobolus's original performers -- Robby Barnett, Alison Chase, Martha Clarke, Moses Pendleton, Michael Tracy and Jonathan Wolken -- as many of the company's dances are.
"Untitled" is the Pilobolus classic in which two women repeatedly rise to twice their height, then subside from that towering perspective.
On an idyllic Edwardian picnic together, they encounter two dandies, have children, then settle back for a spell on dandy rocking chairs.
One can watch the dance as magical shape-play and illusion or as social commentary.
The fine cast caught every nuance.


European Bank Chief Quits Amid Criticism of Spending
The chief executive of the bank set up just two years ago to help foster free market economies in Eastern Europe resigned today amid mounting questions about his spending of taxpayer money and his progress toward the bank's goal of promoting capitalism in the former Soviet bloc.
The resignation of Jacques Attali as president of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development came after months of news reports about his use of expensive private jets and his spending on a lavish new headquarters building here, and just weeks before the release of an internal audit report that is expected to be highly critical of his management.
The departure of Mr.
Attali, a 49-year-old former aide to President Francois Mitterrand of France, should end a storm of bad publicity and internal bickering at the institution.
But since the bank did not name a successor it raises a new question about a successor at a time when there are many concerns about the policies of the bank -- including such basic issues as whether it can effectively make loans on tough commercial terms to fledgling enterprises in formerly Communist countries, as its charter requires it to do.
Some officials said Mr.
Attali's departure would lead to a broad reappraisal of the operations of the bank in an effort to overcome its slow start.


Hamlin Out of the Rough And on Top of Her Game
Shelley Hamlin was in the interview room after the first round of the $450,000 ShopRite L.P.G.A.
Classic today.
She had been there before, but not exactly like this.
"This is the first time I've been invited into the press room to talk about anything other than cancer," Hamlin said, after shooting a four-under-par 67 at the Greate Bay Country Club to share the first-round lead with Brandie Burton and Anne-Marie Palli, the defending champion.


Clinton Introduces the First Federal AIDS Coordinator


Miami Names an Athletic Director
The University of Miami yesterday named its top lawyer as its new athletic director.
PAUL DEE, who had been serving as interim director of intercollegiate athletics for the second time, said one of his top priorities would be the continued development of the Big East Conference.


Philharmonic Concerts, Outdoors and Free
The New York Philharmonic will open its 29th season of free concerts in the parks on Monday with a program of works by Mozart ("Eine Kleine Nachtmusik"), Rossini ("William Tell" overture) and Mussorgsky ("Pictures at an Exhibition").
The concert, directed by the orchestra's assistant conductor, Sam Wong, will end with a fireworks display.
The program is to be repeated at Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx on Tuesday; Great Kills Park, S.I., on July 6; Prospect Park, Brooklyn, on July 8; Cunningham Park, Jamaica, Queens, on July 9, and Heckscher State Park, East Islip, L.I., on July 10.


It's a Long Way Down....


Newnan Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


COMPANY BRIEFS
ARMCO INC., Parsippany, N.J., conditionally approved a $100 million project to upgrade its Empire-Detroit plant in Mansfield, Ohio, to manufacture thinner slabs of carbon steel and some grades of stainless and electrical steels.
IRT PROPERTY CO., Atlanta, said it would buy two Florida shopping centers for $11 million from partnerships controlled by Sembler Co.
NUI CORP., Bedminster, N.J., said it would purchase Pennsylvania &amp; Southern Gas Co. for $17 million in stock pending approval by state regulators.
SOUTHTRUST CORP., Birmingham, Ala., signed a definitive agreement to buy BMR Financial Group Inc. for $16.5 million in cash.


CLINTON NOMINEE DEFENDS HIMSELF
President Clinton's choice to head the National Endowment for the Humanities, who has been attacked by conservatives as an apostle of "political correctness," told a Senate committee today that he now believed that campus codes to restrict offensive speech were a mistake.
The nominee, Sheldon Hackney, president of the University of Pennsylvania, denounced political correctness, saying that "it would be a serious problem if it were to capture a campus."


Ralph Taylor, 89, 50-Year Co-Owner Of Pharmacy Chain
Ralph Taylor, a pharmacist who for half a century was co-owner and manager of Casswell-Massey Company, the oldest apothecary business in the country, died on Thursday at Morristown (N.J.) Memorial Hospital.
He was 89 and lived in Hallandale, Fla., and Manhattan.
His daughter, Jo Taylor Marshall, said the cause was a stroke.


Kim Campbell Takes Oath As Canada's Prime Minister
Under a portrait of Queen Victoria, Kim Campbell was sworn in today as the first woman to head the Canadian Government.
She took her first official step as the country's 19th Prime Minister by announcing a slimmed-down Cabinet, the smallest in 20 years.
The 46-year-old former Vancouver lawyer, who has promised "to do politics differently" to try to be more responsive to the people, named a 24-member Cabinet, to replace 34 ministers under Brian Mulroney.


William F. Prigge, 77, A Travel Executive
William F. Prigge, a travel executive and a leader in his industry, died on Wednesday at his home in Greenwich, Conn.
He was 77.
The cause was a stroke, his family said.


INSIDE
South Africa Talks Disrupted
Hundreds of armed white separatists stormed South Africa's constitutional talks, then dispersed without causing serious casualties.
Page 3.
Clinton Warns Iraq Over U.N.
President Clinton warned Iraq that its refusal to allow United Nations inspectors at missile test sites could have serious consequences.
Page 4.
A Maker of Lists, and Bombs
Federal investigators believe the person who sent bombs to two professors is an obsessive-compulsive white man reared near Chicago.
Page 6. 9 Principals Are Removed
New York's Schools Chancellor removed nine principals in a district plagued by corruption.
Page 21.


Tranzonic Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Afghan War's Web Encircles A Militant Islamic Movement
A widening skein of relationships and travels, from Afghan war fervor to New York tenement life, is emerging as investigators track the disparate lives of the suspects arrested in the latest plot to bomb and terrorize New York City.
On East Eighth Street in lower Manhattan, neighbors yesterday remembered one of the suspects, Tarig El-Hassan, as a resident of an apartment building busy with households of Muslim militants who repeatedly journeyed back and forth to that distant combat viewed by Islamic fundamentalists as a holy war.
Some bragged of their exploits as bomb makers in the war and as supporters of the militant Islamic movement in America, frightened neighbors related.


Three Concerts of Bach Organ Music Are Planned
Three concerts of organ music by J. S. Bach are planned on Wednesdays at St.
Michael's Church, Amsterdam Avenue at 99th Street, Manhattan.
The series, "Bach on the von Beckerath Organ," starts on Wednesday with a recital by Robert Barrows, the music director at the church.
The program is to include two Toccatas and Fugues in D minor, two Preludes and Fugues in C and selected Chorale Preludes.


New Attack on Jordan Timed for King's Visit
To the Editor:
There was nothing new in "Report Describes Jordan's Aid to Iraq During War" (news article, June 17).


Holyfield Camp Is Looking Ahead
Litigants and lawyers, heavyweights and lightweights, perennial enemies and friends by necessity gathered today.
That can only mean a big fight looms.
Depending on whose attorney one speaks to, Saturday night's Evander Holyfield-Alex Stewart 12-rounder is a heavyweight championship elimination, or just another example of a boxing monopoly.


So Look Who's a Goalie For the Rangers: Healy
Two former Islander goalies were the featured attractions today at the National Hockey League congress.
The one who is still active, Glenn Healy, ended up with the Rangers after a series of drafts and a trade.
The one who is retired, Billy Smith, was elected to the Hall of Fame.
Healy, an Islander star this past spring as the team unexpectedly reached the third round of the Stanley Cup playoffs, was chosen by the new Anaheim Mighty Ducks on Thursday in the first phase of the expansion draft.
In the secondary phase this afternoon, he was selected by the Tampa Bay Lightning.
But Tampa quickly traded Healy to the Rangers for a third-round pick in Saturday's entry draft of amateurs.


Misdeeds of Brokers Held Close to the Vest
LAST year, arbitrators awarded $982,000 to Robert Flanagan and two other customers of Prudential Securities, primarily over their losses from its energy investment partnerships.
The firm demanded confidentiality for the documents it turned over, the investors' lawyer said, but he loudly and successfully objected.
Since then, he said, those documents have helped other investors win millions of dollars.
Brokerage firms are stepping up their efforts to keep investors from sharing potentially incriminating records, with each other or the press.
"They don't want the public to learn about their misdeeds," said Stuart C. Goldberg, the Austin, Tex., lawyer who represented several customers of Prudential-Bache, as it was then known.
"There is no other reason a brokerage firm wants a confidentiality order."


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.93
3.02
3.65
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.07
3.09
3.62
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.17
3.18
3.71
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.46
5.50
6.72
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.70
6.73
7.77
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.41
7.44
8.69
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.77
5.77
6.51
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


The Small-Yield and Sound-Sleep School of Investment
Some investors could not care less about stocks, options or even mutual funds.
They want complete safety -- a Federal Government guarantee -- and are willing to sacrifice some yield to get it.
Among these investments, the best bet is Treasury securities, with interest rates at 3.35 for one-year bills and yields at 5.10 for five-year notes.
"I recommend this alternative for those seeking the highest quality, lowest-risk alternative," said Lewis J. Altfest, president of L. J. Altfest &amp; Company, New York financial planners.


Equivalency Diploma Still Has Value
To the Editor:
Your June 15 article questioning the value of the General Education Development diploma, especially relating to New York City, misses or misstates several salient points.


Bed Bath &amp; Beyond Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Regents Keep TV Program Out of Public Schools
The New York State Board of Regents reaffirmed its ban against a nationwide satellite news program for schoolchildren in public classrooms today, asserting that the 2 minutes of commercials in the 12-minute program treat students as "commodities to be exploited."
The 14-to-1 vote means New York remains the only state to have successfully prohibited public schools from using the program, Channel One.
Channel One is shown in about 100 private schools in New York State.


What Atlanta Braves Share With Boss Tweed
To the Editor:
"A Noble Loser" (editorial, June 14) commiserated with the 21st consecutive loss by Anthony Young, the New York Mets pitcher, and explained: "He is closing steadily on the major league mark of 23, set in 1910-11 by Cliff Curtis of the old (and legendarily inept) Boston Braves."


JUSTICES INCREASE WORKERS' BURDEN IN JOB-BIAS CASES
Ruling in an important civil rights case, a divided Supreme Court today made it substantially harder for employees to prove they suffered discrimination on the job.
Until now, a worker could often win a discrimination case by showing that the employer gave the court a dishonest explanation for a dismissal or other action that appeared discriminatory.


Intersystems Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


PANEL ON ECOLOGY SHOWING PROGRESS
The commission created to translate the environmental accords of last year's Earth Summit into action wrapped up its first substantive session on an upbeat note today, with tension between rich countries and poor ones uncommonly relaxed and the United States winning praise for leading a new effort to bridge the gap between North and South.
At a high-level ministerial session on Thursday, the United States announced that it was joining with Colombia, the current head of the 129 developing countries calling themselves the Group of 77, in a special effort over the next year to work out a vital issue that has divided the global haves and have-nots: how technology aimed at improving the environment should be transferred to the developing nations.


Suns Bid Farewell to Chambers
The Phoenix Suns will not exercise their option on TOM CHAMBERS, ending the four-time All-Star's career with the team.
Suns Owner JERRY COLANGELO announced the decision yesterday after speaking with Chambers by telephone the night before.
Chambers left Wednesday for a vacation in Hawaii.


Review/Jazz; Jarrett Brings Out His Romantic Streak And Runs With It
Midway in the second half of his "Standards" concert at Carnegie Hall on Thursday evening, the pianist Keith Jarrett delivered a breathtaking performance of "I Thought About You" that embodied everything people love most about his music.
For all of his explorations into the classical repertory and his excursions into minimalism and meditational music, the side of Mr.
Jarrett that is most appreciated is the part that is a disciple of Bill Evans.
As Evans did, Mr.
Jarrett has an intensely romantic streak and the improvisational skill to extrude a pop melody into cascading runs whose quicksilver chromatic harmonies change almost faster than the ear can follow.


Egyptian Was Informer, Officials Say
The informer who helped the Federal Bureau of Investigation penetrate an apparent plot to bomb targets throughout New York City is a 43-year-old former officer of the Egyptian military from the inner circle of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, senior law-enforcement officials and Muslims close to the Egyptian cleric said.
The muscular, bearded man, who called himself Emad Salem, acted as an occasional translator and bodyguard for the sheik and made himself available to reporters after the bombing of the World Trade Center in February.
Last week, when the cleric called a news conference in Jersey City to denounce the Egyptian Government, Mr.
Salem frisked reporters, and Siddig Ibrahim Siddig Ali, who the authorities say is the leader of the bomb plot, translated from Arabic to English.
Central to Arrests
The authorities said Mr.
Salem was central to the arrests of the accused plotters, luring them to make statements that were recorded, helping to test explosives and even renting the house in Jamaica, Queens, where the suspects are accused of mixing the fertilizer and fuel for bombs.
The Queens building was wiretapped by the F.B.I.


Joy Technologies reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Yichang Journal; Now Russians Wait on the Chinese
To promote international cultural exchanges, the restaurant manager explained with a straight face, she allows Chinese customers to hug the restaurant's Russian hostesses.
"They can hug, because that is a foreign custom," said Meng Qingmin, one of a wave of Chinese restaurateurs who hire young Russian women to chat with and snuggle up to male diners.
"It's a foreign habit, and we want the girls to be at ease and feel able to follow their foreign customs."


Nigerian Who Voided Vote Offers Democracy
Nigeria's military leader, Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida, insisted today that a democratically elected government would be installed as scheduled in August, despite his annulment of presidential elections held this month.
General Babangida, speaking to reporters after a meeting of senior military and police officers in Nigeria's capital, Abuja, said he would explain his plans in a speech to the nation on Saturday.
The speech was originally scheduled for tonight.


No Headline
You just knew that everybody coming through had the exact same thing on their mind.
Every last one of them.
Some asked me if things were safe, sort of joking.
But even those who kept quiet, you knew they were thinking about the bombs. -- GAZETTA CULBRETH, a toll collector at the Lincoln Tunnel.  [ 22:5. ]


Large Punitive Award Upheld
The Court upheld a $10 million award of punitive damages for a $19,000 injury but made no definitive ruling on such awards.
Page 8.


Hugh V. Cochrane, Retail Executive, 60
Hugh V. Cochrane, a retired retailing executive who was the chief financial officer of Saks Fifth Avenue and Gimbels, died on Wednesday at his home in Norwalk, Conn.
He was 60.
Mr.
Cochrane began his business career at the Touche, Ross accounting firm, then entered retailing as the controller of Stewart's department store in Baltimore.
Later he became the treasurer of the Joseph Horne Company in Pittsburgh, then in 1974 joined Saks.


Megatest Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Panel Is Divided on Waiver For Sale of Post to Murdoch
Rupert Murdoch's bid to buy The New York Post hung in the balance today, as the battle lines hardened at the Federal Communications Commission between supporters and opponents of his request for a waiver he needs to complete the deal.
The acting chairman of the commission, James H. Quello, came out strongly in support of Mr.
Murdoch but said the other two voting commissioners were nowhere near agreement on the issue.


Bridge
Playoffs to determine the United States teams in the 1993 world championships in Chile in September continued here today.
In the open final, after 32 deals of a scheduled 128, the Spingold team, including Michael Becker of Tenafly, N.J., led the Vanderbilt team, including Neil Chambers of Schenectady, N.Y., by 59 imps.
In semifinal play last night, Spingold won by 5 imps against a team from Chicago, while Vanderbilt coasted to a 42-imp win against the Reisinger team, including David Berkowitz, Larry Cohen and Sam Lev from the New York area.
In the playoff between the losers, Chicago led Reisinger by 8.


Panel Is Divided on Waiver For Sale of Post to Murdoch
Rupert Murdoch's bid to buy The New York Post hung in the balance today, as the battle lines hardened at the Federal Communications Commission between supporters and opponents of his request for a waiver he needs to complete the deal.
The acting chairman of the commission, James H. Quello, came out strongly in support of Mr.
Murdoch but said the other two voting commissioners were nowhere near agreement on the issue.


Seeking to Change U.S. Tastes; Italian Company Sings The Praises of UHT Milk
Thirty-two years ago, executives of an Italian food company took note of the poor quality of home refrigerators in Europe and decided to develop a line of milk that could be stored for months without spoiling.
This year, the company, Parmalat Finanziaria S.p.A. of Milan, expects to improve total sales by 67 percent over last year, to $2 billion.
Ruggero Peroni, president of Parmalat U.S.A., said 57 percent of that increase would come from milk products, keeping Parmalat as the world's largest maker of UHT milk -- the kind that is pasteurized at ultrahigh temperatures and sealed in cartons for a shelf life of six months or more.


Mego Financial reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Loss Is Seen By Northern Telecom
Northern Telecom of Canada, A.T.&amp; T.'s principal competitor in making the specialized computers that can direct millions of telephone calls, said yesterday that it expected to report a second-quarter loss.
Moreover, because the poor outlook is expected to continue into the second half, the company said it expected that 1993 earnings would be significantly below those of 1992.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Pavin Grabs a 2-Stroke Lead  Corey Pavin, who lost in a playoff to Billy Ray Brown two years ago, used precise iron shots and ideal morning conditions to shoot a five-under-par 65 yesterday and take a two-stroke lead midway through the Greater Hartford Open in Cromwell, Conn.
Wind gusting to 20 miles an hour yesterday afternoon kept later starters from making a strong run at Pavin, who completed 36 holes at 132, eight-under for two rounds over the 6,280-yard Tournament Players Club at River Highlands.
Keith Clearwater shot 68 to gain a share of second place at 134 with Mike Springer.
The first-round co-leaders, Roger Maltbie and Craig Stadler, had wind problems, each shooting 71 to drop to four-under.
Lanny Wadkins failed in an attempt to become the first repeat champion of the Hartford, shooting a 73 for 147 and missing the cut.
A two-time Hartford winner, Paul Azinger, was 12-over after a 77. (AP) Thunderstorm Halts Senior Players Championship: Jim Colbert and Rocky Thompson were in the clubhouse at 5-under-par 139 when a thunderstorm halted yesterday's second round of the Senior Players Championship in Dearborn, Mich.
Thompson shot a one-under 71 and Colbert matched par at 72.
An inch of rain fell in an hour on the TPC of Michigan golf course, and two hours later officials decided they couldn't get the bunkers into playable condition in time to complete the second round.
Thirty-nine players, half the field, faced a restart early this morning to complete the second round.
When the horn sounded to halt play, first-round co-leader Jim Albus was six-under after 13 holes and Bob Charles, the other first-round leader, was four-under after 12 holes.
Jack Nicklaus, who started the day one shot off the lead, was at five-under after nine holes.
"I'm looking at a 20-foot putt for par when I go back out to finish the 10th," Nicklaus said.
"I'm not real sure I want to handle that at 6:30 in the morning." Brian Henning, a rules official for the senior tour, said second-round play would be completed by 9 A.M. today.
Third-round play would begin at 9:30 A.M. (AP) YACHT RACING  Merrythought Wins at Block Island


Russia Cuts Gas Supply To Estonia in a Protest
Russia halted deliveries of natural gas to the Baltic state of Estonia today in a move seen as retribution for a new Estonian residency law condemned by Moscow as a form of ethnic "apartheid."
Although Russian officials said the gas cutoff was because of a backlog of unpaid debts, the Estonian Prime Minister, Mart Laar, called the move a grave act that could lead to the closing of local factories, according to the news agency Baltfax.


Woosnam Charged With Drunken Driving
The British golfer IAN WOOSNAM was arrested and charged with drunken driving after crashing his car into a field in western England on Thursday night, the police said yesterday.
They said Woosnam, the 1991 United States Masters champion and a Ryder Cup player, gave a positive Breathalyzer reading after the accident, in which his wife, GLENDRYTH, suffered rib injuries.


A Gift and a Challenge
The billionaire Walter Annenberg is donating $365 million, through his family foundation, to three universities and the prep school he attended -- the largest one-time donation to private education in the nation's history.
He also issued a timely challenge: "I'm interested in sending word to others who have sizable foundations that now is the time to stop talking and act."
History suggests that those who follow his generous example are likely to give to private institutions.
But future donors might also remember the needs of public institutions.


No Decision At Northwest On Chapter 11
As Northwest Airlines' board adjourned in Minneapolis yesterday without deciding whether to file for bankruptcy, airline executives who have been through the Chapter 11 wringer offered some pithy advice: Don't.
"Filing a Chapter 11 is a very, very serious matter, not a step you take if there's any other alternative," said Martin Shugrue, the former Pan American and Continental executive who was trustee for Eastern Airlines.
"You lose control over your own destiny to the bankruptcy court."


Transactions
Baseball  American League
SEATTLE MARINERS -- Activated Chris Bosio, pitcher, from the 15-day disabled list.
Optioned Jim Converse, pitcher, to Calgary of the Pacific Coast League.
National League
FLORIDA MARLINS -- Optioned Mitch Lyden, catcher, to Edmonton of the Pacific Coast League.
Designated Junior Felix, outfielder, for assignment.


Budget Vote Drives Lautenberg to Unfamiliar Side
President Clinton twisted his arm for more than an hour.
Vice President Al Gore weighed in.
And well into the early morning hours, senior Democrats on the Senate Finance Committee urged him to think of the party's best interests.
But "when all was said and done," Senator Frank R. Lautenberg said, "I could not bring myself to vote for a package that was so detrimental to New Jersey's interests." So Mr.
Lautenberg, the junior Democratic Senator from New Jersey, joined some of his party's most conservative senators today to vote against the Democrats' budget package.


LDB Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Bosnian Leader Resists Pressure to Negotiate on Partition Plan
The Serbian-Croatian proposal to partition Bosnia and Herzegovina into three loosely confederated ethnic states continued to be opposed by Bosnia's President today as he faced diplomatic pressure to join seven other members of the collective Bosnian leadership when peace talks resume here next week.
The opposition by President Alija Izetbegovic is threatening to create a split in Bosnia's collective leadership and to cripple attempts by mediators to promote a peace settlement in the former Yugoslav republic.


A Role for the Khmer Rouge
The Khmer Rouge rebels, who only weeks ago seemed poised to use violence to disrupt United Nations-sponsored peace efforts here, said today that they wanted an advisory role in Cambodia's newly elected Government.
In a remarkable change of heart given its earlier declaration that the elections last month were a "stinking theatrical farce," the Maoist-inspired guerrilla group said in a radio broadcast that it had accepted an offer from Prince Norodom Sihanouk, Cambodia's head of state, to have members serve as advisers to the interim Government.
Rebel Leader to See Prince
Officials of the United Nations peacekeeping force in Cambodia said the titular leader of the Khmer Rouge, Khieu Samphan, would meet with Prince Sihanouk this summer in North Korea, where the Prince has a home, and that a lower-level Khmer Rouge representative would travel to Phnom Penh next week to discuss the rebels' new role.


A 'Vote' for House That Cobb Built
A majority of Detroit voters opposes the use of tax money to buy land and make related improvements for a new Tiger Stadium, according to a survey published yesterday.
A poll of 400 registered voters by The Detroit Free Press and WXYZ-TV found that 51 percent were opposed to the use of tax money to acquire the site, rebuild or reroute roads and demolish existing buildings.
Forty-four percent supported the use of tax money for those purposes and 5 percent were undecided.


METRO DIGEST
TESTIMONY CONFIRMS EMPIRE PRACTICES
Two former employees of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield appeared before a United States Senate subcommittee and provided the first public evidence that the nonprofit health insurer misled state officials.
Page 1.
At the heart of Empire's deep financial crisis is "gross mismanagement," a Senate subcommittee has reported.
Page 24.
NEW YORK CITY
SPECTER OF TERROR: MORE BLAST SUSPECTS SOUGHT
Federal investigators say that several men still at large are believed to be part of the terrorist group seized this week on the brink of carrying out a spectacular plot to assassinate political leaders and bomb targets in New York.
Page 1.
AFGHAN WAR DREW SUSPECTS TOGETHER
Experience in the Afghanistan war is emerging as a fervid common denominator among the suspects arrested in the latest plot to bomb and terrorize New York City.
Page 1.
At the Lincoln Tunnel, it was impossible to drive the 8,006 feet without visions of devastation.
About New York.
Page 22.
The confidential informant who helped to penetrate the bombing plot is a former officer of the Egyptian military.
Page 23.
Sudanese passports held by eight suspects cast a spotlight on the growing role of the African country as a staging ground.
Page 23.
CLOSING OF BASE RECOMMENDED
Virtually ending any significant Navy presence in New York City, a commission has voted to close the Staten Island Homeport.
Page 1.
Supporters of the Homeport reacted with bitter resignation.
Page 6.
NEW YORKER IS CHOSEN FOR CHICAGO SCHOOLS
The Chicago Board of Education has selected Argie K. Johnson, the deputy chancellor for instruction in New York City, as general superintendent of the Chicago school system, a struggling, deficit-ridden district.
Page 6.
Rupert Murdoch's bid to buy The New York Post hangs in the balance as the battle lines have hardened at the Federal Communications Commission.
Page 23.
Nearly three weeks after a ship crammed with Chinese immigrants ran aground off Queens, 7 of the 10 bodies of those who perished trying to swim ashore are unidentified.
Page 23.
A steam pipe burst on West 33d Street between Fifth Avenue and Broadway in Manhattan, snarling traffic in midtown.
Page 23.
REGION
YOUTH GUILTY IN SLAYING OF 3
A jury in Rochester has found a teen-ager guilty of shooting three people to death days after the police say he shot his grandparents, an aunt and a cousin in New York City.
Page 26.
ANOTHER HAND FOR ATLANTIC CITY
Art Donovan, a former defensive tackle, won the first hand of live poker in Atlantic City casino history.
Page 25.
Lawyers for Sol Wachtler and Joy Silverman reach a tentative settlement.
Page 26.


Corrections
Because of a computer transmission error, the Options on Futures table in Business Day on Thursday carried incorrect figures for trading volume and open interest in foreign currency options on the Chicago Merchantile Exchange.
Readers wishing corrected copies of the table may write to the Business Editor, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


New Yorker to Head Chicago Schools
The Chicago Board of Education selected Argie K. Johnson, the deputy chancellor for instruction in New York City, today as general superintendent of the Chicago school system, a deficit-ridden district struggling with decentralization.
Mrs.
Johnson, 54 years old, had been a candidate to replace the departing New York Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez.
She said she had chosen Chicago in a last-minute flurry of telephone calls and pitches from both sides because of the potential she sees in Chicago's decentralization program, an effort to give parents more control over schools.
Under decentralization, which began in 1989, the district has set up parent-dominated governing boards for each of Chicago's 551 schools.


Wachtler and Silverman End Their Fiscal Tie, Lawyers Say
Lawyers for Sol Wachtler, the former Chief Judge of New York State, and Joy Silverman, his former lover, have reached a tentative settlement over the future of the Silverman family's $24 million trust fund, both sides said today.
Once the agreement, is signed by Surrogate Edward A. Baker of Nassau County, it will sever the last links between the judge and the socialite he barraged with obscene and threatening letters after she broke off an affair with him.
On March 31, Mr.
Wachtler pleaded guilty to threatening to kidnap Ms.
Silverman's daughter.
He is to be sentenced on Aug. 9.


New Yorker to Head Chicago Schools
The Chicago Board of Education selected Argie K. Johnson, the deputy chancellor for instruction in New York City, today as general superintendent of the Chicago school system, a deficit-ridden district struggling with decentralization.
Mrs.
Johnson, 54 years old, had been a candidate to replace the departing New York Schools Chancellor, Joseph A. Fernandez.
She said she had chosen Chicago in a last-minute flurry of telephone calls and pitches from both sides because of the potential she sees in Chicago's decentralization program, an effort to give parents more control over schools.
Under decentralization, which began in 1989, the district has set up parent-dominated governing boards for each of Chicago's 551 schools.


What Atlanta Braves Share With Boss Tweed
To the Editor:
"A Noble Loser" (editorial, June 14) commiserated with the 21st consecutive loss by Anthony Young, the New York Mets pitcher, and explained: "He is closing steadily on the major league mark of 23, set in 1910-11 by Cliff Curtis of the old (and legendarily inept) Boston Braves."


Antennae Repair Assures Endeavor a Secure Return to Earth


Jetronic Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Jan 31


Opening a Wound on Staten Island
Supporters of the Staten Island Homeport reacted with bitter resignation to yesterday's decision by the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission to close the base.
The Staten Island Borough President, Guy V. Molinari, a longtime advocate for the Navy base, called the closing a wound to the borough's pride.


Annuities Help Feather Retirement Nests
Many people nearing retirement fear that if today's low interest rates continue, they will live more like paupers than princes.
To be sure they will have the income they need, they are buying record amounts of variable-rate annuities, which mimic mutual funds but have the added appeal of tax deferral.
"With the expected increases in tax rates, tax deferral becomes even more significant, and people of all ages may want to consider annuities for their long-term investments," said Avery E. Neumark, a partner in Weber, Lipshie &amp; Company, a Manhattan-based accounting firm.
"I would first encourage clients to take full advantage of plans that use pretax dollars like a 401(k) plan," he said, "then use annuities for additional investments."


The Small-Yield and Sound-Sleep School of Investment
Some investors could not care less about stocks, options or even mutual funds.
They want complete safety -- a Federal Government guarantee -- and are willing to sacrifice some yield to get it.
Among these investments, the best bet is Treasury securities, with interest rates at 3.35 for one-year bills and yields at 5.10 for five-year notes.
"I recommend this alternative for those seeking the highest quality, lowest-risk alternative," said Lewis J. Altfest, president of L. J. Altfest &amp; Company, New York financial planners.


Lennar Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Andersen Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


What Atlanta Braves Share With Boss Tweed; Prodigious Loser
To the Editor:
"A Noble Loser" (editorial, June 14), on the losing streak of the Mets pitcher Anthony Young, encouragingly notes that only a pitcher of some talent would be permitted to stick around long enough to set that kind of record.
You might also have noted that the major league record for most losses in a pitching career (315) is held by the same pitcher who holds the record for most victories (511) -- Cy Young.
JAMES J. HANKS JR.
Baltimore, June 16, 1993


Ag Services of America Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Swen Swenson Is Dead; Broadway Dancer, 63
Swen Swenson, a Broadway dancer who also performed on television, died on Wednesday at Midway Hospital in Los Angeles.
He was 63 and lived in Hollywood.
The cause was AIDS, his sister, Carolyn Dougherty, said.


Misdeeds of Brokers Held Close to the Vest
LAST year, arbitrators awarded $982,000 to Robert Flanagan and two other customers of Prudential Securities, primarily over their losses from its energy investment partnerships.
The firm demanded confidentiality for the documents it turned over, the investors' lawyer said, but he loudly and successfully objected.
Since then, he said, those documents have helped other investors win millions of dollars.
Brokerage firms are stepping up their efforts to keep investors from sharing potentially incriminating records, with each other or the press.
"They don't want the public to learn about their misdeeds," said Stuart C. Goldberg, the Austin, Tex., lawyer who represented several customers of Prudential-Bache, as it was then known.
"There is no other reason a brokerage firm wants a confidentiality order."


NEW FIGHT AHEAD
Hours after his budget package took a predawn white-water trip through the Senate and survived, mostly intact, President Clinton said today that he saw "quite encouraging" prospects that the House and Senate would meld their versions into one mutually acceptable bill.
But outside the White House, the signs that Mr.
Clinton's budget faces yet another perilous legislative struggle were already mounting.


Strawberry's Thinking 1994
Dodgers outfielder Darryl Strawberry, docked a day's pay for showing up late for Thursday's game, arrived four hours early today for tonight's game.
On the disabled list with a bad back, he announced he was not talking to reporters for the remainder of the season.
"Nothing to be said," said Strawberry, who lost $19,230 of his $3.5 million annual salary for skipping his rehabilition workout Thursday.
"I'm not talking to the press anymore the rest of the year. I'm finished."


Tokheim Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Swindled, Even Out of Their House in Old Age
WHERE is "the Millionaire" when you really need him?
Nobody knocked on the door of Constance and Barbara Brigham's house in Upper Brookville the other night.
No television host offered the sisters $1 million to do with as they wished, when their only wish was to save their homestead.
Instead, the early morning sun found them sitting on a stone wall in front of the Nassau County Courthouse in Mineola.
They had walked up the courthouse steps as the owners of a multimillion-dollar estate, a home that they had lived in for 35 years.
Unless some angel of mercy, or a ghost of television past, descended before them, in less then five minutes they would walk down the steps, homeless.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
Some books are next to impossible to categorize.
Espionage plays a part in THE SILENCER, by the Glasgow-born Israeli author Simon Louvish (Interlink Books/Interlink Publishing, cloth, $24.95; paper, $10.95), and so do satire, humor, political analysis, Israeli-Arab relationships, the meaning of Jewishness, the terrors of religious fanaticism (Israeli as well as Arab), Realpolitik, Surrealism -- you name it.


Labor Has a Big Job for Its New Friend Clinton
ORGANIZED labor, or what is left of it, has high hopes for the Clinton Presidency.
But so far the Administration has put on the back burner all the proposals that might give labor more power, except for one: a bill that would prohibit management from replacing strikers permanently with newly hired workers.
And now that bill has become the defining labor issue of the young Clinton Presidency, as important today as the air traffic controllers strike was in the early Reagan years.
The heart of the matter is not in the bill's details, although they are important.
The heart of the matter is that both unions and management have chosen the bill for one of their periodic battles over the balance of power between them.
A union victory would probably be followed by other union gains.
And if the managers win, then President Clinton, for all his sympathies toward workers, might not be much better for organized labor than Ronald Reagan or George Bush.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THE SUNITA EXPERIMENT By Mitali Perkins. 179 pp.
Boston: Joy Street Books/Little, Brown &amp; Company.
IF IT HADN'T BEEN FOR YOON JUN By Marie G. Lee. 134 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $13.95.


The Cake Of Cakes
WHAT: The symbolic connubial snack.
Often the only nourishment a bride consumes at the wedding.
Well-mannered guests do not leave before the cake is served.
WHAT IT HAS BECOME: A Rorschach test of taste.
You can't do much with the canapes, poached salmon or fillet of beef, but the cake can represent the eccentricities of the couple.


IN the Region Westchester; Recent Sales
Bronxville, N.Y.,  $142,705
15 Meadow Avenue  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 63-year-old co-op; entry hall, fireplace, French doors, den, balcony; maintenance $650.
Lewisboro, N.Y.  $330,000
317 Cross Pond Road  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 15-year-old contemporary; family room, fireplace, deck, pool, hot tub; 2.3 acres; taxes $7,679.
Ossining, N.Y.  $175,000
1-5 Bridal Path  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old condominium; dining room, fireplace, deck, outdoor pool; common charges $225; taxes $4,700.
Durham, Conn. 160,000
230 Skeet Club Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 14-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room with fireplace, rural setting, 1 acre; taxes $3,232.
Meriden, Conn.  $115,000
110 Newton Street  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 67-year-old Dutch colonial; large front porch, formal dining room, remodeled kitchen, 50- by 130-ft. lot; taxes $1,695.
Wallingford, Conn.  $80,000
59 Circle Drive  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 40-year-old ranch; gas heat, new siding, 1-car detached garage, 60- by 110-ft. lot; taxes $1,575.
OTHER AREAS Edison, N.J.  $132,500
90 Ovington Avenue3  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 36-year-old split level; family room, 1-car garage, full basement; taxes $2,439.
Hillsdale, N.J.  $440,000
57 Heritage Court  6-bedroom, 4-bath, 6-year-old colonial; fireplace in living room, c/a, study, 2-car garage, skylights; taxes $8,500.
East Williston, L.I.  $485,000
26 Summit Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 2-car garage with loft; taxes $7,600.


When Tired Plants Need a Pick-Me-Up
SUMMER is officially here with its bright sunny days and good growing weather.
The garden should be flourishing with abundant green and beautiful flowers on sturdy stems.
If it is not, there may be good reasons.
It is possible that the plants are simply hungry, and the simplest solution is application of a plant fertilizer.
If the soil is of poor quality, lack of proper nutrition may be the cause of spindly growth and lack of strong flowers.
But if the soil is in good condition, these starvation conditions should not exist and can be easily remedied.


Two Ways to See The Big Picture
TWO photograph enlargers aimed at serving photographers with different degrees of experience -- Durst Phototechnik's Magico 35-millimeter enlarger for beginners and Salthill Photographic Instruments' Fiberoptic 4.5 Enlarger for advanced photographers -- are now on the American market.
For photographers just starting out -- or for those who are traveling and want a small, lightweight, portable unit that makes quality black-and-white enlargements -- the Magico is worth examining.
Of course, accessories like trays, safelights, chemicals, washers and tongs must be carted along in a separate container.


In the Region: Long Island; Recent Sales
East Williston  $485,000
26 Summit Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 2-car garage with loft; taxes $7,600.
Islip  $125,000
515 Islip Avenue  4-bedroom, 3-bath, 20-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kichen, fireplace, finished basement; taxes $5,400.
Levittown  $115,000
54 Needle Lane  4-bedroom, 1-bath, 45-year-old Cape Cod; dining room, 60- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $3,700.
North Massapequa  $187,000
240 North Kentucky Avenue  4- bedroom, 1-bath, 35-year-old colonial; dining room, den, eat-in kichen, fireplace, 1-car attached garage; taxes $5,300.
Westbury  $128,000
2548 Astor Place North  2-bedroom, 1-bath, 38-year-old ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $3,900.
Williston Park  $210,000
500 Marcellus Road  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 35-year-old ranch; dining room, new eat-in kitchen, den, basement; taxes $$5,000.
OTHER AREAS Ossining, N.Y.  $175,000
1-5 Bridal Path  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old condominium; dining room, fireplace, deck, outdoor pool; common charges $225; taxes $4,700.
Durham, Conn.  160,000
230 Skeet Club Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 14-year-old colonial; family room, 1 acre; taxes $3,232.
Montclair, N.J.  $192,000
128 Squirehill Road  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 53-year-old colonial; sunken living room, fireplace, porch; taxes $5,3167.


Lightning Protection: Focus on Small Jobs
ALTHOUGH lightning can occur in any season, summer storms generally produce the largest amount.
Houses in urban and built-up suburban regions usually are at only a small risk, because lightning tends to strike just the highest points, like tall commercial buildings in such areas.
Not so in open places like parks, fields, farmland and beachfront property.
In those areas, houses, trees and often people are frequently the highest points and, thus, the most likely targets.


The Most Entertaining Americans? Canadians
WHAT'S SO FUNNY ABOUT Canada?
It's a big country with a lot of snow, Mounties and politely boring people who say "eh." The British novelist Kingsley Amis put a fictitious tome titled "Canadian Wit and Humor" on his list of the World's Shortest Books.
"Worthwhile Canadian Initiative" was the winner of The New Republic magazine's Most Boring Headline contest.
Joke-wise, Canada gets no respect.
But it should, especially since Canada has produced some of America's funniest comedians, actors, writers, directors -- a veritable army of renegade humor professionals.
Without them, there would have been no "Saturday Night Live," no "SCTV," no Spy magazine, no "Ghostbusters," no "Wayne's World," no sidekick for David Letterman to take with him to CBS.
Expatriate Canucks like Dan Aykroyd, Michael J. Fox, Mike Myers, Phil Hartman, John Candy, Rick Moranis and Martin Short could gather on Thursday to celebrate Canada Day, a holiday most Americans would rank somewhere below National Pickle Week.


Lemieux Takes Marriage Vows in Montreal
MARIO LEMIEUX, the National Hockey League's scoring champion, married his longtime girlfriend, NATHALIE ASSELIN, yesterday in a ceremony at Montreal's historic Notre Dame Basilica attended by almost 400 guests.


An Avoidable Case Of Double Dummy
A PLAYER may see one or more of an opponent's cards deliberately, or accidentally, or deliberately-accidentally.
Peeking is, of course, improper, but has been known to happen.
The tall player with good peripheral vision has a potential advantage.
But an opponent who leans forward and holds his cards sloppily is a nuisance.
A warning is in order, but after that, most would agree that the exposing player should suffer the consequences.
There is also the case of a player who deliberately shows his cards to an opponent.
This sometimes happens late in the play, in an effort to convince an opponent that all roads lead to Rome.
But on the diagramed deal from the Vanderbilt Knockout Teams in Pasadena, Calif., in March, 1992, Bob Levin, a former world champion, in the South seat showed his cards to West before the opening lead.


Social Security's Identity Crisis
To the Editor:
Not only do I agree with the proposal in "Let Social Security Earn More Money" (Viewpoints, June 13) to offer investment alternatives in the Social Security Trust Fund but I'd take it a step further: vesting.
In order for the participants of my generation (20-nothing, 30-something and 40-whatever) to secure their benefits, a separate account should be established with ownership rights and privileges.
At retirement age, one should have the option of taking out a lump sum (to pay off a mortgage, for example), receiving an income stream or simply bequesting the money to heirs.


Interpreting: a Business Spurred by Diversity
THE increasing ethnic and racial diversity of New Jersey has produced a huge demand for interpreting and translating services in courts, state agencies and corporations, officials and business executives say.
With scores of multinational corporate headquarters now nestled in New Jersey's suburbs, and with large communities of non-English-speaking Hispanic, Asian and other immigrants settling in the state's urban centers, this demand has led to the creation of hundreds of agencies that use the services of thousands of independent interpreters and translators.


A New Home for Peeperkorn
To the Editor:
Color!
Sin!
Forbidden books!
Some new typography!
To these innovations, might you add one other?
I have in mind re-reviews, specifically one of Frederic Tuten's "Tintin in the New World" (June 6).


Reneging on Refuge: The Haitian Precedent
WHEN the Supreme Court last week upheld the forcible repatriation of Haitians intercepted at sea, human rights advocates cringed with the dread that their work of three decades was coming unraveled.
Since World War II, they had fought to pass international and Federal laws establishing the obligation of nations to provide haven for political refugees.
The broad notion of refugee protection was based on the principle of non-refoulement, that no refugees should be forcibly returned to a place where they could suffer persecution. (Refouler is French for "to force back.")


Nancy Anne Low, James Sullivan
Nancy Anne Low, a daughter of Mary R. Low of Potomac, Md., and the late George M. Low, was married yesterday to James McGrath Sullivan, a son of Barbara M. Sullivan of Bedford, N.Y., and the late Edward O. Sullivan Jr.
Msgr.
Thomas Gartland performed the ceremony at St.
Patrick's Church in Bedford.
Mrs.
Sullivan is the manager of training and development at Estee Lauder Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Mount Vernon College.
Her father was a deputy administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration in Washington and president of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute.


Arsenal Mars New Image of Salvador's Ex-Rebels
The explosion of tons of weapons hidden by El Salvador's former guerrillas under an auto repair shop in Nicaragua last month has seriously damaged the former rebels' credibility as a newly formed political party.
Only six months ago, United Nations officials certified that the rebels had surrendered all their weapons as part of the settlement that ended 12 years of civil war in El Salvador.
The officials responded to the discovery of the arms with sharp criticism, with the Security Council calling it the "most grave violation to date" of the peace accords signed in January 1992.


Q and A
Gaudi Tours in Barcelona
Q.
I will be in Madrid this summer and would like to take a short architectural tour of Barcelona as well.
Is there a bus service between the two cities and is there a tour in Barcelona that would include Gaudi's works? -- Evelyn Doyle, Brooklyn


Tatyana Frolov, Timothy Hellman
Tatyana Frolov, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George Frolov of Farmington, Conn., was married last evening to Timothy Moore Hellman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael M. Hellman of Lloyd Harbor, L.I.
Melvin Meacham, a justice of the peace from East Windsor, Conn., performed the ceremony at Avon Old Farms School in Avon, Conn.
Mrs.
Hellman, 27, is a senior computer-systems analyst at Fidelity Investments, an investment company in Boston.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford and received a master's degree in computer science from Boston University.
Her father is the vice president of engineering at Locknetics Security Engineering, an engineering company in Forestville, Conn.
Her mother, Sima Frolov, is an engineer at the Northeast Utilities Service Company in Berlin, Conn.


The Wonderful World of Charles Barkley
Disney popped the wrong question to CHARLES BARKLEY.
Barkley, the Phoenix Suns' star forward, filmed his half of a Disney commercial only hours after his team lost in the National Basketball Association finals last Sunday to the Chicago Bulls.
With a concocted smile, he said in front of a rolling camera, "I'm still going to Disney World."


Devils Spend the Day Collecting Centers
The Devils didn't draft a coach today, so they still must fill a big gap in their organization.
But they tried to bolster their weakness at center by trading for the Los Angeles Kings' Corey Millen and drafting a pair of centers with two of the three picks they had among the first 39 choices in the draft.
And in an attempt to add toughness to their forward lines, they acquired Ottawa's Mike Peluso, a large, veteran left wing who is best known for his willingness to punch people.
Amid the trading, Lou Lamoriello, the Devils' general manager, said he has hired a coach to replace the departed Herb Brooks but wouldn't say who it is.
There was heavy speculation here that a Vancouver assistant, Rick Ley or Ron Wilson, would get the job.
Both men denied it tonight.
Lamoriello is expected to announce his choice next week.


Social Security's Identity Crisis
To the Editor:
In 1983, Congress took steps, including raising Social Security taxes, with the aim of collecting in current taxes the money to pay benefits to baby boomers whey they retire, beginning in 2010.
By that time, the proportion of workers supporting retirees will have dropped from 20 to 1 to 3 to 1, so the trust fund was supposed to have more than $1 trillion in assets.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 27, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
49
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
2
74
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
19
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
2
CASTLES, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) To save herself from danger, a princess agrees to marry a knight in 19th-century England.
5
63
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
6
1
SAHARA, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $6.50.) Dirk Pitt uncovers a plot that may extinguish all life in the world's seas.
7
1
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
8
26
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The investigation of a woman's death involves the American-Japanese rivalry.
9
1
THE HEIRESS BRIDE, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) The last volume of "The Bride Trilogy," set in Regency England.
10 *
6
DARKEST HOUR, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The concluding volume in a series about the Cutlers, a plantation-owning family.
11
9
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Pocket, $5.99.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
12 *
5
THE MAGIC OF YOU, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A 19th-century British minx sets her cap for an American sea captain.
13
3
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
14
8
SHADOWFIRES, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A woman is stalked by her supposedly deceased husband.
15
3
TURTLE MOON, by Alice Hoffman. (Berkley, $5.99.) Two damaged adults and a troubled child strive valiantly to achieve happiness.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
9
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
2
6
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President.
3
503
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
4
89
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
5 *
8
NOT FOR SALE AT ANY PRICE, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $5.95.) The Texas billionaire on America's economic and political problems.
6 *
110
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
7
19
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
8
20
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of rustic France.
9 *
2
A WORLD LIT ONLY BY FIRE, by William Manchester. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) An account of the Renaissance and the Reformation.
10 *
7
WHERE THE BLUEBIRD SINGS TO THE LEMONADE SPRINGS, by Wallace Stegner. (Penguin, $11.) Essays on the American West.
11
24
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on self-esteem.
12 *
19
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) The changes in social life that have affected the sexual fantasies of women.
13
134
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
14 *
34
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist describes a war against women's rights.
15
16
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Examples of waste, with suggestions for curbing it. 16 *
6
WRITTEN BY HERSELF,
edited by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $15.) An anthology of autobiographical writings by American women.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
98
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) A collection of some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
123
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
3
12
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK: Volume 2, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) A second collection of tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
1
THE NEW FIT OR FAT, by Covert Bailey. (Houghton Mifflin, $7.95.) Advice about diet, exercise and weight loss.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 12, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Raid on Baghdad; Trial of 14 in Plot Resumes, but U.S. Verdict Is Known
The United States missile attack against intelligence sites in Iraq came hours after the trial of 14 men accused in a supposed plot to assassinate former President George Bush resumed on Saturday in Kuwait after a three-week recess.
Though the Clinton Administration had indicated that it would await the outcome of the trial before deciding whether any American action was necessary, it said Saturday night that Iraq was definitely responsible for the plot.


Social Security's Identity Crisis
To the Editor:
I was struck at the naivete of the argument that increasing the investment rate on the Social Security trust fund would solve the "problem" of Social Security.
Many Americans are unaware of it, but there is no money in the Social Security trust fund.
Yes, there is an "accounting" each year by the trustees.
But like the emperor's new clothes, the money is not there at all; it is being spent for general Government expenses.
Since there is no money, increasing the rate is hardly the solution.
Zero times an investment rate is still zero.
PAUL WESTBROOK Watchung, N.J., June 13  The writer is president of Westbrook Financial Advisers Inc.


Sports of The Times; Brits Enjoy a Better Week Than Bumbling Mets
Homesickness washes over the visting New Yorker.
It is not the burgers they insist upon selling, nor is it the corn on the cob and the hot dogs the pubs drag out to celebrate the Fourth of July.
What makes the New Yorker miss home so much is the bark of the pack, hot on the whiff of failure.
There is no Mike and there is no Mad Dog, at least not on my civilized BBC radio band, but they do have their rabid tabloids here, and they are yowling about the failure of the national cricket team and the national soccer team.
Two sports they invented, by the way.


Cristina Roig and Matthew Morris
Cristina Rosario Roig, an associate at Brown &amp; Wood, and Matthew Pristow Morris, an associate at Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore, both New York law firms, were married yesterday in Puerto Rico.
The Rev.
John Bednarik performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Iglesia San Jose in San Juan.
The bride, who will keep her name, is a daughter of Antonio Roig-Ferre of Humacao, P.R., and Marianne Maldonado-Davila of San Juan.
She graduated from Harvard University, and she and her husband received their law degrees from Columbia University.


A Therapeutic Program for Troubled Students
DURING the final weeks of the spring term, most high school teachers have to struggle to capture their students' interest.
So it was to be expected that some of the teen-agers in Sam Hedrick's world-cultures history class were gazing into space recently instead of their textbooks.
Still, Mr.
Hedrick managed to steer a conversation about welfare abuse into a spirited discussion of World War II and the rise of Hitler.
Despite these trappings of a conventional high school classroom, which has such standard social studies features as world maps, globes and computers, this class actually took place inside the Psychiatric Institute of the Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla.
And the students, who have had problems with alcohol and drug abuse, as well as psychiatric disorders that include anxiety, depression, suicide attempts and severe mood swings, are enrolled in West-Prep.
Checking to Avoid Relapses
The program, a joint effort of the Westchester County Medical Center, New York Medical College and the Board of Cooperative Educational Services of Southern Westchester, offers troubled adolescents a combination of school and therapeutic treatment on an outpatient basis.


'Phantom' (the Other One), Full of Glitter
WHEN the musical "Phantom" had its premiere in the New York metropolitan area last summer, it was imperative to point out that this was the 1911 Gaston Leroux novel as interpreted by Maury Yeston (music and lyrics) and Arthur Kopit (book).
It was not to be confused with the Andrew Lloyd Webber spectacle currently selling out on Broadway for the sixth year.
Now that the commonly called "other Phantom" is news no more but, all of a sudden, a summer stock staple, with additional, more elaborate productions countrywide, differentiation remains imperative.
Still, confusion goes on and perhaps will, evermore.


It's Not Up to You
QUEER IN AMERICA Sex, the Media, and the Closets of Power.
By Michelangelo Signorile. 378 pp.
New York: Random House. $23.


Linda Bellantoni, Carmine Venezia
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Bellantoni of Seaside Park, N.J., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter Linda Patricia Bellantoni and Carmine Anthony Venezia, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Salvatore Venezia of Bethlehem, Pa.
Ms.
Bellantoni, 27, is an audit manager at Price Waterhouse, the accounting firm in New York.
She and her fiance, both certified public accountants, graduated from Lehigh University, she cum laude.
Her father is a principal in and a vice president of Quad Tex Inc., a New York textile converting company.


Not Analyst's Habit
To the Editor:
In your coverage of my libel trial against Janet Malcolm and The New Yorker, you stated ("Jurors Decide for Psychoanalyst," front page, June 3) that I am a man who "only recently renounced his habit of sleeping with every woman he met."


tallER, taLLEST
If fashionable women appear to be a few inches taller, it's because platform footwear is the mark of warm-weather dressing for 1993.
Platforms of wood, cork and raffia, ranging in height from one to three inches, are seen in an endless variety of styles.
Perhaps the biggest success is not the clog but the platform sneaker; some even come with heels.
The new sneakers have nothing to do with space-age hip-hop footwear.
Instead, they resemble the high-top canvas sneakers of the 1930's and 1940's, now set on a platform soles and often worn with ankle-length granny dresses.


Mutual Funds; Exotic Issues in Unlikely Places
The real growth in the mutual fund business lately has come on the fixed-income side, a legacy of shrinking cash yields that have pushed people into bonds.
But the industry may be paying too steep a price for its latest crop of income investors.
To produce attractive yields when interest rates are at or near bottom, financial engineers have invented some high-tech issues.
But Federal regulators and others have raised concerns that the new products may behave in unpredictable ways to big shifts in interest rates -- and that should serve as a warning to investors about the exotica hidden in their bond funds.


Mary Beth Murphy, William Roche
Mary Beth Murphy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin P. Murphy of Newton, Mass., was married there yesterday to William Emerson Roche, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James E. Roche of Arlington, Mass.
The Rev.
Michael S. Foster performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Sacred Heart Church.
Mrs.
Roche is the director of publicity at Random House, the publishing company, in New York.
She graduated from Wellesley College.
Her father is the president of Handy House Inc., a waste-disposal company in Newton.


Raid on Baghdad; Clinton's Address: Message Is 'Don't Tread On Us'
Following is a transcript of President Clinton's address yesterday from the White House, as recorded by The New York Times:
STATEMENT


Neuchatel
To the Editor: Paul Hofmann's charming article on Neuchatel brought back many pleasant memories of my two years as a graduate student at the University of Neuchatel.
He was remiss, however, in not mentioning the beautiful views of lakes and Alps and walks through pastureland and pine forests at Chaumont, high above Neuchatel in the Jura Mountains, which is easily reached from the center of town by bus and then funicular at La Coudre.


Moths To the Flame
A FEW minutes before Monday night's premiere of "Sleepless in Seattle" at the Loews Fine Arts Cinema, the skies opened up with a brief, hair-flattening rain.
But somehow, as if by miracle or destiny, it tapered down to a reasonable drizzle as the stars arrived.
And how they arrived.
They arrived as if from the skies, stepping out of black storm clouds of limousines onto the red carpeting on West 58th Street and past the barricaded mob of photographers who were so overcharged by the electricity from the storm that anything seemed possible.


Sound Bytes; Film, TV, Technology -- And Now, Fiction
Roger Ebert is the film critic for The Chicago Sun-Times and co-host, with Gene Siskel, of "Siskel &amp; Ebert," a nationally syndicated television program that reviews films ("thumbs up, thumbs down").
Mr.
Ebert is hardly all thumbs when it comes to technology, though; he is a longtime computer user, a denizen of electronic mail systems, and even knows how to program his own VCR.
His computer, in fact, just finished its first work of fiction, "Behind the Phantom's Mask" (Andrews &amp; McMeel), a whodunit that follows the misadventures of a self-destructive British actor who is an understudy for the Phantom of the Opera.
Question: Did you take a portable PC to the Cannes Film Festival?


JUNE 20-26: Islamic Terrorists; 8 Suspects Seized Planning Bombings And Assassination
In what seemed a dazzling coup for anti-terrorism work last week, the F.B.I. and New York City police said they broke up a cell of Islamic fundamentalists who were planning to bomb the United Nations and two commuter tunnels and to kill the U.N.'s Secretary General, a Senator and other officials.
The agents apparently closed in as the terrorists were mixing barrels of fertilizer and diesel fuel to make a bomb like the one that damaged the World Trade Center in February.
They said they had the group under surveillance for months from an apartment next door to their bomb laboratory, thanks to an informant within the group who was so trusted that he was assigned to find and rent the lab.


In Search Of New Glasses
To the Editors:
The Shuberts and the Nederlanders had best take off their 20th-century glasses and find new ones appropriate for the 21st century before they find themselves and their theaters in complete darkness.
NORMA J. KOHMER Woodmere, N. Y.


Linda Murray, Robert Berzok
Linda Murray, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Murray of Hamden, Conn., was married yesterday to Robert M. Berzok, a son of Mrs.
Benjamin Berzok of Deerfield Beach, Fla., and the late Mr.
Berzok.
Judge Mary Smith of the Yonkers City Court officiated at the Caramoor estate in Katonah, N.Y.
Mrs.
Berzok, 50, is the manager of editorial services for Medicus Intercon Inc., the health-care subsidiary of D'Arcy, Masius, Benton &amp; Bowles, an advertising agency in New York.
She is also a contributing editor at Longevity magazine in New York.
She graduated from Wheaton College.


TIPS FOR TIGHTWADS
As a freelance writer who has made an art out of living stylishly on less than most New Yorkers spend for rent alone, I turned eagerly to "Tips for Tightwads," expecting to pick up a few choice hints.
By the time I read that "six-pack rings can be tied together into a hammock," I decided the list couldn't be serious.
The very idea of living on cornmeal mush and coffee made from recycled grounds is revolting.
Cat food is a lot cheaper than tuna fish, too.
How come Dacyczyn forgot to mention that?


JUNE 20-26: Islamic Terrorists; 8 Suspects Seized Planning Bombings And Assassination
In what seemed a dazzling coup for anti-terrorism work last week, the F.B.I. and New York City police said they broke up a cell of Islamic fundamentalists who were planning to bomb the United Nations and two commuter tunnels and to kill the U.N.'s Secretary General, a Senator and other officials.
The agents apparently closed in as the terrorists were mixing barrels of fertilizer and diesel fuel to make a bomb like the one that damaged the World Trade Center in February.
They said they had the group under surveillance for months from an apartment next door to their bomb laboratory, thanks to an informant within the group who was so trusted that he was assigned to find and rent the lab.


Yet Another Heritage
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein's essay on folk music, "60's 'Folk' Is Giving Up the Ghost"  [ May 30 ] , wasn't quite complete.
Yes, by 1970 the folk-music movement was finished.
But it left a heritage Mr.
Rothstein didn't mention.
Early in the 60's, folk music seeped into rock-and-roll, changing rock in ways we now take for granted.
Thanks to folk music's influence, rock singers now write their own songs, and they don't have to be love songs, as almost all pre-folk rock songs were; in fact, they're often political, like many 50's and 60's folk songs.


East End Towns Hire Special Officers for Summer:


TIPS FOR TIGHTWADS
Amy Dacyczyn says, "There's a simple way to weigh your letter and maybe save that 29 cents."


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THE SUNITA EXPERIMENT By Mitali Perkins. 179 pp.
Boston: Joy Street Books/Little, Brown &amp; Company.
IF IT HADN'T BEEN FOR YOON JUN By Marie G. Lee. 134 pp.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $13.95.


Sampling Seafood in the Norwegian Style
ONE might think that since Connecticut borders the water, good seafood restaurants would be a dime a dozen.
But one of the most frequently asked questions of a restaurant reviewer is "Where can I get fresh, well-prepared seafood?"
We have a ready answer: Fjord Fisheries in Stamford.
The small, appealingly decorated place is in a sports complex just off Interstate 95 at Exit 6.
To frequent diners-out, the space might look familiar as the site of several past restaurants, Oslo being the most recent.


From the Welfare Rolls to the Honor Roll
AT Pace University here, Lillian Pou graduated with honors last month.
The 32-year-old single parent of two daughters, who had been receiving public assistance for 10 years, won the Pace University Office Technology Award and was elected to the Phi Eta Sigma Honor Society at the university for her academic achievement.
Ms.
Pou, a Yonkers resident, is one of 17 welfare recipients who graduated with Associate of Science degrees from the university -- the first graduates in a new educational program sponsored by the county's Department of Social Services to help mothers on welfare enter the workforce.


What's Ban-Lon Got to Do With It?
THE coming-soon-to-middle-age couple seated next to me at the Embassy 1 theater watching "What's Love Got to Do With It?" was blithely, almost lovey-dovily holding hands -- no mean feat, considering the picture hardly qualifies as the make-out movie of the summer.
Even during the film's initial re-enactment of sexual abuse, the woman didn't stiffen and pull away, the man wasn't pretending to count roses in the carpet.
Their popcorn chomping never lost a beat.
Evidently, someone else's emotional turmoil didn't push any buttons on their control boards.
Then Laurence Fishburne, as Ike Turner -- married at the time to Tina Turner, played by Angela Bassett -- loped into a diner, wearing a royal blue jumpsuit girded by a leather-and-coin-studded belt in a heavyweight championship width.
Their chomping grew erratic.
Their hands disengaged.
The man muttered something.
The woman muttered something back, punctuated by a snigger.
The man's tone got bolder.


Counting Down to the Year 2000
I've left a number of plays recently wondering if Samuel Beckett didn't get it wrong.
For the last 30 years or so, the playwright many consider the 20th century's greatest has been responsible for the theater's prevailing view of doomsday.
The universe, as he saw it, was emptying out, drying up, grinding down.
Nature was too exhausted to put out much more than a leaf here or an ant there.
Human congress was limited to the futile conversation between tramps, the idle speculations of the half-interred or the fragmented memories echoing inside a single staring skull.


Cathy Hoag And Brian O'Shea
Cathy Hoag, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Fredrick W. Hoag Jr. of Weston, Conn., was married yesterday to Brian Martin O'Shea, a son of Norma O'Shea of Rye, N.Y., and Bernard P. O'Shea of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Molly Comeau, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Chapel of the Snows in Stratton, Vt.


REBELS WITH A CHECKBOOK
A friend's 15-year-old son reports that Hot Rod is one of the most frequently checked-out magazines in his high-school library.
The desire for such cars may change form over the years, but it will not die.
It is unlikely that Chrysler would consider putting its new Prowler prototype (an updated version of the traditional track roadster) into production if it apppealed only to men in their 40's.
DAVID L. KATZ San Diego


More Burdens From the Rehnquist Court
Unchastened by Congress's rebukes for misinterpreting civil rights laws, the Supreme Court is back in the business of loading up job discrimination cases with extra burdens for those claiming bias.
On Friday the Court ruled that an employer could give false explanations for firing a black employee -- yet still prevail in a lawsuit.
Over the years the courts have worked out procedures and burdens of proof that were fair to both employees and employers.
A plaintiff's plausible claim of discriminatory firing put the onus on the employer to provide a nonracial reason or lose the case.
One would think that a phony or incredible explanation would be worse than none at all.
Not according to the 5-to-4 majority.


Live and in Color
To the Editor:
I can live with four-letter words on television, professional athletes collecting more money than potentates and even something called "no-fat" cheddar cheese.
But color on the cover of the Times Book Review (June 6)?
Never!
What's next, a glossy centerfold featuring the Bookmate of the Month?
STEPHEN J. KUDLESS Staten Island


Republicans Blame Cuomo For Empire
As revelations of mismanagement at Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield continue, Republicans here have rushed to hang the issue around the neck of Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo.
In news releases and interviews, they have heaped blame on the Governor's appointee, the superintendent of the State Insurance Department, Salvatore R. Curiale.
The calls by Republicans in both the Senate and Assembly for Mr.
Curiale's resignation, which began in April, are only likely to intensify in light of hearings in Washington by the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations.
A report issued by Senate investigators on Friday concluded that the Insurance Department has "often taken on the role of cheerleader for Empire's cause," instead of being an aggressive regulator.


Getting Into Buckingham
Buckingham Palace in London has announced that there will be 18 major rooms open to the public this August and September, the first time that visitors are being admitted to the palace in the five-year plan to raise money to repair burned-out Windsor Castle.
The rooms include the Green, Blue and White Drawing Rooms, the Silk Tapestry Room, the East Gallery, the Music Room, the State Dining Room, the Throne Room and the Marble Hall.
A high point of the tour will be the 155-foot-long Picture Gallery, which is hung with paintings by such masters as Rembrandt, Rubens and Van Dyck.
Travelers determined to get into the palace without waiting in line can obtain advance tickets through at least four tour companies that obtained allotments for group visits.
The catch is that the tickets are being sold as part of packages that also include hotel accommodations and-or other sightseeing trips.


Streetscapes: The 83d Precinct Station House; A Chance for a Centennial
THE Police Department has made an unusual decision: In looking for a site for a new headquarters for the Brooklyn North section of its Safe Streets, Safe City Program, it decided to convert the 83d Precinct station house at 179 Wilson Avenue, which has been decaying for a decade.
This gives the oddly grand building a fighting chance to survive to celebrate its centennial in 1995.
Completed in 1895 at the southeast corner of DeKalb Avenue in an area of older tenements, the $50,000 building dominated the intersection with its picturesque, castle-like silhouette and tall corner tower.
The New York Tribune said at the time it was opened that its 30- by 40-foot muster room was the largest in New York.


Death in Venice (at the Biennale)
It is fitting that the most talked-about work at the current Venice Biennale should be Hans Haacke's installation in the main chamber of the German pavilion, a pile of rubble made from the room's torn-up stone floor, with the word "Germania" emblazoned on the wall.
It might as well have read "Biennale."
One way to picture this fiasco of an event is to imagine a pendulum paused at the end of its arc.
The 45th version of the oldest and most famous of the international art roundups is so inert and lifeless that it can provoke only malaise, nothing stronger.
At the same time, what is on view suggests that matters in certain quarters of contemporary art have reached an untenable extreme, proved above all by the vast wasteland of the Aperto, the Biennale's international display of younger artists.


Its Courtship Over, E.D.S. Seems Eager to Play the Field
WHEN Britain's largest telephone company backed away last month from a proposed alliance with the Electronic Data Systems Corporation, the initial reaction from some investors and industry observers was one of pity.
But Lester M. Alberthal Jr., chairman, president and chief executive of the Dallas-based computer services company owned by the General Motors Corporation, says far from being the wallflower at the global dance, E.D.S. is doing just fine, thank you.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Budget: Vote on a deficit cutting plan Republicans offered as an alternative to the Democratic package.
Rejected 55 to 43, June 23.
2.
Budget: Vote to kill a Republican amendment that would eliminate the new 4.3 cent-a-gallon tax on gasoline and diesel fuel.
Approved 50 to 48, June 24.
3.
Budget: Vote to kill a Republican amendment that would prevent an increase in taxes on the Social Security benefits of middle- and upper-income retirees.
Approved 51 to 46, June 24.
4.
Budget: Vote on passage of a five-year budget package that follows President Clinton's approach in most respects.
Approved 50 to 49 (Vice President Gore broke the tie for the bill to pass), June 25.
1
2
3
4
Connecticut
Dodd (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
Y
Lieberman (D) . . .
N
N
Y
Y
New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
Y
Lautenberg (D) . . .
N
N
Y
N
New York
D'Amato (R) . . .
Y
N
N
N
Moynihan (D) . . .
N
Y
Y
Y
House
1.
Space Station: Vote on an amendment to an authorization bill for NASA that would kill the space station project.
Rejected 216 to 215, June 23.
2.
Supercollider: Vote on an amendment to an energy and water appropriations bill that would halt construction on the superconducting supercollider project.
Approved 280 to 150, June 24.
1
2
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
N
Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
N
Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
N
Y
4. Shays (R) . . .
Y
Y
5. Franks (R) . . .
N
N
6. Johnson (R) . . .
N
N
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
N
N
2. Hughes (D) . . .
Y
Y
3. Saxton (R) . . .
N
Y
4. Smith (R) . . .
N
Y
5. Roukema (R) . . .
Y
Y
6. Pallone (D) . . .
Y
Y
7. Franks (R) . . .
Y
N
8. Klein (D) . . .
Y
Y
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
N
N
10. Payne (D) . . .
Y
Y
11. Gallo (R) . . .
N
N
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
Y
13. Menendez (D) . . .
Y
Y
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
N
N
2. Lazio (R) . . .
Y
Y
3. King (R) . . .
Y
Y
4. Levy (R) . . .
Y
Y
5. Ackerman (D) . . .
Y
N
6. Flake (D) . . .
Y
Y
7. Manton (D) . . .
N
A
8. Nadler (D) . . .
Y
N
9. Schumer (D) . . .
Y
Y
10. Towns (D) . . .
A
N
11. Owens (D) . . .
Y
Y
12. Velazquez (D) . . .
Y
Y
13. Molinari (R) . . .
Y
Y
14. Maloney (D) . . .
Y
Y
15. Rangel (D) . . .
Y
Y
16. Serrano (D) . . .
Y
Y
17. Engel (D) . . .
N
Y
18. Lowey (D) . . .
Y
N
19. Fish (R) . . .
Y
Y
20. Gilman (R) . . .
N
Y
21. McNulty (D) . . .
Y
N
22. Solomon (R) . . .
Y
Y
23. Boehlert (R) . . .
N
Y
24. McHugh (R) . . .
Y
Y
25. Walsh (R) . . .
Y
Y
26. Hinchey (D) . . .
A
A
27. Paxon (R) . . .
Y
Y
28. Slaughter (D) . . .
Y
Y
29. LaFalce (D) . . .
Y
Y
30. Quinn (R) . . .
N
Y
31. Houghton (R) . . .
N
Y
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Reasons for Closing A Regional High School
The June 6 article concerning the closing of David Brearley Regional High School in Kenilworth ("This Town Will Die Without Our School") was noticeably curtailed in that it failed to discuss in complete terms the reasons and motivation that the Union County Regional High School District No. 1 Board of Education used in deciding to close the school.
In fact, many of the important details pertaining to the Board of Education's point of view were omitted and should be addressed and clarified.
For example, the Kenilworth group opposing Brearley's closing is quoted as saying that the town alone could handle the operation of the school.
On the contrary, it would be extremely difficult for Kenilworth to financially support the operation of Brearley alone in view of the high costs already facing the residents because of the judgment in the Waldorf case.


Europe Car Rental
To the Editor: I was especially interested in your article about car rentals on the Continent since I leased a car in France on a recent trip.
Though we are avid train enthusiasts and veterans of "roughing it," my traveling companion and I found driving to our European destinations a thoroughly enjoyable and completely different trip altogether.


Katherine Drury, Christopher Verni
Katherine Thomas Drury, the daughter of David and Deborah Drury of Williamsville, N.Y., was married yesterday to Christopher Thomas Verni, a son of Vito and Mary Verni of Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
John Tipton, a Presbyterian minister, and the Rev.
Alan Mitchell, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the First Presbyterian Church in Buffalo.
Mrs.
Verni is an assistant at Sotheby's in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Georgetown University.
Her father is the general director of the Harrison division of General Motors in Lockport, N.Y.


Horseshoe Pitching Clanks and Thuds Back Into Fashion
"IT looks like a ringer, Doc," Bob Lobell called to his partner, Dr.
Louis Wasser, as they watched a forged steel horseshoe encircle a steel stake.
Moments before, Dr.
Wasser had held up the two-and-a-half-pound horseshoe, looking squarely through it at the stake 40 feet away.
He tossed the shoe, which rose in a rainbow arc, turned and descended, landing first with a clank, then a thud, a perfect ringer.


Conversations/William Kristol; A Conservative Cheerfully Argues That 'Family Values' Has a Future
So why should we care about values issues after the 1992 campaign, after the Murphy Brown imbroglio and the backlash to the Republican National Convention?
Haven't the liberals basically won on issues like abortion?
Shouldn't we all just settle down and talk about the economy?
"To the contrary," says William Kristol, former chief of staff to Vice President Dan Quayle, now a conservative strategist trying to chart the movement's future.
"Despite the clumsiness with which those issues were raised in 1992, the fact is that values issues -- to use your phrase -- are back stronger than ever."


'Power Lunches' in a Converted Barn
NEAR the intersection of Route 24 and Columbia Turnpike, where cows once grazed on rolling farmland, gleaming office parks rise from landscaped lawns.
Only a weathered brick barn appears untouched by the development.
But close inspection reveals that it, too, is part of the change.
This "historic barn," as a bold-lettered sign explains, is the unlikely home of a new organization called the Park Avenue Foundation and Club.


POSTINGS: New Regulatory Manual; A Page Turner It's Not
Given a choice of "City Environmental Quality Review Draft Technical Manual" and, say, "Women Who Run With the Wolves," Deputy Mayor Barbara J. Fife would have a hard time recommending the former for a summer read, even though it was produced under her aegis.
"This may not be 'I can't put it down' reading," she said, "but we think it's a major achievement."


The Savior Of the Opera House
May I add an important name to your story (June 6) on the 30th anniversary of the Goodspeed Opera House?
The name of the late Vivien Kellems, without whom there would be no opera house today.
Vivien was a great lady, a fiery crusader who lived in East Haddam.
She was a cultured and inventive industrialist, and a maverick Republican who ran for Governor as an independent in 1954.
It was she who saved the opera house.


Anne Ueland, Anthony Bailey
Anne Ueland, a marketing consultant to the travel publishing industry, was married yesterday to Anthony Bailey, a dealer in rare books, both in London.
The Rev.
Donald Clifford, a Roman Catholic priest, and the Rev.
Alanson Houghton, an Episcopal minister, jointly officiated at St.
Augustine's Roman Catholic Church in Philadelphia.


The Waif Look: A Dissent
To the Editor:
Elizabeth Kaye's cover story on the return of the waif model, "So Weak, So Powerful," is full of holes.
She seems to claim that women crave these images -- "what women want is at odds with what they say they want." Excuse me, but an image appearing in British Vogue has no correlation to what women want.
Magazines like Vogue do not reflect women's needs.
They represent a manipulative and multibillion-dollar fashion industry.


Rethinking 42d St. For Next Decade
"IT'S going to be a more beautiful Times Square in a hurry," Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said last August, as four giant office towers on 42d Street were postponed in favor of an interim rehabilitation of existing buildings.
But "hurry" means something different on 42d Street than almost anywhere else.
After all, it has been 10 years since Mr.
Cuomo said, "Today we have laid the final cornerstone to rebuild the most famous crossroads in the world."


George S. Lewis, Former Directoer Of Architects Group, Dead at 77
George S. Lewis, who led the New York chapter of the American Institute of Architects to a high-profile role in civic debates, died on Friday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 77 years old and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was prostate cancer, said a friend, Eugenie Cowan Havemeyer.


Alejandro, Critic and Cuckold
ECLIPSE FEVER By Walter Abish. 335 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


Police Link Suspect to a Radical Sect
Clement Rodney Hampton-El, one of the suspects in the bombing plot foiled last week, was described by New York City police detectives yesterday as having worked closely with al-Fuqra, a radical Islamic sect whose followers are believed to be responsible for a string of crimes in the United States in recent years.
The detectives, familiar with group's fringe in Brooklyn, said yesterday that Mr.
Hampton-El, 55, worked closely with al-Fuqra, a sect based in Pakistan that is believed to have carried out 17 bombings and killings in the United States since 1979.
Its followers in the United States and Canada are predominantly black Muslims.


On Sunday; Quiet Steward Says Farewell To His Parks
ORIN Lehman, the New York State Parks Commissioner, is driving from park to park, quietly saying goodbye.
After 18 years, Albany's longest-reigning commissioner retires in mid-July.
Few among the public will notice.
He is not a modern man, does not attract attention to himself.
Friday he stood under an old pavilion here in Baird State Park, propping himself up with the metal canes he has relied on since a World War II injury, and thanked the 40 workers (groundskeepers, mechanics, maintenance men), asking for last suggestions to make the parks better.


Editors' Note
A review in the Times Book Review on May 23 discussed "Faith in a Seed: 'The Dispersion of Seeds' and Other Late Natural History Writings," by Henry D. Thoreau, edited by Bradley P. Dean.
The review -- by William Howarth, author of "The Book of Concord: Thoreau's Life as a Writer" -- was mixed: it spoke well of the "grooming" of the material by its editor, and praised Thoreau's thoughtfulness, his powers of observation and his ecological insights.
It also characterized the text as resembling "a set of working notes" more than a book, and said the volume ignored much prior scholarship.
After the review appeared, senior editors of the Book Review learned that before accepting the assignment, Mr.
Howarth had expressed reservations about "Faith in a Seed" to its publisher, and had disclosed that fact to the Book Review.


Laura Zambelli, Keith F. Barket
Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Anthony Zambelli of Haverford, Pa., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter Laura Joy Zambelli and Keith Farris Barket, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Keith Lawrence Barket of St.
Louis.
Miss Zambelli, 25, is a corporate recruiter at Prudential Securities in New York.
She is a graduate of Franklin and Marshall College.
Her father is a public-relations consultant at Edelman Worldwide, a public-relations concern in New York.
Her mother, Nancy G. Zambelli, is a sales associate at Emlen-Wheeler, a real-estate firm in Strafford, Pa.


Services Count Also
To the Editor:
"Trade Gap Widened in April" (Business Day, June 18) aptly summarizes the important changes in the United States merchandise trade deficit reported by the Commerce Department for April and the year to date.
Yet in equating these merchandise figures with the United States net "trade deficit," you ignore the growing trade surplus in private services and consequently vastly overstate our trade woes.
This is an example of a national misperception that only overseas sales of American merchandise count as exports.


A Rural Plateau and Its Earthy Cuisine
I DISCOVERED Puglia about 15 years ago while seeking a route from Rome to Greece.
There had to be an alternative to the long, boring train ride to the Brindisi ferry; there had at least to be something to see on the way.
The logical place to begin looking was the region to which the port of Brindisi belongs, Puglia.
The modern version of the trip did not offer hope that the poets' experiences had been exceptional.


Jamaica: Prosperous Isle in Queens
When Ken Bernard and his two partners decided recently to open an upscale bistro offering Caribbean and other dishes and sidewalk dining, they looked past obvious spots like TriBeCa, SoHo or the Upper West Side.
Instead, they invested about $270,000 in a vacant storefront in downtown Jamaica, a commercial hub in southeastern Queens that not long ago had deteriorated amid the urban decline that ravaged other commercial districts in New York City and across the nation.


U.S. Will Focus on Reducing Pesticides in Food Production
The Federal Government has decided to reduce the use of chemicals in the production of the nation's food, assigning a higher priority than in the past to protecting children's health and the environment.
If the change of policy is fully carried out, it could alter everything about the way food is grown and what Americans eat.
It was announced Friday by the Environmental Protection Agency, the Food and Drug Administration and the Department of Agriculture and will be reinforced in a scientific report to be issued Tuesday.


Fugitive Somali Warlord's Rivals Joust for Power
Since the United Nations unleashed its military campaign against a powerful Somali clan leader, dozens of other factional chiefs have been jockeying for power and pledging cooperation with the peacekeepers in the hope of dominating Somalia's political transition, United Nations and Western officials say.
While officials say the move against Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid's arsenals and fighters was unavoidable, some lament that it has set back the timetable for creating a Somali government after two years of anarchy.
By issuing an arrest warrant that sent General Aidid into hiding, some say, the United Nations inadvertently added to the instability threatening relief efforts and reconstruction.


Political Memo; States' Top Democrats Get Appeal for Patience
For a party that assumed the White House only five months ago, the message at a convention of state Democratic leaders here was a candid admission that amounted to a political confessional: Lower your expectations and be patient with your President.
He's learning from his mistakes.
In public and in private, David Wilhelm, chairman of the Democratic Party, devoted hours this weekend trying to convince restive state leaders that President Clinton had a bright future, even while conceding the party's shortcomings.


It's Just a Game, Isn't It?
To the Editor:
In "Cancel That Meeting: It's Little League Time" (The Executive Life, June 13), Jill Andresky Fraser failed to address a common problem with executive coaches: confusion between commitment and competition.
As a busy executive who coached 13- to 16-year-olds for three years, and who sat on the league's board of directors for one year, I understand that many executives are willing, at least every spring, to prioritize the coaching of children over that late-afternoon meeting.
However, in contrast to the good-natured child assistance portrayed in the article, many coaches, especially successful executives, have the tendency to live out their competitiveness through the kids.
GERRY S. FORD Macon, Ga., June 18  The writer is chief executive of Southern Office Concepts, a computer and office supplies company.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE WOMAN WHO FELL FROM THE SKY: The Iroquois Story of Creation.
Retold by John Bierhorst.
Illustrated by Robert Andrew Parker.
Morrow. $15. (Ages 5 to 9) In this distinguished collaboration, an Iroquois creation myth is clearly and simply retold and complemented by limpid watercolor illustrations.


Perspectives: Bradlees at Atlantic Center; Retailing Opens a New Front in Brooklyn
THE unflattering term applied in development circles to the suburban discount merchandisers who are tirelessly on the lookout for sites in the metropolitan area is "big box users."
"They are always looking for big square footage on one floor, surrounded by five acres of parking," says Bruce Ratner, president of Forest City Ratner Company, the developer of Metrotech in downtown Brooklyn.
And, in New York City, not finding it.


Sass and Soul


Yankees' Day Is Past
To the Sports Editor:
George Steinbrenner, the Wizard, is shaking his fright rod and warning us that he might depart, along with the Yankees.
Politicians are so scared that they are hurrying to promise a billion or more to build them a new Yankee Stadium.


Q and A
Security Refund Question: I have rented an apartment in a rent-stabilized building for about 25 years.
I initially paid two months' security and upon each two-year renewal of the lease I also paid an additional amount to bring the security in line with the increased rent.
About a year or so ago, though, I believe a law was enacted that stated that only one month's security was necessary.
Since then I have tried to get one month's security returned to me, but the owner informed me that I'm not entitled to a refund since the law stated two months when I moved in.


Its Competitors Distracted, France Gets to Be a Power
PERHAPS the only thing that France dislikes more than bowing to American leadership is having to recognize Germany as Europe's main power.
The collapse of the Soviet bloc thus gave it good reason to worry: The United States was left as the sole superpower, while united Germany seemed destined to dominate the new Europe.
Yet France's fears of losing its clout appear premature.
With the United States sending conflicting signals about its role in the world and Germany forced into introspection by economic and social problems, France has grabbed the chance to reassert itself as the only European power with global vision.


Dr. Winslow, Dr. Seldin
Dr.
Constance Pinover Winslow, an orthodontist, and Dr.
Leslie Wilfred Seldin, a dentist, both in practice in New York, were married there yesterday.
Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel officiated at the Leopard Restaurant.
The bride, 47, is the daughter of Harriet Pinover of New York and the late Maurice Pinover.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received her dental degree from New York University.


Family Pays Last Respects to Pat Nixon


O'Neill Finds Himself a Hit In New York
If only Paul O'Neill had his truck back.
It was a 1993 Land Cruiser.
He last saw it at La Guardia Airport three weeks ago.
The Yankees embarked on a 10-day road trip, O'Neill parked the truck in one of the lots and it wasn't there when he returned.
Someone, somewhere, has probably added to the 2,000 miles that were on the odometer.
"I guess," said O'Neill, "that happens in New York."


What's All the Fuss About Children's Book?
As a published children's-book illustrator, conscientious parent of two elementary-school children, a frequent workshop moderator at elementary schools throughout Suffolk County with the New York State Arts-in-Education Services and as former chairperson of our Southampton Elementary School's annual Authors and Illustrators Night, I read with bemused interest "Authors' Day Cancellation Ignites Furor at Sag Harbor School  [ May 30 ]  about Jim and Kate McMullen's new book, "The Noisy Giants Tea Party."
I had the pleasure of inviting the McMullens and their new book to this year's event at my children's school.
Mr.
McMullen was a gracious guest (his wife was unable to attend due to a prior commitment), signing books and conversing in his quiet, attentive manner with the many children who stopped at his table throughout the evening.
My son (an aspiring artist himself!) asked to buy "The Noisy Giants," which we did, and it stayed at his bedside for many nights afterward, to be thumbed through again and again in wonder and delight.


In an Oil Rush to the East, Elf Plays Pied Piper
LOIK Le Floch-Prigent, the chairman of Elf Aquitaine, discussing the French oil company's bold exploratory drilling in the former Soviet Union, spread his hands incredulously and asked: "Where is there no risk? Qatar is risky, Mexico is risky, California is risky."
The companies that invested heavily to explore in California, for example, are now prevented from further drilling because of the strong environmental movement, he said.


From Bach Concertos to Rossini Arias
THE offerings at three current festivals are thoroughly European.
This evening at 6, the Connecticut Early Music Festival calls it a season with performances of all six of Bach's Brandenburg Concertos at Harkness Chapel in New London where the players will use period instruments and be directed from the harpsichord by Igor Kipnis.
For reservations, call 444-2419.
At the Norfolk Festival, Friday's 8:30 P.M. concert finds an unusual juxtaposition of opera and chamber music: the Yale Opera Ensemble will present arias and scenes from stageworks of Mozart, Rossini and Verdi, the violinist Syoko Aki, the cellist Luis Garcia-Renart and the pianist Evelyne Brancart will play Schubert's Trio in B-flat.
The program at that hour Saturday includes a striking example of vocal chamber music -- Respighi's "Tramonto," with the mezzo-soprano Mary Phillips -- plus a sonata by Ravel transcribed for viola and piano by Atar Arad, who'll play it with the pianist Joseph Kalichstein.
For ticket information or travel directions, the number is 542-5537.


Gustave Lussi, 95, a Coach of Skating Champions
Gustave Lussi, who taught and coached 16 world champions and seven Olympic gold medalists in figure skating, died in his sleep on Thursday night at his home in Lake Placid, N.Y.
He was 95 and was still teaching until a few days ago, a grandson, Arthur Lussi, said.
Among those coached by Lussi were the American gold medalists Dick Button, Hayes Alan Jenkins, David Jenkins, Dorothy Hamill and Scott Hamilton, as well as John Curry of England, gold medalist in 1980 at Lake Placid.


Poll Finds Tide of Immigration Brings Hostility
With both legal and illegal immigration into the United States approaching historic highs, a public reaction against immigration is also growing, the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll shows.
After decades of heavy immigration that has included large numbers of Hispanic laborers and Southeast Asian refugees, and at a time when many Americans are out of work, a large majority of Americans surveyed said they favored a decrease in immigration.
Many cited the economy as a factor in their opinion.


Anyone for Bridge?
No, "bridge" is not what you wear to do construction work on rivers.
It's actually an old term, newly revived, referring to all those labels with acronyms, nicknames and initials for designers whose clothes might otherwise be unaffordable.
Bridge lines were initially designed to attract a new, younger customer.
But these days, who can resist a bargain?
And the response, even among those who can afford the higher- priced threads, has been so terrific that designers have begun investing their bridge lines with distinct personalities (and heftier tariffs, now that they know what the traffic will bear).
So what started as a way over trouble waters has become a fresher path to the designer exit.
That is, until the toll goes too high.


Seance and Sensibility
ANGELS &amp; INSECTS Two Novellas.
By A. S. Byatt.
Illustrated. 339 pp.
New York: Random House. $21.


Anne Peck, John Marden
Anne Elliott Roberts Peck, the majority inspector of elections in Treduffrin, Pa., and John Newcomb Marden, a partner in the New York law firm of Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt &amp; Mosle, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Robert G. Hultz performed the ceremony at the Hitchcock Presbyterian Church in Scarsdale, N.Y.


Gift Certificates
To the Editor: I must express my disappointment at the Angel of the Sea Bed &amp; Breakfast in Cape May, N.J.
I was given a $300 gift certificate purchased there.
When I went to use it a year later, the proprietor told me it had expired and would not accept it for payment.
How does a gift certificate expire?
I was shocked that the highly rated and often-mentioned Angel of the Sea would lower to such a policy.
MICHAEL A. KIEL Hawthorne, N.J.
Kathleen A. Davis, innkeeper, responds: Putting expiration dates on gift certificates is a fairly common business practice.
We sell hundreds of certificates a year, and each purchaser is told.
The one-year expiration date is printed clearly on the front of the card.
We tried to explain our position to Mr.
Kiel in person and tried to accommodate him by giving him part value for a certificate that had expired four months before, but this was not good enough.


Buffalo
The last few years have been good for Buffalo.
A recent survey by the the National Weather Service confirms that there are worse places in New York State for snowfall (Syracuse topped the list last winter).
Then, too, there was a flurry of new investment that followed the announcement in January 1989 of the North American Free Trade Agreement, which phases out tariffs between the United States and Canada.
But landing the World University Games for the United States for the first time in their 70 years of competitions may be the biggest boost yet.
The games are held every two years.
They are scheduled for July 8 through the 18th and are expected not only to bring more than 5,000 athletes from 120 countries, but also to put the state's second-largest city in the international limelight.


Residential Resales
Closings in the week ended June 12  MANHATTAN  East Midtown  $1.4 million
641 Fifth Avenue (51st St.)  (Olympic Towers)  2-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 1,787-sq.-ft. condo; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, manned elevator, dining area, 2 exposures; common charge $1,415, taxes $18,700 (Broker: Sandy Neuringer &amp; Associates)  Greenwich Village  $824,000
8 Morton Street  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 4-story one-family town house; dining area, 2 powder rooms, solarium, 25- by 90-ft. lot; taxes $7,622 (Broker: Wells &amp; Gay/Stribling &amp; Associates)  Greenwich Village  $280,000
115 Fourth Avenue  (Petersfield)  1-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,200-sq.-ft. loft condo; 24-hr. doorman, elevator, dining area, 10-ft. ceilings; common charge $596, taxes $3,900 (Brokers: Ambrose Mar-Elia-J.I. Sopher &amp; Co.)  SoHo  $480,000
185 Lafayette Street  1-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 2,100-sq.-ft., one-family 3-story brick town house in a former firehouse; dining area, artist studio, roof deck, 35- by 25-ft. lot; taxes $5,000 (Broker: Ambrose Mar-Elia)  Upper East Side  $1 million
131 East 65th Street  9-bedroom, 3-bath, 5-story one-family town house; dining room, fireplace, roof terrace, hardwood floors, first floor commercially zoned, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $15,000 (Broker: Corcoran Group)  Upper West Side  $360,000
115 Central Park West (71st St.)  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,600-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, manned elevator, dining area, 2 exposures; maintenance $1,521, 41% tax-deductible (Brokers: Corcoran Group-L.B. Kaye)  BRONX  City Island  $215,000
611 King Avenue  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family carriage house; dining room, fireplace, front porch, finished attic, L.I.
Sound view, 50- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,500 (Broker: Jacqueline Kyle Kall)  Crotona Park Area  $125,000
2473 Crotona Avenue  3-family detached brick house; 3 bedrooms in two units; 2 bedrooms in other; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1 bath in each; 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $900 (Broker: Marland Real Estate)  BROOKLYN  Midwood  $235,000
1321 East 10th Street  3-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family detached frame house; dining room, eat-in kitchen, parquet floors, finished basement, 1-car garage, 30- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,800 (Broker: Maryl Realty)  Windsor Terrace  $210,000
15 Howard Place  3-bedroom, 2-bath, one-family attached brick house; dining room, front porch, finished basement, 20- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,600 (Broker: Frederick Palmer Real Estate)  QUEENS  Howard Beach  $52,000
84-40 153d Avenue  (Amherst)  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 750-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; dining el, hardwood floors, 2 exposures; maintenance $348, 62% tax-deductible (Broker: Kraham Realty)  Ozone Park  $90,000
109-05 109th Street  3-bedroom, 1-bath, one-family detached colonial in need of rehabilitation; dining room, eat-in kitchen, enclosed front porch, full basement, 1-car garage, 25- by 100-ft. lot; taxes $1,080 (Broker: Kremer Real Estate)  STATEN ISLAND  Annadale  $215,000
535 Carlton Boulevard  2-family, detached colonial; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, eat-in kitchen, family room, fireplace in primary unit; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in other; 2-car garage, 120- by 130-ft. lot; taxes $1,300 (Broker: Century 21/Appleseed Agency)  Huguenot  $127,000
5 Stack Drive  4-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, one-family attached frame house; dining room, finished attic with skylight, 18- by 105-ft. lot; taxes $1,327 (Broker: Kingsley Real Estate)


TIME BOMB IN THE WHITE HOUSE
I've known Bob Hattoy as a political associate and comrade for over a decade in California politics and can honestly say that your article captured perfectly his charm and foibles.
But, curiously, not one of the White House officials mentioned in the article talked about how soon, or even if, an AIDS czar is to be appointed.
If officials want Hattoy to stop quipping, they might put finding a Government AIDS coordinator on the fast track now.
In the meantime, to paraphrase Lyndon Johnson, it's better to have Hattoy inside the tent quipping out than outside quipping in.
MARSHAL ALAN PHILLIPS Los Angeles


The Waterfront Is Precious
To the Editor:
In his essay "On the Hudson, Launching Minds Instead of Ships"  [ June 6 ] , Herbert Muschamp writes that "the whole city gains" from the new building for Stuyvesant High School because it "gives the city's waterfront a renewed sense of purpose."


Nancy Donohue, Thomas Brady
Nancy Jeanne Donohue, a lawyer and accountant, was married yesterday to Thomas Ryan Brady, an assistant vice president at the National Westminster Bank, both in New York.
Msgr.
Edward Connors performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Immaculate Heart of Mary Church in Scarsdale, N.Y.


RECORD BRIEF
Dinah Washington: 'The Dinah Washington Story -- The Original Recordings' Mercury 314 514 841-2; CD only.


Frontier Spirit To Germany
On Sept. 1, Seaquest Cruises will go out of business, moving its two-and-a-half-year-old ship Frontier Spirit to Germany, where she will join Hapag-Lloyd's fleet, be renamed and be marketed exclusively in Europe.
Hapag-Lloyd is one of five member companies in the Seaquest consortium.
Passengers who have made reservations for cruises after Aug. 31 have three options: a full refund, moving up their trip to an earlier Frontier Spirit departure (at a 50 percent discount) or transferring to a comparable cruise on the Abercrombie &amp; Kent Explorer, the Seabourn Spirit or Orient Lines' Marco Polo.
Those choosing the Marco Polo will be given a 20 percent discount, a Seaquest spokesman said.


Margaret Sirot And Robert Habl
Margaret Sirot, the director of major gifts at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital, was married yesterday to Robert Habl, a law professor at Brooklyn Law School.
Judge Sterling Johnson Jr. of the Federal District Court in Brooklyn performed the ceremony in Westport, Conn., at the home of Mr. and Mrs.
Anders Gittelson, friends of the couple.
Mrs.
Sirot-Habl is also an author.
She graduated from Queens College and received a master's degree in education for the gifted at the College of New Rochelle.
She is a daughter of Tess and Leonard Brickman of Valley Stream, L.I.
The bride was widowed in a previous marriage, as was the bridegroom.


A Wealth of Wright Designs Is Dispersed
THROUGHOUT THE 1980'S, Thomas S. Monaghan, the founder, owner and chairman of Domino's Pizza, often paid huge prices for designs by Frank Lloyd Wright.
And, for a time, Domino's corporate collection was the most comprehensive assemblage of Wright's decorative arts in the world.
But in the 1990's, the financially troubled Domino's began selling portions of the collection, which consisted of 300 architectural furnishings and scores of drawings, to reduce its debt.
Mr.
Monaghan no longer talks about his passionate interest in Frank Lloyd Wright.
After a year of private sales and a major auction earlier this month, most of the collection, which cost about $13 million, has been sold.
Domino's still owns a score of leaded-glass windows, a dozen pieces of furniture and an archive of drawings and other papers -- but the rest is gone.


So Long to Saks
Retirement party for Melvin Jacobs, Metropolitan Museum of Art, June 21.


Tech Notes; An Automated Attempt at the Classic Crust
Even in the pizza business, craftsmen are being replaced by machines.
The classic parlor pizza is made by a guy in the window with a white apron who kneads dough to the just right consistency, spins it dramatically in the air for shape, adds tomato sauce, cheese and toppings, and pops it into an oven.
All that handwork is meant to produce a pie with the ideal combination of a crunchy, chewy crust.


Jamaica: Prosperous Isle in Queens
When Ken Bernard and his two partners decided recently to open an upscale bistro offering Caribbean and other dishes and sidewalk dining, they looked past obvious spots like TriBeCa, SoHo or the Upper West Side.
Instead, they invested about $270,000 in a vacant storefront in downtown Jamaica, a commercial hub in southeastern Queens that not long ago had deteriorated amid the urban decline that ravaged other commercial districts in New York City and across the nation.


The Food Fight That Wasn't
William Norwich, the New York Post gossip columnist, aided and abetted by Liz Smith, the New York Newsday gossip columnist, was intent on irking a rival on Tuesday.
The scene was a benefit auction at Sotheby's for God's Love We Deliver, an organization that provides meals for homebound people with AIDS.
Mr.
Norwich (right), bidding on behalf of himself and Ms.
Smith, was after one particular item -- a chance to have Aileen Mehle, who writes the "Suzy" column for Women's Wear Daily, come to dinner and put it in her column.


Two Viewfinders, Two Pictures of Gay America
The gay population in America bedevils the bean-counters.
The Census Bureau does not ask questions on sexual identity, so the burden falls on surveys.
But surveys don't agree.
Today, as Gay Pride Day is celebrated, there is still no consensus as to how many homosexuals there are in America.
In 1948, a Kinsley report estimated that 10 percent of white males were more or less exclusively gay; last April, the Battelle Human Affairs Research Center reported that 1 percent of men said thay only had homosexual sex in the past 10 years.
Women were not included in either survey.


Punitive Aspects of Progress
IN a 1973 elegy for the Newark-that-was, Adolf Konrad depicts the city's Center Market as a veritable palazzo, complete with mosaics and a clock without hands.
The painting, titled "Newark Banishes Its Poets," is a blend of de Chiricoesque metaphysics and the desolation that Hughie Lee-Smith imparts to urban landscape and, as such, makes an apt tribute to a structure that was displaced by a Federal Government building.
It also epitomizes "Rethinking the City," the current exhibition at the Aljira Center for Contemporary Art here, and by implication the punitive aspects of progress.


Out of the Tunnel, Into the Woods
To the Editor:
Congratulations to Frank Rich for telling it exactly as it is on Broadway.
The "tunnel vision" and concern for the big bucks rather than for innovative, moving theater has forced me to hit the Great White Way about once every two years -- and I'm only 80 miles away.


Meredith Glass, Adam Weinstein
Meredith Tricia Glass, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James D. Glass of Oyster Bay Cove, L.I., was married last evening to Adam Kirk Weinstein, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Weinstein of Holbrook, L.I.
Rabbi Arthur Schwartz officiated at the North Shore Synagogue in Syosset, L.I.
Mrs.
Weinstein is the assistant manager of Epic House in Baldwin, L.I., an adult residence of the United Epilepsy Foundation of Long Island.
She and her husband graduated from the C.W.
Post campus of Long Island University, from which the bridegroom also received a master's degree in public administration.


JUNE 20-26: The Old Order Unravels; Japan's Ruling Party Suffers Desertions
Japan's ruling Liberal Democratic Party has long been skilled at many things: Raising millions in secret cash "donations" from its corporate buddies, steering contracts toward friends, destroying enemies.
Last week it performed a new trick: unraveling.
As the country raced toward a July 18 election, forced after a party revolt led to a no-confidence vote against Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa nine days ago, 20 percent of the party's members in the lower house of Parliament jumped ship.
Two new opposition parties have formed and, with leaders of the reformist Japan New Party and some Socialists, they sought a way to join forces in a coalition government after the elections.


Alejandro, Critic and Cuckold
ECLIPSE FEVER By Walter Abish. 335 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $23.


'Must Carry' Must Be Changed
Congress last year gave broadcast television stations the right, if they so demand, to be carried by local cable systems.
The purpose of "must carry" rules is to guarantee viewers access to local programming.
That sounds reasonable.
But is it reasonable to give that right to home-shopping channels that peddle toasters and jewelry up to 24 hours a day?
Is it reasonable to give them that right when doing so would force cable operators to drop valuable channels like CNN, C-Span and Court TV?
The Federal Communications Commission was on the verge of answering yes when some irate critics yelped.
So the F.C.C. delayed its ruling until this week.


Miss Prezzano And Mr. Durfee
Dr. and Mrs.
Edward P. Prezzano 2d of Bedford, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Katherine Prezzano, to Sherman Brayton Durfee Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Durfee of Katonah, N.Y.
A September wedding is planned.
Miss Prezzano, 26, is a media planner at Jordan, McGrath, Case &amp; Taylor, a New York advertising agency.
She graduated from Franklin and Marshall College.


Wild Bill's Night at the Pony Express Motel, Jackson, Wyo.


SURFACING
CLOTHES -- Dazzey Duks: Evoking the sweet-tart image of Daisy Duke (from "Dukes of Hazzard"), as well as the cartoon heroine Daisy Mae, restyled short shorts have re-emerged on the coattails of the hit hip-hop song of the same name by the group Duice.
Next?
A Dazzey Duks boutique to open this week at Bloomingdale's.
And speaking of bottoms . . .
DANCE -- The bump: Likely to be coming back soon to a club near you -- now that Janet Jackson does it in her new video, "That's the Way Love Goes." MEDIA -- Model apologists: Their lives can be as difficult as the rest of ours -- or so we are reminded in a July Harper's Bazaar essay contending that model iconography should not be held accountable for eating disorders, and in the July Esquire cover story exploring myths about the modeling life.


Profile/Myron E. Ullman 3d; Changing the Mood at Macy's
SAN FRANCISCO
It was the end of a long day of sobering business reviews this month in the West Coast division of R. H. Macy &amp; Company.
Inventories were way out of line, portending heavy markdowns and a hit to the bottom line.
First one, then another Macy executive took responsibility for the poor planning, though neither had been in charge when the plans were made.
Then one of them, Thomas C. Shull, turned to look at Macy's chairman and chief executive, Myron E. Ullman 3d, and said with a smile: "But now that I think about it, the fish does stink from the head."


Six Chinese Gang Members Arrested in Kidnapping of Immigrants


TIME BOMB IN THE WHITE HOUSE
Bob Hattoy confronts the status quo in hope of righting wrongs and changing the way many Americans feel about themselves, their fellow Americans and their country. (Sound at all like candidate Clinton?)


Miss Pickholz, Mr. Eickelbeck
Michelle Pickholz, the daughter of Phyllis and Jerome Pickholz of New York, was married yesterday to Steven Eickelbeck, a son of Sibille Beimel of Stony Brook, L.I., and Ralph Eickelbeck of Freeport, the Bahamas.
Rabbi David Greenberg performed the ceremony at the Bridgehampton, L.I., home of the bride's parents.
The bride, a graduate of Vanderbilt University, is an account executive for Comedy Central, the cable network in New York.
Her father is the chairman of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct Worldwide, the advertising agency in New York.


Honolulu Drivers Find Traffic Jam in Paradise
Hawaii, the land of seemingly endless tranquil beaches, has become, around this city at least, a land of seemingly endless traffic jams.
The roads in and around Honolulu have become so snarled that the Federal Government is offering more than $700 million to help build a light-rail system that would link the downtown with growing areas west of the city.


Strength and Conditioning Coaches: The Force Is With Them
Each new Houston Oiler upon his arrival sits for a one-on-one evaluation with Steve Watterson, the Oilers' strength and conditioning coach.
Little is left uncovered.


After a Year, Neighbors In Yonkers Live Warily
In the Crestwood section of this city with a racially troubled past, neighbors grumble to each other about the newcomers, about the graffiti on a suburban fence, the lawn that was brashly invaded by bicycle riders, the blaring music that jarred a languorous afternoon.
But such complaints also mask a collective sigh of relief.


Clara Bingham, David Michaelis
Clara York Bingham and David Tead Michaelis, writers in Washington, were married there yesterday.
The Rev.
Dr.
Robert K. Massie 4th performed the ceremony at Christ Episcopal Church.
Ms.
Bingham, 30, is keeping her name.
She is a former White House correspondent for Newsweek magazine and a graduate of Harvard University.


Betting the Farm on Managed Care
FOR an idea of what's coming in health care, we leave Hillary Rodham Clinton's recently disbanded task force and join Lawrence P. English's Connecticut-based army as it advances on the New York metropolitan region.
Mr.
English, a division president at the Cigna Corporation who commands 25,000 employees, is leading a bet-the-company drive to become a dominant force in the new world of "managed care" health plans.
New York is his next big battleground.
His troops, it seems, are everywhere:


A Death in the Party
SILENT CLOSE NO. 6 By Monika Maron.
Translated by David Newton Marinelli. 184 pp.
Columbia, La.: Readers International.
Cloth, $19.95.
Paper, $11.95.


Iran's Zealots Get a Jolt Out of Failure
FOURTEEN years after the overthrow of Shah Mohammed Riza Pahlevi, the Iranian revolution has failed to achieve either prosperity or sustained hope.
A costly eight-year war with Iraq, economic mismanagement and endemic corruption coupled with executions and arrests have left the clerics who rule Iran isolated and ever more dependent on the repressive organs of state security for control.
Discontent is so widespread that even Government officials wonder aloud how they managed to lose so much support.
But amid these failures the Government has embarked on a new radicalism both within Iran and abroad and seems in many ways as potent as ever.


Antje Buelte, Edward Dolido
Antje Assunta Buelte and Edward Paul Dolido, associates in New York law firms, were married yesterday at St.
Paul the Apostle Church in Brookville, L.I.
The Rev.
Mario Costa performed the Roman Catholic ceremony.
Mrs.
Dolido, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Horst E. Buelte of Locust Valley, L.I., graduated from Bryn Mawr College, and she and her husband received their law degrees from Boston University.
She works at LeBoeuf, Lamb, Leiby &amp; MacRae, he at Fulbright &amp; Jaworski.


Gretzky Is Taking Action Against Nike
WAYNE GRETZKY is suing Nike Inc. for $6 million, alleging that the company reneged on a deal for him to endorse a denim clothing line after he became sidelined with a back injury.
Gretzky seeks $1 million in compensatory damages and $5 million in exemplary damages.
The Los Angeles Kings star alleges that his deal "obligated Nike, among other things, to make Gretzky an integral part of its denim-apparel marketing."


Ashley Tuttle, Charles Askegard
ASHLEY TUTTLE, 22, a soloist with the American Ballet Theater, catches your eye even while dancing in a crowd.
She is as athletic as a gymnast and so ethereal she seems to be made of little more than air and tulle.
Charles Askegard, 24, is also a Ballet Theater soloist.
He is known as Chuck and, at 6 feet 4 inches tall, looks more like a basketball player than someone adept at jetes and pirouettes.


China Tourism Sets Record
After a dip caused by the 1989 Army crackdown on the Tiananmen democracy movement, tourism is again soaring in China.
According to the Government, a record 37 million foreigners visited China last year, up sharply from the previous total of 31 million in 1988, a year before the crackdown.
Every indication is that numbers will go still higher this year.
The bad news is that it is now difficult to reserve flights or make last-minute schedule changes.
The days when a tourist could show up in Hong Kong and quickly arrange a 10-day tour of China are now over.


Wall Street; In the Face of a Fund Panic . . .
A FINANCIAL doomsday scenario, 1993-style, goes something like this: a record-high stock market begins to go into a tailspin, resulting in mass exodus by mutual fund investors.
As fund portfolio managers seek the cash to pay off the sellers, they hurriedly dispose of the highest quality, liquid holdings, accelerating the downdraft.
Such a stock market Armageddon may or may not ever occur, but as stocks hover near record highs, some gurus are again fretting that it might.
And recently, one adviser added an interesting twist to the fund meltdown theory: An arcane and largely untested piece of mutual fund law that could let funds pay investors off in securities from the funds rather than in cash.


Data Update
NATIONAL HOUSING TRENDS
*4*(In thousands of units, seasonally adjusted annual rates)
Apr. 93
Apr. 92
Change
Starts
1,215
1,095
+11.0%
Completions
1,191
1,079
+10.4%
Sales
751
552
+36.1%
*4*Source: Census Bureau, U.S. Department of Commerce
*4*MORTGAGE INTEREST RATES (Averages)
Last Week
Previous Week
Year Ago
New York
Conventional (30-yr)
7.51
7.63
8.64
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.68
4.73
5.86
New Jersey
Conventional (30-yr)
7.41
7.49
8.53
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.54
4.55
5.67
Connecticut
Conventional (30-yr)
7.39
7.51
8.48
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
4.43
4.33
5.61
Co-ops (N.Y.)
Conventional (30-yr)
7.63
7.78
8.75
Adjustable Rate (1st yr)
5.38
5.37
6.42
*4*Indexes for Adjustable-Rate Mortgages*
1-yr. Treasury security
3.49
3.61
4.12
National Mortgage Contract Rate
7.06
7.06
8.26
*Rates on most adjustable mortgages are set 1 to 3 percentage points above these indexes.  (Source: HSH Associates)


Balanced Jurist at Home in the Middle
hen advocates for the homeless pitched nine tents in Lafayette Park across from the White House in 1981, they also set up a complicated constitutional question involving free speech and government regulation.
By the time the issue was resolved, it provided a clear demonstration of the resolutely centrist judicial style of Ruth Bader Ginsburg -- then a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, now President Clinton's nominee for the Supreme Court.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SMALL-TOWN LIFE DEAR JAMES By Jon Hassler. Ballantine, $21.


In Miami, Talk of Talking With Cuba
Emboldened by the change of administrations in Washington and deteriorating economic conditions in Cuba, new voices calling for a more flexible attitude toward Fidel Castro's Communist Government are emerging in the Cuban exile community here and challenging the hegemony of established groups.
The resulting political ferment most threatens the Cuban-American National Foundation, which for a dozen years has dominated, if not monopolized, exile politics.
Having identified itself with the Reagan and Bush Administrations, the group has, in recent months, seen its influence diminish in Washington and had its political agenda increasingly questioned here.


Mrs. Clinton, Government Official
A Federal appeals court upheld the secrecy of Hillary Rodham Clinton's task force on health care last week, but did not settle the legal status of the First Lady.
The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia said Mrs.
Clinton was a full-time Government official, not a private citizen.
Thus, the court said, the Task Force on National Health Care Reform, headed by Mrs.
Clinton, was composed wholly of Federal officials and was not subject to open-meeting requirements.


Diplomats Are Wary on Eve of Haitian Showdown
As Haiti's ousted President prepared for talks in New York with the army commander who overthrew him, diplomats predicted today that the meeting would quickly disclose whether the country's military was willing to relinquish power in Haiti.
The talks on Sunday between the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Haiti's first democratically elected President, and Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras are to focus on issues like forming a new Government and the mandate of an international police force to be sent to the country to guard against human rights violations.
It is the first meeting between the two enemies since September 1991, when a military coup forced Father Aristide into exile.


Not Even The Towel Can Stop Pazienza
Vinny Pazienza continued his theatrical return to boxing tonight along with his usual circus-like antics.
Pazienza, who suffered a broken neck 19 months ago and was nearly paralyzed, halted Lloyd Honeyghan of London after 56 seconds of the 10th round as the Briton's corner threw a towel into the ring.


In the Region: New Jersey; Recent Sales
Edison  $132,500
90 Ovington Avenue3  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 36-year-old split level; family room, 1-car garage, full basement; taxes $2,439.
Hillsdale  $440,000
57 Heritage Court  6-bedroom, 4-bath, 6-year-old colonial; fireplace in living room, c/a, study, 2-car garage, skylights; taxes $8,500.
Lawrence  $400,000
6 Fairview Terrace  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 4-year-old contemporary; cathedral ceilings, h/w floors, lot backs onto woods; taxes $8,327.
Montclair  $192,000
128 Squirehill Road  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 53-year-old colonial; sunken living room, fireplace, porch; taxes $5,3167.
Robbinsville  $227,000
28 Aluchy Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old colonial; breakfast nook, 5-acre lot, maintenance free exterior; taxes $5,054.
Warren  $485,000
31 Olsen Drive  5-bedroom, 3-bath, 19-year-old colonial; 1.5-acre plot, 2 fireplaces, pool; taxes $7,278.
OTHER AREAS East Williston, L.I.  $485,000
26 Summit Avenue  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 40-year-old colonial; dining room, eat-in kitchen, den, 2-car garage with loft; taxes $7,600.
Ossining, N.Y.  $175,000
1-5 Bridal Path  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 8-year-old condominium; dining room, fireplace, deck, outdoor pool; common charges $225; taxes $4,700.
Durham, Conn.  160,000
230 Skeet Club Road  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 14-year-old colonial; eat-in kitchen, family room with fireplace, rural setting, 1 acre; taxes $3,232.


Lightning Protection: Focus on Small Jobs
ALTHOUGH lightning can occur in any season, summer storms generally produce the largest amount.
Houses in urban and built-up suburban regions usually are at only a small risk, because lightning tends to strike just the highest points, like tall commercial buildings in such areas.
Not so in open places like parks, fields, farmland and beachfront property.
In those areas, houses, trees and often people are frequently the highest points and, thus, the most likely targets.


The Most Entertaining Americans? Canadians
WHAT'S SO FUNNY ABOUT Canada?
It's a big country with a lot of snow, Mounties and politely boring people who say "eh." The British novelist Kingsley Amis put a fictitious tome titled "Canadian Wit and Humor" on his list of the World's Shortest Books.
"Worthwhile Canadian Initiative" was the winner of The New Republic magazine's Most Boring Headline contest.
Joke-wise, Canada gets no respect.
But it should, especially since Canada has produced some of America's funniest comedians, actors, writers, directors -- a veritable army of renegade humor professionals.
Without them, there would have been no "Saturday Night Live," no "SCTV," no Spy magazine, no "Ghostbusters," no "Wayne's World," no sidekick for David Letterman to take with him to CBS.
Expatriate Canucks like Dan Aykroyd, Michael J. Fox, Mike Myers, Phil Hartman, John Candy, Rick Moranis and Martin Short could gather on Thursday to celebrate Canada Day, a holiday most Americans would rank somewhere below National Pickle Week.


How Many Need Special Access to Transit?
DETERMINING the number of people with disabilities who use the Long Island Rail Road is difficult.
The L.I.R.R. does not keep figures.
Neither do advocacy groups.
But they agree that the number is probably small, because most people who use the train system go through Pennsylvania Station in Manhattan, which, despite continuing renovations, is still inaccessible to people in wheelchairs.


And Baby Makes Two
PIGS IN HEAVEN By Barbara Kingsolver. 343 pp. New York: HarperCollins Publishers.


Manor Houses
To the Editor: Having seen most of the moated castles in the article "England's Moated Manor Houses" (May 2) I can say they are well worth visiting.
Bodiam Castle is a tantalizing ruin; I could almost see the knights on white horses riding across the causeway.
Leeds Castle, with the largest moat, was very grand.
But Ightham Mote evoked strong imaginings of what life in a moated manor was like.
I can still recall the hound dog's house in the courtyard, a cellar that had a window opening onto the moat and a comfortable looking sitting room.
Little Moreton Hall is so well cared for that it's hard to believe it was built before Columbus discovered America.


Kathleen Fritsch, Rick Giannasi
Kathleen Fritsch, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
August Fritsch of Royal Oak, Mich., was married yesterday to Rick Giannasi, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Piero Giannasi of Fort Lee, N.J.
The Rev.
Edgar da Cunha, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Nicholas Church in Palisades Park, N.J.


A Little Night Music Fills the Great Lawn


The Church Faces the Trespasses of Priests
FOR the Roman Catholic Church in the United States, reports of sexual abuse by priests of children and teen-agers have taken on the dimensions of a biblical plague.
Last week, for the first time, Pope John Paul II spoke out publicly on the problem.
In a letter to American bishops, the Pope expressed sorrow for the harm inflicted on victims and for the shock and demoralization suffered by the whole church.


When Tired Plants Need a Pick-Me-Up
SUMMER is officially here with its bright sunny days and good growing weather.
The garden should be flourishing with abundant green and beautiful flowers on sturdy stems.
If it is not, there may be good reasons.
It is possible that the plants are simply hungry, and the simplest solution is application of a plant fertilizer.
If the soil is of poor quality, lack of proper nutrition may be the cause of spindly growth and lack of strong flowers.
But if the soil is in good condition, these starvation conditions should not exist and can be easily remedied.


On Syrian Streets, They Dare Talk of Peace
In the ancient souks and the new office buildings of this city, growing numbers of people are now saying openly what was once unspeakable: peace with Israel is coming, and it is time to think about Syria's role in the Middle East after a peace agreement is signed.
While such private pronouncements are sharply at odds with the statements of the Syrian Government, which continues to accuse Israel of intransigence at peace talks in Washington, they are a clear measure of the degree to which the popular mood and economic reality seem to be shifting within Syria, which has long been the most hostile to Israel of the front-line Arab countries.


Wilfredo Sauri Garcia and Nicole King
Nicole Roberta King, a daughter of Ina H. and Robert F. King of New York, was married yesterday to Wilfredo Sauri Garcia, a son of Juanita Garcia and Wilfredo Sauri of Rio Piedras, P.R.
The Rev.
Renee Hill, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Union Theological Seminary in New York.
Ms.
King, who is 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Princeton University and received a master's degree in English from the University of Pennsylvania, where she a Ph.D. candidate in English.
She is to join the English department at the University of Maryland at College Park in September as an assistant professor of English.


Data Bank/June 27, 1993


Hsien-yu Wang and Craig C. Malbon
Dr.
Hsien-yu Wang, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Shih-Chung Wang of Hsin-Chu, Taiwan, was married yesterday to Dr.
Craig C. Malbon, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Elroy W. Malbon of Oxford, Mass.
The Rev.
Louis T. Tuleja performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church at Wading River, L.I.
Dr.
Wang, who is keeping her name, is an associate professor of biochemistry at the National Defense Medical Center, an army hospital and medical college in Taipei, Taiwan.
She is also a lieutenant colonel in the National Defense Army of Taiwan.
She graduated from National Chunghsing University in Taichung, Taiwan, and received a master's degree in biochemistry from the National Defense Medical Center.
She received a Ph.D. in pharmacology from State University at Stony Brook, L.I.


Put Radar Towers In the Ocean or Sound
"F.A.A. Is Opposed on Radar Towers"  [ June 13 ]  stated that the proposed towers have to be within an 8-to-12-mile radius of Kennedy and La Guardia Airports to be effective.
Thus the respective selection of North Bellmore and Roslyn.
Considering the intense local opposition to these towers, why not locate them in the Atlantic Ocean and Long Island Sound?


Buffalo
The last few years have been good for Buffalo.
A recent survey by the the National Weather Service confirms that there are worse places in New York State for snowfall (Syracuse topped the list last winter).
Then, too, there was a flurry of new investment that followed the announcement in January 1989 of the North American Free Trade Agreement, which phases out tariffs between the United States and Canada.
But landing the World University Games for the United States for the first time in their 70 years of competitions may be the biggest boost yet.
The games are held every two years.
They are scheduled for July 8 through the 18th and are expected not only to bring more than 5,000 athletes from 120 countries, but also to put the state's second-largest city in the international limelight.


When Postmasters Were Creative
IN the 19th century, in the infancy of the octopus that became the Civil Service bureaucracy, postmasters in smaller offices did not earn regular salaries from what was then the Post Office Department.
Instead, they were allowed to keep the money customers paid for postal services.
In simplified terms, managers of local post offices were given appointments that required them to hold mail addressed to local residents, who picked up their letters.
There was almost no home delivery.


Two Types of Lasers Available on L.I.
In reference to "Laser Surgery Making Inroads on L.I."  [ April 18 ] , we would like to clarify several issues concerning dermatologic laser surgery.
The pulsed-dye laser is one of several selective vascular-lesion lasers capable of treating port-wine stains, hemangiomas, facial spider veins and cherry angiomas.
Another is the copper-vapor laser, which also utilizes yellow light to specifically target red blood vessels.
Presently, there are two pulsed-dye and two copper-vapor lasers available on Long Island.
Different vascular lesions may respond better to one or the other.
No laser has been proven safe and effective for the treatment of spider veins on the legs.
Regarding the removal of pigmented lesions and tattoos, three lasers have received F.D.A. approval.
One, the q-switched ruby laser, was discussed in your article.
Another, the q-switched Nd-YAG laser, utilized a similar q-switched technique and has been shown to be equally successful in the removal of brown spots and tattoos.
Currently two of these lasers are located on Long Island.
The copper-vapor laser can also erase certain benign pigmented lesions.
However it does not treat tattoos.


P.O.W. TRADE BID FROM'67 DISCLOSED
Recently declassified State Department documents show that in early 1967, an East German lawyer dangled the possibility of trading two convicted Soviet spies in Britain for American prisoners of war who were captured in Vietnam and who were reported to be receiving medical treatment in East Germany.
But the lawyer, Wolfgang Vogel, now says that he was mistaken and that no American prisoners from Vietnam were in East German hospitals when he asked American officials in January and February of 1967 if they were interested in a trade for the spies, known as Peter and Helen Kroger, who were then serving 20-year terms for spying on British nuclear weapons development.


Connecticut Guide
DINOSAURS ARE US
Dinomania has arrived in Connecticut.
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. will proclaim the opening of Dinosaur Summer 1993 at Yale next Friday and on Sunday, from noon to 5 P.M., the Peabody Museum of Natural History will open its 125th anniversary exhibit titled "Dinosaur Vision: Science and Fiction in Jurassic Park."


L.I.R.R. Remodels 18 Stops for Disabled
FACED with a deadline of July 26 to comply with a Federal law mandating that commuter railroads be accessible to the disabled, the Long Island Rail Road is scrambling to complete work on major parts of its program.
Under the plan, submitted to the Federal Transit Administration in the Transportation Department in July, as required by the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990, 18 stations deemed essential to using the system are being made accessible to the disabled.


How the Littlest Stars Infiltrated Hollywood
Children are being seen, heard and, in general, causing all sorts of commotion on movie screens this summer.
They are bonding with killer whales ("Free Willy") and matching wits with dinosaurs ("Jurassic Park"), finding dad a mate ("Sleepless in Seattle") and setting him straight ("Father Hood"), mixing it up in cartoonish adventures ("Dennis the Menace") and hitting the road in a kind of "Easy Rider" about troubled prepubescents ("Josh and S.A.M.").
Though Hollywood has always had a place in its heart for precocious preteens, such child stars of yesteryear as Shirley Temple and Mickey Rooney were curious -- if hugely popular -- anomalies, their movies serving as quaint diversions during the Depression years.
Even the early 1960's boomlet of Disney family fare looks more like a minor ripple compared to the current tidal wave of movies featuring children.
Now deemed big business, young performers are being vigorously packaged in everything from high-jinks-infested John Hughes comedies to more traditional action-adventures to adult tales about broken homes primed for mending.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
HISTORY OF WATERWAYS
Water, according to the experts who put together the "Waterways" exhibition at the Pound Ridge Historical Society Museum, is our most abundant, yet most threatened element.
The display, which is on view through Dec. 12, traces the region's water history from the period of early American Indians to the contemporary era.


Hamlin Takes a 3-Shot Lead Over Daniel in Classic
It would have been easy for Shelley Hamlin to collapse after making bogeys on the first two holes in today's second round of the $450,000 L.P.G.A Classic.
Instead, the 44-year-old Hamlin displayed her resiliency by rallying for six birdies.
Hamlin finished with a four-under-par 67 on a windy afternoon at the Greate Bay Country Club, matching her opening-day 67 for a 134 total.
She finished the day with a three-shot lead over Beth Daniel, who also shot 67 after shooting 70 opening day.


Raid on Baghdad; Attack Is Aimed at the Heart of Iraq's Spy Network
Pentagon officials said tonight that the attack on Iraqi intelligence headquarters was intended as the military and political equivalent of a huge bombing of Central Intelligence Agency headquarters outside Washington.
The United States fired 23 Tomahawk cruise missiles at Iraq's intelligence headquarters, which is based in seven large buildings inside a walled compound in downtown Baghdad.
Secretary of Defense Les Aspin, in a Pentagon briefing tonight, said that the intelligence service directs espionage operations, interrogations and investigations, and runs computer and communications networks.  [ Text, page 12. ]


Corliss C. Spencer, Dana F. Perry
Corliss Christina Spencer, the daughter of Mrs.
Charles C. Spencer of Garden City, L.I., and the late Mr.
Spencer, was married yesterday to Dana Fraser Perry, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David P. Perry of West Orange, N.J.
The Rev.
James W. Adelmann of the United Church of Christ officiated at the Mohonk Mountain House in New Paltz, N.J.


Bookshelf
Additional titles of interest:
THE WOMAN WHO FELL FROM THE SKY: The Iroquois Story of Creation.
Retold by John Bierhorst.
Illustrated by Robert Andrew Parker.
Morrow. $15. (Ages 5 to 9) In this distinguished collaboration, an Iroquois creation myth is clearly and simply retold and complemented by limpid watercolor illustrations.


Modern-Dress 'Hamlet' Takes an Unusual Spin
IT is a pleasant surprise to have a prejudice shattered, as one of this writer's was last week by Studio Theater in Lindenhurst.
The publicity sent out by the theater read: " 'Hamlet' . . . staged in modern dress, with a new score . . . This production . . . is like none that has ever crossed the boards before."


INSIDE
The Elusive Judge Ginsburg
Sometimes a liberal and sometimes a conservative in her judicial opinions, Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg, the Supreme Court nominee, often winds up squarely in the middle.
Page 20.
Behind Japan's Scandal
Leaders of the Liberal Democratic Party say they should not have ignored signs of the corruption that led to its collapse.
Page 10.


Patricia A. Four, David W. Silber
Patricia Ann Four, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Four of East Williston, L.I., was married yesterday to David William Silber, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Avery Silber of Roslyn Heights, L.I.
The Rev.
Thaddeus Sapio performed the ceremony at St.
Anthony of Padua Roman Catholic Church in Yulan, N.Y.
Mrs.
Silber is a buyer for Judy's Place, a manufacturer of women's apparel in New York.
Her father owns the Hofsbrau restaurant in Richmond Hill, Queens.


4-Year-Old Bronx Boy Falls Six Stories to Death
A 4-year-old Bronx boy climbed over a window guard in his apartment building and fell six stories to his death early yesterday.
The boy, Chris Davis, of 1060 Sherman Avenue in University Heights, died at 1:55 A.M. at Lincoln Hospital from injuries caused by the fall, which occurred at 12:01 A.M., said Officer Scott Bloch, a police department spokesman.


Dump Nafta and Let the U.S. Worker Work
To the Editor:
"Poland's New Entrepreneurs Push the Economy Ahead" (June 20), attributing that country's newfound business success largely to a dedicated work force, is in stark contrast to "Labor Draws the Line in Decatur" (June 13), about United States worker slowdowns and hostility.


A Double Solution
To the Sports Editor:
George Steinbrenner is right to be concerned about safety at Yankee Stadium.
But there is a simple solution, and one that doesn't require the Bombers to abandon the Bronx.
Instead of paying Danny Tartabull $5 million a year to go 0 for 4, the principal owner should take all but two cents of that money and hire a thousand private uniformed security guards, at five grand for the summer, and station them in highly visible positions throughout the immediate neighborhood.
That would make everyone happy, and Tartabull would finally be earning his pay.
TONY SAVAGE The Bronx


Jeffrey Fine and Jennifer Rubin
Jennifer Rubin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
A.
Michael Rubin of Wayne, N.J., was married last evening to Jeffrey Fine, the son of Allan Fine and Barbara Fine, both of New York.
Rabbi Carl Astor performed the ceremony at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
Mrs.
Fine, 27, is the executive director of the Co-op City Jewish Community Council, a social-service agency in the Bronx.
She and her husband graduated from Syracuse University and both have master's degrees in social work, she from Yeshiva University and he from New York University.
Mrs.
Fine's father is a lawyer in Wayne.
Her mother, Marilyn Rubin, is an associate professor of public administration and economics at John Jay College in New York.


Spector of Terror; NOTEBOOK: Terrorism in New York: Looking for the Common Denominator
LINKS A solid line indicates a strong connection; dashed lines indicate a weaker connection.
TO THE AFGHAN RESISTANCE Muslims all over the world rallied to help Muslin rebels fighting a Soviet-backed government in Afghanistan.
Both the Sheik and Mr.
Nosair supported the rebels there.


Dinkins Opposes Measure on Garbage
A bill in the New York State Assembly intended to prevent the bunching of incinerators, landfills and sewage plants in poor or minority communities is encountering opposition from an unexpected corner: the Dinkins administration.
Under the legislation, companies or government agencies seeking to open such "environmental facilities" would have to prove that they were not placing an unfair burden on a neighborhood.
To receive a permit, the applicants would also have to develop plans to share profits with surrounding communities, or provide them with amenities like parks.


Mallory L. Israel, Bruce A. Huberman
Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Israel of Short Hills, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Mallory Lewis Israel to Dr.
Bruce Adam Huberman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Huberman of South Orange, N.J.
An October wedding is planned.
Ms.
Israel, 27, is a publicity coordinator at Donna Karan New York.
She is a graduate of Arizona State University.


Saving and Trade
To the Editor:
"Trade Sanity With Japan" (editorial, June 16) falls back on an old shibboleth of free traders: "Longstanding trade deficits reflect insufficient saving." There is a good argument for free trade, but that is not it.


Neuchatel
To the Editor: We note that the article on Neuchatel describes "life-size puppets, fondue and the Swatch" as among the town's inventions.


Secular and Sacred Images In Cold Spring a Puzzlement
TO say that Jerald Frampton's Cibachromes, on view at the John Froats Gallery, here, could prompt a visit to the ophthalmologist is not a wisecrack but rather a note of caution.
After all, a series of blurred photographs is an unsettling experience, all the more so when the works are tableaux.
Add to that the show's title, "True Tales of Jesus," which may or may not be ironic -- the artist himself does not seem sure.
The Savior appears in only 3 of these 24 scenes: in one He sits, a berobed figure with a flower in his hair and arms outstretched, in the company of two small children; in another, He is airborne over a Classical temple to the apparent surprise of a Roman centurion; and in a third image He stands beside a leafless tree with a bird.
Otherwise, the cast consists of cowboys, boxers, animals and prehistoric figures clad in skins -- all deployed in a doll's landscape, except when they are portents in the sky.


POSTINGS: Shelton Prospering; Corporate Cornucopia
"It's quite a corporate roster we have," said Mayor Mark A. Lauretti of Shelton, Conn.
Most recently, Pitney Bowes decided to build a new center for its shipping and weighing division on a 22-acre site where research and development operations are already based.
Carm Adimando, vice president and treasurer of Pitney Bowes, said the company hoped to break ground for the 234,000-square-foot building next month.


Ancestral Home Of Yellowed Celery
I had to laugh reading the May 30 Montclair Journal, "Plan for Farmers' Market in Center of Town Upsets Grocers." You print without a trace of skepticism the bizarre notion, promulgated by close-knit local merchants, that competition is "unethical and unfair" in the grocery business.
It's especially amusing to those of us who for years have been complaining about low-quality supermarkets and the lack of decent produce in this area -- where real-estate prices have long discouraged the kind of freewheeling competition in the grocery business that provides most other Americans with access to a range of quality produce.


The View From: Stamford; A Shelter That Works To Motivate Residents
AT Franklin Common in Stamford, people without homes can get help and a place to live for up to two years.
And while a family is housed at the Common -- with everything from laundry to child care available -- the basic rule is they have to make an effort to help themselves.
The Rev.
Richard L. Schuster, director of St.
Luke's Community Services, which operates the Common, said that "what we're trying to accomplish here is to help persons have a full opportunity to reach towards self-sufficiency."


Disgraceful Attitude, Or Boys-Will-Be-Boys?
To the Editor:
Your article about Inside Edge betrays a disgraceful boys-will-be-boys attitude about the creators, Aaron Shapiro and Jon Hsu.
Their demeaning treatment of half the U.S. population should be reprimanded, not rewarded.
ROSE N. WALD New York


George S. Lewis, Former Directoer Of Architects Group, Dead at 77
George S. Lewis, who led the New York chapter of the American Institute of Architects to a high-profile role in civic debates, died on Friday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 77 years old and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was prostate cancer, said a friend, Eugenie Cowan Havemeyer.


53 Youths Are Selected By General Foods U.S.A.
"I'M sorry to say I'm happy to get a rejection letter," said Michael E. Aquilino, a marketing major at Iona College in New Rochelle who has sent his resume for a summer job to 46 companies.
Mr.
Aquilino, a senior who began contacting companies in February, has so far received rejection letters from only 5 of them.
"The most promising rejection came from Xerox in Stamford," he reported.
"It said that they had nothing part-time but to contact them when I was ready for full-time employment. That cheered me. Maybe they saw something they liked in my resume. But I can't help wondering if the other companies even opened my resume. They must be getting thousands. I feel I'm in competition with the whole world this summer."


Scholars Say Sheik Gives Inspiration, Not Orders
He sat on the beige sofa of his spare living room, thundering his call for revolution in Egypt.
The planned execution of 22 of his followers would lead to a "blood bath" against the Egyptian Government of President Hosni Mubarak, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman warned in Arabic.
"The first people who will drown are Mubarak and his regime."
America, too, would pay the price, said the blind 55-year-old Islamic fundamentalist.
"They have to understand they will have to bear the consequences for their actions," he threatened on June 17.


Mirror, Mirror
OUT of all interior spaces, perhaps none are as fearsome as the fitting room.
Laden with secret psychology, they are spaces in which life's truths are tripled in tripartite mirrors.
Setha Low, a professor of environmental psychology at the CUNY graduate center, calls them "the ultimate confrontational space."
Anne Cole, the California-based swimsuit designer, admits that there are "worse things in life than fitting rooms -- I just can't think of what they are."


Live and in Color
To the Editor:
Hail and three rousing cheers for your Book Review this week -- almost encyclopedic in scope, a guide to reading and a color cover!
Congratulations.
ADOLPH N. SPERO  Bronx


Report on Empire Assails Albany's Insurance Dept.
While Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield was being mismanaged, the New York State Insurance Department seemed helpless to address the company's financial crisis and overly concerned that it might generate bad publicity for Empire, a scathing report on the nation's largest nonprofit health insurer says.
The 200-page report released on Friday by the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations portrays a department that was fearful that the company would collapse, leaving some of the state's sickest people uninsured.
And so, the report asserts, regulators often appeared to bend to Empire's wishes.


The Bridge Brigade
Here come the newest fall looks -- Edwardian-inspired pants suits, madly romantic silhouettes, monastic simplicity and swinging shapes -- all ticketed to sell in the "bridge" bracket.
Which means great fall style for less than astronomical prices.


The Short Season for Apricots
FOR the connoisseur of fresh apricots, an all-too-brief season, from mid-June to mid-July, is often full of frustration.
Unlike Goldilocks, anyone trying to find the lush, velvety fruits when they are neither too hard nor too soft but just right may have trouble.
It's the familiar yet tiresome story of fruit that is at its best when tree ripened but which rarely comes to market in that condition.
Few local growers have apricots to harvest, so they are shipped from California, the source of most apricots, and both time and safe handling preclude picking the fruit at its peak.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about the purchase of 40 Wall Street referred incorrectly to the buyer's arrangements with the owner of the land.
There was no moratorium on land-lease payments for the property.
The picture caption with the article misidentified the man at the right.
He was Kwai Hing Sen, a director of Kinson Properties, not Edmund Yu, its president.


Positive Images And AIDS Awareness
To the Editor:
Whatever reactions or backlash the red ribbon may have provoked ("Red Ribbons Are Turning Black and Blue," May 23) are, in my mind, positive, because communicating about AIDS confronts the barrier of fear.


Europe Car Rental
To the Editor: In addition to the issue of cost, raised in the article by John Brannon Albright ("Figuring the Cost of Car Rentals in Europe," May 9), there is a more important problem for those of us that are 70 years old or older.
Most European car rental agencies, including branches of American companies, will not rent to a driver over 70.
My wife and I, both over 70 and both good drivers with exemplary records, had to make arrangements for rental here before we left for Ireland.
I advised the travel agent that unless we had a guarantee of a car we would not make the trip.
After some effort we had the guarantee and then spent almost a week driving around the country.


Judging by the Cover, And What's Inside
To the Editor:
As a junior at Harvard, I feel compelled to respond to the article on Inside Edge by Elizabeth Kaye ("A Niche for the 90's," May 23).
The article glosses over many disturbing aspects of the new magazine, founded by two other Harvard juniors.
Its cover, which bears bold headlines like "Women Who Love Sex," "A Trip on Acid" and "How to Dump Your Girlfriend," is hardly, as Ms.
Kaye seems to think, misrepresentative of the magazine's content.
These examples will suffice:


Now a Round of Applause: And the Loser Is . . .
We all remember what Vince Lombardi, Leo Durocher and Billy Martin thought about losers, particularly good ones.
Perverts, social retrogrades, drooling embodiments of Communistic values was what they were.
"If there is such a thing as a good loser, then the game is crooked," is what Billy said.


Motown Comes to Katonah
A benefit at Caramoor Center for Music and the Arts, June 19.


Public &amp; Private; Another Kind of Closet
Sometime in the next few weeks the President will decide whether or not to lift the ban on gay men and lesbians in the military.
Faced with considerable opposition in Congress, it looks today as though he is likely to settle for a compromise that is politically safe.
But it also looks as though that compromise is un-American.
The new policy for allowing gay people to serve in the armed forces -- as they have done since this country was founded -- is known in shorthand as "Don't ask, don't tell." This gives the illusion that sexuality in the service will become a private matter.
Illusory it is.
Several of the proposed compromises would replace the outright ban on gay soldiers with the creation of a permanent cadre of second-class military men and women.


Are Very Rich Puppies Really Different?
The First Family's search for a dog for Chelsea continues.
In May, President Clinton bid on a golden retriever at a benefit auction for the Sidwell Friends School, where Chelsea is a student.
He stopped at $3,500. (It went for $3,700.)


Pejorative Parallels
To the Editor:
As the author of books for young adults, I would like to respond to Doris Grumbach's review of "Sarah Orne Jewett: A Writer's Life" (May 23).
The reviewer compared Elizabeth Silverthorne's biography to a young-adult book, claiming that both are "stripped down" and "simplistic." There are clunkers in any genre of writing.
When casting about for a pejorative parallel, however, Ms.
Grumbach should have picked a literary field with which she has had more experience.
Those familiar with young adults and their literature know that a lower age level does not mean a lower level of quality.


Avril Hordyk, Lorne Dannenbaum
Avril Andrea Hordyk, a director of Off Broadway plays, and Lorne Stephen Dannenbaum, a poet and playwright, were married on Friday in a civil ceremony at the Municipal Building in Manhattan.
The bride, 37, is the daughter of John and Catherine Marie Hordyk of Armonk, N.Y.
She graduated from Barnard College and received a master of fine arts degree from Columbia University, where she is studying for a Ph.D. in theater directing.


Airborne


Anti-Abortion Group Maps Strategy
Over the past three days, as the National Right to Life Committee held its first annual convention since its fall from power in Washington, one analogy was cited again and again by the speakers who rose to rally the rank and file.
The Rev.
Richard John Neuhaus, in his keynote address to the nation's largest anti-abortion group, set the tone.
"We as a country have been this way before," he said.
"Remember that at the time of Dred Scott all three branches of government were in the hands of pro-slavery forces."


Ask What PBS Can Do for Its Country
Granted, only someone who makes a living from watching television could leap to the conclusion that David R. Gergen's performance as a commentator on "The MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour" was what got him his big new job with the Clinton White House.
There must be other reasons.
Yet glimpsing the master of communications on the tube nowadays, venting the Administration line with the same breathy boyishness as when he was criticizing it, one can't help wondering.
Is it so unlikely that after months of tuning in to the Friday-night PBS post-mortems on Administration mishaps, the slow-reacting Clintonians finally figured out that if Mr.
Gergen's advice were privately available on, say, Wednesday, it might forestall embarrassments on Thursday?


Jean Harris Savors a New Life After Prison
JEAN HARRIS, who was released from state prison five months ago on a grant of clemency in the 1980 murder of her former lover, Dr.
Herman Tarnower, said that soon after she moved to a cabin on the Connecticut River in New Hampshire, CBS sent a television team "to find my house and take pictures of it."
"They went to the tax bureau to track it down, then to my neighbors to ask what they thought of this notorious woman living in the neighborhood." She smiled and said, "The man who runs the general store shook his head and said, 'Frankly, I don't think anybody gives a damn.' "


Triple Crown Must Be Majestic, Not Cruel
They have a Triple Crown in England, too.
You win the 2,000 Guineas, the Epsom Derby and the St.
Leger, and you sweep.
Only one horse has done it since 1935.
In this country, you win the Kentucky Derby, the Preakness and the Belmont Stakes, and you sweep the Triple Crown.
Only 11 horses have done it since 1919.


Balanced Jurist at Home in the Middle
hen advocates for the homeless pitched nine tents in Lafayette Park across from the White House in 1981, they also set up a complicated constitutional question involving free speech and government regulation.
By the time the issue was resolved, it provided a clear demonstration of the resolutely centrist judicial style of Ruth Bader Ginsburg -- then a judge on the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, now President Clinton's nominee for the Supreme Court.


At Work; The Unfolding of Gay Culture
CHOOSE a media source, any media source.
This is what you've seen recently: A sea of people, stretching from a stage at the foot of Capitol Hill to the Washington Monument, cheering as a color guard and a group of uniformed gay men and lesbians march in and brace at attention.
They are not the Village People and the song is not "In the Navy." Lesbians hug on the cover of Newsweek.
RuPaul, "super model of the world," sashays in drag on MTV and makes the wig a political statement.
Country-and-western chantoosie/lesbian frissonmeister K.D.
Lang comes out, but it's her vegetarianism that causes controversy.
Celebrations of gay pride no longer seem relegated to the month of June.
Change may not be as -- pardon the adjective -- flamboyant in the workplace, but it is occurring, person by person, enterprise by enterprise, all over the country.


Benefactors Find Out Too Late the Real Costs
"Neuberger Museum Honors Benefactor on His 90th Birthday" (May 30) notes that "the story is full of dizzying and impressive numbers," but omits mention of the most staggering figures of all -- the costs of constructing the SUNY Purchase facility and meeting operating budgets.
In the mid-1960's, Neuberger had no more room at home to house an art collection valued between $4 million and $7 million.
Major museums, including the Museum of Modern Art and the Metropolitan put out feelers to acquire his paintings.
A sophisticated sort, Mr.
Neuberger knew that if he donated the art works, requests would inevitably follow for a multimillion-dollar gift to maintain the gallery and/or wing in which they would be exhibited.
He declined the solicitations.


Church Burglary On Rise
BURGLARIES in churches, synagogues and mosques around the state are on the rise, law-enforcement officials say.
"Thieves are ripping off churches more and more these days," said Detective Capt.
James Buckley of the Paterson Police Department.
"Years ago there was a certain amount of honor even among thieves. You would never catch anyone burglarizing a church or a synagogue. Now it's par for the course."


Early Blueprints for Abstract Expressionism
Who is Augustus Vincent Tack?
The name hovers tantalizingly in the background of the history of American painting, a vague presence in need of definition.
Tack, who died in 1949 at the age of 78, is probably best known as a visionary precursor of Abstract Expressionism, American painting's finest hour.
The semi-abstract landscapes that he began painting in the late 1920's -- with their flat expanses of color flecked and faceted with contrasting tones -- look like blueprints for Clyfford Still's fissured abstractions. (This connection was emphasized when their work was placed in proximity in "The Natural Paradise: Painting in America 1800-1950," an exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art in 1976.)


Elizabeth Gavin, David Scott
Elizabeth Anne Gavin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Henry Gavin of Rumson, N.J., was married there yesterday to David Andrew Scott, the son of Anne Scott of Point Pleasant, N.J., and the late Jack H. Scott.
The Rev.
Joseph W. Hughes performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Holy Cross Church.


Two Communities Savor Victory Over Pentagon Plans for Cutbacks; Lives Constructed Around Military Can Go Forward
McGuire Air Force Base, the military enterprise that sustains this region, went from the brink of extinction this week to an expanded role that seems to assure a prosperous future for its neighboring communities into the next century.
Not only will McGuire be kept open as an active Air Force base, contrary to a Pentagon recommendation in March, but it will expand in size and stature as the chief air mobility wing for the eastern United States, the Base Closing and Realignment Commission decided on Thursday.


Into the Maelstrom
Kristine M. Gebbie walked into the White House Rose Garden on Friday to accept a job that is ready made for trouble: AIDS czar.
When President Clinton took office there were high expectations for the job of AIDS czar, or White House AIDS Coordinator, its real-world title.
Some envisioned the AIDS czar as a strategic framer of AIDS research policy with a mandate to focus on the most promising areas of development.
Others wanted the czar to overhaul AIDS policy and coordinate efforts among public health and social agencies.
Mr.
Clinton, at one point, recalled the Manhattan Project in describing the emergency, large-scale effort that such a person would lead.


The City Can Be 'Green,' Too
To the Editor:
Kent Jeffreys seems perplexed by the National Audubon Society's decision to locate its headquarters in Manhattan ("What's Audubon Doing in New York City?" Letters, June 13).
Environmental groups (and any employers concerned about air quality) would naturally choose to place their offices where they can be served by public transportation.
EDWARD LLOYD Newark, N.J., June 14  The writer is director of the Rutgers Environmental Law Clinic.


Spector of Terror; NOTEBOOK: Terrorism in New York: Looking for the Common Denominator
LINKS A solid line indicates a strong connection; dashed lines indicate a weaker connection.
TO THE AFGHAN RESISTANCE Muslims all over the world rallied to help Muslin rebels fighting a Soviet-backed government in Afghanistan.
Both the Sheik and Mr.
Nosair supported the rebels there.


Anne Davidson and Douglas Barr
Anne Woodruff Davidson, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dekkers H. Davidson of Thornwood, N.Y., was married yesterday to Douglas Clayton Barr, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harry C. Barr of Boston.
The Rev.
Deadra Johns, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Mountain Grove Memorial Church in Huletts Landing, N.Y.
Mrs.
Barr, 31, graduated from Dartmouth College, and she and her husband received M.B.A.'s from Harvard University.
Next month, she will become the senior account manager in the Dallas office of Cambridge Technology Partners, computer consultants.


A Dog, a Fence, a Hank of Hair
If you want to keep rabbits out of the garden and you don't mind blood on your hands, get a dog with a killer instinct.
Or you can put up a fence.
Roger Swain, in "The Practical Gardener" (Henry Holt, 1989), recommends 48-inch-high chicken wire with a 1-inch mesh, which he puts up every spring and takes down every fall.
In the spring, he runs his rototiller around the periphery of his vegetable garden, "churning the soil to a fine froth." Then he works the fence 4 to 6 inches down into the soil, which settles it firmly enough to keep animals from getting underneath.


If You're Thinking of Living in: Dobbs Ferry
FROM the living room of their two-story Mediterranean-style home high on the ridge at the south end of Dobbs Ferry, Mary and Carl Schellhorn can look across the Hudson River at the Palisades and the New Jersey hills.
The Schellhorns bought their 86-year-old, four-bedroom house six years ago when they first saw the hilly neighborhood with its mix of Tudor, colonial and Italian architectural styles set amid tall tulip and oak trees.


JUNE 20-26: Young Steps Down; Detroit Now May Face A Referendum on Revival
His voice laboring from the effects of emphysema, Coleman A. Young, who is 75, said last week that he did not have the energy to seek a sixth four-year term as Detroit's mayor.
The city's mayoral race instantly became a wide open contest among more than a dozen candidates, and could well turn into a referendum on the economic future of what is arguably the country's most depressed big city.
Mr.
Young, whose principal contribution was to bring political enfranchisement to blacks, failed to lure investment and business after a massive flight of whites during the 1960's and 1970's.


JUNE 20-26: Passive Smoking; The Tobacco Industry Strikes Back
How much power does the Environmental Protection Agency have?
Too much to suit the tobacco industry, if the agency's position on second-hand smoke becomes law.
Five months after the E.P.A. said smoke from other people's cigarettes can cause lung cancer and other illnesses in non-smokers, the Philip Morris and R. J. Reynolds companies, and four other tobacco industry groups sued the agency in a Federal District Court in North Carolina, saying the E.P.A. had made false claims, using data selectively.
The E.P.A. hasn't put forward any regulations about second-hand smoke.
That would be up to Congress or the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.
But the tobacco companies said the E.P.A.'s announcement carried the weight of an edict, and that scores of employers and municipalities had reacted by tightening restrictions on where smokers could light up.


The Executive Computer; Do Offices Want a Rolls-Royce of Color Printers?
The first desktop color laser printer has been introduced by QMS Inc., and it's only $12,499.
At that price, the printer can produce color even before it's ordered.
The accountant will turn gray, the boss will see red, and there will be smatterings of envyish green and jaundiced yellow among people now using conventional black-and-white laser printers.
On the other hand, the QMS Color Script Laser 1000 does represent a breakthrough.
Until now, such machines have sold for $20,000 to $40,000.


Eliza McC. Knox, Clark E. Cohen
Eliza McCulloch Knox, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph T. Knox of Richmond, was married there yesterday to Dr.
Clark Emerson Cohen, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert Cohen of Boulder, Colo.
The Rev.
Don Raby Edwards performed the ceremony at St.
Stephen's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Cohen is an associate at Lyon Appraisals, a personal-property appraisal company in San Francisco.
She and her husband graduated from Princeton University.
Her father is the chairman of the foreign language department at St.
Christopher's School, a private school for boys in Richmond.
Her mother, Ella-Prince Knox, is a retired art historian.


AMERICA: LOVE IT OR LOATHE IT
In "America: Love It or Loathe It" (June 6), David Remnick reports that some Russians fear that the country is "being taken over by foreign prospectors using the country as a Klondike, a vast resource pool that will enrich the foreigners but leave Russia even more of a ruin."


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SOCIAL CRITICISM THE LAST INNOCENT WHITE MAN IN AMERICA And Other Writings.
By John Leonard.
New Press, $21.95.


And They Delivered
A benefit auction and cocktail reception for God's Love We Deliver, June 22.


Elizabeth Kopelman, Kurt Borgwardt
Elizabeth Sue Kopelman, a lawyer in Palo Alto, Calif., was married yesterday to Kurt Chandler Borgwardt, the director of research at a mutual fund company in Mountain View, Calif.
Rabbi Pamela Frydman Baugh performed the ceremony at the Lark Creek Inn in Larkspur, Calif.
Ms.
Kopelman, 28, is keeping her name.
She is a principal of Accord Dispute Resolution Services, a mediation and arbitration concern, and is a senior fellow at the Center for Conflict and Negotiation at Stanford University, both in Palo Alto.
She graduated from Cambridge University, from which she also received a master's degree in international relations.
She received her law degree from Harvard University.


Whitney Joy and Scott Cathcart
Whitney Maguire Joy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James F. Joy of Paris and Highland, N.J., was married yesterday to Scott DePass Cathcart, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles D. Cathcart of Tuxedo Park, N.Y.
The Rev.
George J. Willis Jr. and the Rev.
Daphne Hawkes, both Episcopal priests, jointly performed the ceremony at St.
George's-by-the-River Church in Rumson, N.J.
Mrs.
Cathcart, 26, is the regional sales manager for G. S. L. Inc., a junior sportswear company in New York.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
Her father is a director, in Paris, of Citicorp Venture Capital, a division of Citicorp.


Shift Recommended In H.I.V. Treatment
An independent panel of experts appointed by the Government has suggested a major change in the strategy for treating people infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
The experts said a widely used drug, AZT, was no longer necessarily recommended for patients with stable conditions and high enough counts of certain immune cells in their blood.


Reader, She Married Him, Alas
FROM THE HEAT OF THE DAY By Roy Heath. 159 pp. New York: Persea Books. $19.95.


Cultural Heritage Series Begins at Kensico Dam
ONCE again this summer, Westchester residents can be grateful to the Department of Parks, Recreation and Conservation for conserving our money with free recreation in the parks.
Today at 2 P.M., the yearly series of Cultural Heritage Celebrations begins with an African-American Festival at Kensico Dam Plaza in Valhalla.
On the program is "live musical and dramatic entertainment throughout the afternoon" with performances by, among others, the Dave Hubbard Jazz Quartet and the Bereshith Cultural Institute African Dancers.
If it rains, the program will be given at the Fairview/Greenburgh Community Center.


Helaine Harte, Bogdan Miltchev
Helaine Lynn Harte, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Lawrence S. Harte of Livingston, N.J., was married there yesterday evening to Bogdan Miltchev, a son of Col. and Mrs.
Ivan Miltchev of Sofia, Bulgaria.
Cantor Dennis Tobin officiated at the Cedar Hill Country Club.
The bride, 26, graduated from Columbia University, from which she also received an M.B.A.
She is employed in brand management for the Procter &amp; Gamble Company in Cincinnati.
Her father is an orthodontist.


Dashed Hopes: When Tour Companies Go Under
EARLIER this month, Milestone Educational Institute of Cambridge, Mass., a commercial tour operator, abruptly shut its doors, leaving an estimated 5,000 students and teachers without the tickets to Europe or hotel vouchers they paid for long ago.
The Massachusetts Attorney General said complaints received immediately from schools in 27 states involving 1,160 would-be travelers showed the school groups had lost $2.4 million.
When all the complaints are gathered authorities expect a total above $6.5 million.
Massachusetts has moved against Milestone and its owner, Christopher DuMello Kenyon, who was served with lawsuit papers in England in mid-June, according to Leslie Davies, an assistant Attorney General.
The state got a restraining order to keep Mr.
Kenyon from again selling travel arrangements in Massachusetts and sued for refunds to clients, plus civil penalties and costs.


Corrections
A picture caption about Arnold Schwarzenegger with the Film View column today, on page 15 of the Arts and Leisure section, misstates the release date for the film "Pumping Iron." It was 1977.


Fresh Air Fund Explores Career Choices
Most of the junior high school students from the Bronx who toured New York Telephone's Guardian Center in Manhattan last week have yet to settle on careers.
But for 14-year-old Toya Ford, the visit provided a chance to sample corporate life, and she seized it with gusto.
When the students filed into a boardroom to see a film on career options, Toya grabbed a seat at the head of the table so she could learn what it feels like "to be the boss."


East Coast Bridge Team Contending
In playoffs here today to select the United States teams to compete in the world bridge championships in Chile in September, an East Coast team headed closer to victory in the open final.
Michael Becker of Tenafly, N.J., Ron Rubin of North Miami Beach, Fla., Ron Sukoneck of Annandale, Va., Russ Ekeblad of Providence, R.I., Bob Levin of Hallandale, Fla., and Peter Weichsel of Encinitas, Calif., who are known as the Spingold team, led by 50 imps with 48 deals remaining out of a scheduled 128.


Putting It in the Market
To the Editor:
"Trade Sanity With Japan" (editorial, June 16) states that the American economy suffers from a lack of savings, presumably as witnessed by the low percentage of money invested in banks, and that this low rate of bank savings has prevented American companies from raising capital for modernization.
I disagree.


Elaine P. Mullen, Thomas H. Peer
Elaine Patricia Mullen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter P. Mullen of Bronxville, N.Y., was married on Friday to Thomas Harold Peer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold T. Peer of Cranford, N.J.
The Rev.
Otto Hentz performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the chapel of the Convent of the Sacred Heart in New York.
Mrs.
Peer is a senior occupational therapist at the New York State Psychiatric Institute and the director of the transitional work program at the institute's Community Mental Health Clinic, both in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received a master's degree in occupational therapy from Columbia University, where she is also a clinical instructor of occupational therapy.


Bryant Park's So Near, So Far
Last week's social marathon, perhaps the last until fall, included an event in an outdoor arena, the lushly restored Bryant Park, behind the New York Public Library.
On Wednesday, Ricky and Ralph Lauren (seen dancing, above) gave a dinner there to benefit the Robert Steel Foundation for Pediatric Cancer Research.
Robert Isabell, the floral designer, added a thousand or so citronella candles, a handpainted dance floor and white wicker furniture to the park's green-as-could-be lawn and gardens, creating a wonderland worthy of Mr.
Lauren's own advertisements.
All that was missing was an entrance by the fashion designer himself on one of his noble steeds.
"It was like being at a grand European house," said Peter Brown, who does public relations for Andrew Lloyd Webber and others.


Jeannine Gibbons, Peter Margolis
Jeannine M. Gibbons, the daughter of Thomas and Patricia Gibbons of Swansea, Mass., was married yesterday evening to Dr.
Peter S. Margolis, a son of Dr.
Gerald Margolis of Cinnaminson, N.J., and Gail Magnus of Cherry Hill, N.J.
Rabbi Donald Pollack officiated at Glen Manor House in Portsmouth, R.I.
Mrs.
Margolis, 26, is an analytical chemist at Springborn Laboratories, an aquatic toxicology laboratory in Wareham, Mass.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
Her father is a quality assurance representative in Boston for the Department of Defense.
Her mother is a customer service representative for Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Rhode Island in Providence.


Graduates Bring Their Ideals to a Battered World
AS Ricardo Horacio Roda prepared for graduation last week, he looked back on three years of struggling to learn a new language and make friends in a strange country.
The 17-year-old from Argentina, the first Hispanic student in 60 years to become valedictorian of Roosevelt High School in Yonkers, said that for him graduation was "the American dream come true -- proof that in this country, if you want something and work hard for it, it can happen."
Throughout Westchester last week, high school students who were approaching graduation looked back at their struggles as teen-agers and ahead at the responsibilities they would shoulder as adults.
Born in the 1970's, these graduates are statistically part of what some journalists are calling "Generation X" (from the 1991 book by Douglas Coupland, regarded by some as the manifesto of the under-30 set).
This group has no formal name (titles like Boomlets and MTV Generation have at times been suggested by the media for the older, twentysomethings) and to date few distinguishing characteristics except that they follow a generation of baby boomers, school authorities say.
A Difficult Legacy
It is what 17-year-old Jennifer Zobel, who graduated second in her class at Fox Lane High School in Bedford last week, described as "a generation of children of working parents, kids who had to learn early on to be independent."


Next Week, the World Stage Clinton's Well-Timed 'Escape to Tokyo'
WHEN President Clinton steps from Air Force One onto Japanese soil on the afternoon of July 6, he will be granted a sort of magic wish.
Overnight, he stands to be transformed from a President struggling up a steep learning curve into a world leader of stature and weight.
Arriving for the economic summit meeting with a deficit-reduction measure in hand that embodies the United States' promises to set its fiscal house in order before demanding the same of others, he will have accomplished what the other weakened leaders could only fantasize about.


Yellowstone's Landmark in Logs
PERHAPS no building embodies the myths of the American West better than the Old Faithful Inn in Yellowstone National Park, where the mere act of entering the lobby -- an enchanted treehouse come to life -- provides the same sense of awe as the wilderness itself.
For devotees of rustic architecture, the hotel, designed in 1903 by the architect Robert C. Reamer and built within oooooh-ing distance of Old Faithful, defines Yellowstone as a place as surely as the geysers and mountains that inspired it.
Its atrium lobby, one of the most dramatic and dotty log interiors ever created, is surely the only one in which the bellmen sleep in a belfry called "Bat's Alley" and guests can sip from a drinking fountain embedded in a boulder or gaze at an shiplike indoor crow's nest seven stories up.


Farce Within Farce: Michael Frayn's 'Noises Off'
"NOISES OFF" is about a provincial English repertory company touring in a thoroughly tacky sex comedy called "Nothing On." Much acknowledged and justly so, the farce within a farce is the flip side of Michael Frayn, an amazingly protean playwright ("The Benefactors," a drama about social reform, was a 1985 hit on Broadway), novelist ("Now You Know," a portentous comedy about bureaucracies was published this year), adapter (of French and Russian authors, mostly Chekhov) and journalist.
For all Mr.
Frayn's braininess and versatility, it is this 1982 theater piece, recently mauled in a movie version, for which he remains best known.
What "Noises Off" says about a dying-out genre is relevant to the dire state of summer stock and what it shows of actors and a director gone haywire makes a final statement, preposterous and inarguable, about the theater at its craziest.


When Tired Plants Need a Pick-Me-Up
SUMMER is officially here with its bright sunny days and good growing weather.
The garden should be flourishing with abundant green and beautiful flowers on sturdy stems.
If it is not, there may be good reasons.
It is possible that the plants are simply hungry, and the simplest solution is application of a plant fertilizer.
If the soil is of poor quality, lack of proper nutrition may be the cause of spindly growth and lack of strong flowers.
But if the soil is in good condition, these starvation conditions should not exist and can be easily remedied.


Lightning Protection: Focus on Small Jobs
ALTHOUGH lightning can occur in any season, summer storms generally produce the largest amount.
Houses in urban and built-up suburban regions usually are at only a small risk, because lightning tends to strike just the highest points, like tall commercial buildings in such areas.
Not so in open places like parks, fields, farmland and beachfront property.
In those areas, houses, trees and often people are frequently the highest points and, thus, the most likely targets.


Corrections
An article last Sunday in copies distributed in Connecticut and Westchester, about small-landlord associations, included an erroneous status report from a legislative aide on a measure in the Connecticut Legislature.
The measure, allowing towns to require tenants to pay rent into escrow accounts when landlords lack certificates of occupancy, did reach the floor, and was passed.


Even Now the Civil Rights Struggle Needs Young Activists
To the Editor:
I was the young woman described as "no Joan of Arc" by Dennis Graham Combs's City University law professor ("Preachers of the Bar," Op-Ed, June 13) because as a white civil rights worker in the South during the 1960's I was not at risk.


'Life's Dominion'
To the Editor:
Laurence H. Tribe's review of "Life's Dominion," while chiding the author for begging a "key question" regarding a secular state's power to protect particular people, itself begs the big abortion question by describing fetuses as "helpless creatures that are on their way to becoming such people." "Becoming" implies "not arrived," which logically precludes the early fetuses from being people.
Mr.
Tribe has served them up to the defenders of abortion as nonpeople and thereby, in one answer-assuming stroke, really eliminated most, if not all, of the arguments against abortion.
WILLIAM H. IZLAR JR.
Atlanta


Stacey A. Mayer, Todd M. Crandall
Mr. and Mrs.
Donald Mayer of Albany have announced the engagement of their daughter Stacey Ann Mayer to Todd Michael Crandall, a son of Mrs.
Wayne Pickup of Burnt Hills, N.Y.
An October wedding is planned.
Miss Mayer, 27, is a mortgage consultant for the Mortgage Group in Albany.
She graduated from the College of St.
Rose.


Business Diary/June 20-25
COMPANIES At Empire Blue Cross, Definitely a Week to Forget


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF Pavin Hangs On for a One-Shot Lead  Corey Pavin put a bunker shot to within six feet on the 18th hole to avoid squandering a three-stroke lead for a second time yesterday and take a one-stroke advantage into the final round of the Greater Hartford Open in Cromwell, Conn.
With wind gusting to 20 miles per hour, Pavin double-bogeyed the 17th hole after a chip shot from a ravine got caught on the fringe.
After narrowly missing a 15-foot putt, he missed a 3-footer coming back.
"It was the kind of day where everything went haywire," Pavin said.


New Approaches To Menopause
"Menopause: New Research and Treatment"  [ June 6 ]  was well written with a lot of good information.
Unfortunately, I feel that it misrepresented some of the effects of exercise on the woman with osteoporosis and might be misleading to the general public.
It is important to make a distinction between the woman who has osteoporosis and the woman who does not, and what is appropriate therapy for each of these two very different groups.
In the population that does not have osteoporosis, proper medical, dietary and physical activity can be preventative measures taken by an individual.
In the population with osteoporosis, the progression of the disease may be slowed down with this intervention, but not "reversed."
The picture accompanying the article was taken of a class of woman who have osteoporosis.
They are exercising to maintain their present medical status, not "prevent" the disease.
As a physical therapist I believe that weight-bearing exercises such as walking and specially designed exercises are essential components in an exercise program.
I feel, however, that aerobics and jogging are too vigorous with their high-impact features for this fragile-bone population and are not recommended by our staff.


Commercial Property: Ladies' Mile; From the Carriage Trade to the Category Killers
IT used to be the Ladies' Mile, the place where affluent women went to buy fashionable clothes.
It included Hugh O'Neill, B. Altman, Siegel-Cooper and other department stores that catered to the carriage trade.
Today, after decades of catering to virtually no one save the odd buyer of a quick lunch or piece of hardware, part of that once-fashionable strip -- from 17th to 23d Street on Avenue of the Americas -- is again turning into a major retail area.
But this time, its target market is not the free-spending ladies who lunch (and shop); it is the bargain hunters.


Libraries
To the Editor:
It was good to read that New York Public Library branch buildings are being renovated ("Carnegie's Library Parade Marches On," June 6).


Rangers Hope Next Messier Is Sundstrom From Sweden
Niklas Sundstrom, the first-round choice of the Rangers in today's entry draft, is an 18-year-old from Sweden who probably won't play in New York next season or in the one after that.
It's likely that the 6-foot, 183-pound forward will return to Sweden next season and there is a possibility he could make the Olympic team for his country for the Games next winter in Norway.


The Call of a Lifetime
The phone call, he knew, could change his life.
And it scared him.
He had been told to expect the call at 3 o'clock last Friday afternoon.
The call was coming from the basketball coach at American University in Washington, and Ronnell Williams, age 18, did not want to miss it.
He was the lean, 6-foot-6-inch leading scorer for Taft High School at 29 points a game and an honorable mention on the McDonald's all-America basketball team.
He was also an honor student who had succeeded in advanced placement courses like calculus and Latin and had been a student council vice president and had graduated recently in the top 10 percent of his class and who, at about the same time, was convicted of drug dealing.
His basketball scholarship hung in the balance, hung on that phone call.


Atonal, of Course, But Deep Down He's Got Rhythm
"We are bringing them the plague," Sigmund Freud supposedly remarked as his ship docked in New York and delivered psychoanalysis to America.
Arnold Schoenberg might have said something similar when he showed up in California in 1934 with his "system for composing in 12 tones." In the postwar era, the 12-tone system swiftly spread through the American compositional community, and in the 1950's and 60's an even more difficult phenomenon called Serialism took hold.
Schoenberg's strict method, ordering the 12 pitches of the scale in nonrepeating atonal rows, was exhilarating therapy for composers beset by a multiplicity of stylistic choices.
The plague was on audiences, who detested the jumbled, athematic textures common to the idiom.
Schoenberg's conviction that his new system would replace the old proved to be foolish.
The 12-tone order failed to make atonality second nature; at the same time, it tamed atonality's unnatural force.


One Campaign by Alter: Many Interpretations
On a recent Sunday morning, the Rev.
Clarence A. Norman Sr. faced the members of his church -- one of the largest black congregations in Brooklyn -- and introduced his choice for Public Advocate.
"I'm not telling you what to do," said the minister, ending a somewhat tepid endorsement of Susan D. Alter, who is running for the post that is replacing the job of City Council President.
"But I consider her a friend."
As Ms.
Alter stood at the pulpit, praising the minister "for his courage," many in the congregation seemed impressed with the white, red-haired woman who talked with passion about "the brotherhood of man." But some were not, notably the pastor's son, Clarence A. Norman Jr., the state Assemblyman and Brooklyn Democratic leader who sat fuming at the sight of the woman who had crossed party lines in an alliance with Republican mayoral candidate, Rudolph W. Giuliani.


Buffalo
The last few years have been good for Buffalo.
A recent survey by the the National Weather Service confirms that there are worse places in New York State for snowfall (Syracuse topped the list last winter).
Then, too, there was a flurry of new investment that followed the announcement in January 1989 of the North American Free Trade Agreement, which phases out tariffs between the United States and Canada.
But landing the World University Games for the United States for the first time in their 70 years of competitions may be the biggest boost yet.
The games are held every two years.
They are scheduled for July 8 through the 18th and are expected not only to bring more than 5,000 athletes from 120 countries, but also to put the state's second-largest city in the international limelight.


Making Theater In Unlikely Places
The rusting piers near the Penn rail yards on the West Side of Manhattan may seem a million miles from classic, open-air Greek theater, but not anymore.
En Garde Arts has taken care of that.
The latest site-specific production by the nonprofit experimental group is "Orestes," an updating of the Euripides play by Charles L. Mee Jr.; it opens tonight near 59th Street and 12th Avenue, where Donald Trump is planning to build the Riverside South development.
The Hudson River, the New Jersey skyline and the twisted spines of two large piers are all part of the background against which the tragedy will be enacted.
Directed by Tina Landau, the work is the latest in a series by En Garde, which has been setting drama in unexpected places since 1985.
Anne Hamburger, En Garde's founder and producer, has said the group's mission is to "challenge the notion of the traditional well-made play" and to "create a theater that is visually exciting." Using dusk as its curtain, En Garde has presented works in Central Park and the meatpacking district, among other places.
Indoor sites have included the Chelsea Hotel (for a second look at the punk rocker Sid Vicious and his girlfriend, Nancy Spungen) and the dilapidated Victory Theater on West 42d Street.


Manager's Profile; Randall W. Merk
Fund: Co-manager, Benham GNMA Income Fund; $1.2 billion in assets; manager since 1987 (Sponsor: The Benham Group, Mountain View, Calif.)
Born: July 25, 1954; Fresno, Calif.


Nancy Blum, Howard Feinglass
Anita Kaskel Roe and Dr.
Morton Blum, both of New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Nancy Lynn Blum, to Howard Paul Feinglass, the son of Leonard Feinglass and Elaine Feinglass, both of Baltimore.
A July wedding is planned.
Miss Blum, 27, graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father, a consultant in asset management, retired as an attending physician in the department of medicine and gastroenterology at Lenox Hill Hospital in New York.
Her mother is an executive vice president of the Carol Management Corporation in New York, real estate developers and owners of the Doral hotel chain.
The bride's maternal grandfather, the late Alfred L. Kaskel, founded the corporation.


Sports of The Times; A Get-Well Letter For A.Y.
DEAR Anthony Young:
You were wearing a white T-shirt with shiny blue lettering that grumbled, "If I Had Any Luck It'd Be All Bad." You had been the losing pitcher.
Again.
In the Mets' box score an "L" was next to your name for the 23d consecutive time, tying a major league record that one Cliff Curtis set in 1911.


RECORD BRIEFS
Greg Osby: '3-D Lifestyles' Blue Note B4-98635; CD and cassette.


Invited


Raid on Baghdad; U.S. FIRES MISSILES AT BAGHDAD, CITING APRIL PLOT TO KILL BUSH
The United States launched a missile attack against Iraq tonight in retaliation for what President Clinton described as a "loathsome and cowardly" attempt to assassinate former President George Bush during a visit to Kuwait in April.
United States ships in the Red Sea and Persian Gulf fired 23 Tomahawk cruise missiles at the main headquarters of the Iraqi intelligence service in downtown Baghdad, which Mr.
Clinton said was responsible for plotting the attack on Mr.
Bush.
The missiles struck about 6 P.M.
Eastern time, early Sunday morning in Baghdad.


Busting the Mafia: Italy Advances in War on Crime
By 4 A.M. the 16 armed law enforcement officers had slipped through the orange grove and encircled the farmhouse.
As the sun rose over Sicily an hour or so later, they moved in, smashing down a door to burst into a kitchen and then swarm into the bedrooms.
What happened next was almost an anticlimax.


Two Viewfinders, Two Pictures of Gay America
The gay population in America bedevils the bean-counters.
The Census Bureau does not ask questions on sexual identity, so the burden falls on surveys.
But surveys don't agree.
Today, as Gay Pride Day is celebrated, there is still no consensus as to how many homosexuals there are in America.
In 1948, a Kinsley report estimated that 10 percent of white males were more or less exclusively gay; last April, the Battelle Human Affairs Research Center reported that 1 percent of men said thay only had homosexual sex in the past 10 years.
Women were not included in either survey.


Off to the Hamptons for Urban 'Fugitives'
AFTER an audacious premiere season that confronted audiences with weighty issues in unorthodox styles, the Bay Street Theater Festival in Sag Harbor is turning to something breezy.
In "Alone at the Beach," Chris and Lonnie and Robbie and Alex and Molly, all summer shares, show up at a house in the Hamptons.
"Urban escapees" all, they answered the ad of George, the owner, and gained instant acceptance long distance.
No screening.
No strings.
Trust chance.


They Hear America Talking
To the Editor:
After reading James R. Kincaid's thoughtful review of Shelley Fisher Fishkin's "Was Huck Black? Mark Twain and African-American Voices" (May 23), in which he primarily questioned what he called her "carnival-barker swagger," I wondered if it might not be useful to emphasize an important factor Mr.
Kincaid perhaps alluded to but did not stress.
He mentioned those scholars who "tacitly" assume that black and white cultures have no significant effect on each other.
They are simply blind or irresponsible in their ability to think about the past.


It's Not Up to You
QUEER IN AMERICA Sex, the Media, and the Closets of Power.
By Michelangelo Signorile. 378 pp.
New York: Random House. $23.


Bad Seeds: Ivanisevic, Chang Wilt
Off they went into the seemingly endless territory of the fifth set: each for the third time in three rounds of Wimbledon workouts, each with an unseeded opponent in the role of spoiler and each with a different attitude about his predicament.
One threw his racquet.
The other kept a conscientious grip on it.
But both seeded players came to the same bad end on a steamy Saturday afternoon that separated this Grand Slam tournament's continuing contenders from the pretenders.
The weak do not survive Week 1 of Wimbledon and, somewhat improbably, both fifth-seeded Goran Ivanisevic and 12th-seeded Michael Chang succumbed today.


FAIR GAME
Thomas L. Friedman missed the mark badly when writing, in Endpaper (Life and Times, May 30), about the 10th-anniversary reunion of the military officers and diplomats who were in charge on the ground during the bombing of the United States Marine Corps barracks in Beirut.
Reportedly, in the days preceding this incident, there was credible intelligence available to them that such an attack was possible, if not imminent.
Second, these were the people charged with responsibility for the barracks' defenses, which were, as described by the press at the time, woefully inadequate by any military standard.


Anti-Abortion Group Maps Strategy
Over the past three days, as the National Right to Life Committee held its first annual convention since its fall from power in Washington, one analogy was cited again and again by the speakers who rose to rally the rank and file.
The Rev.
Richard John Neuhaus, in his keynote address to the nation's largest anti-abortion group, set the tone.
"We as a country have been this way before," he said.
"Remember that at the time of Dred Scott all three branches of government were in the hands of pro-slavery forces."


Miss Murphy, Mr. Gendreau
Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Murphy of Huntington, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kerry Lynn Murphy to Christopher Gendreau, a son of Armand Gendreau of Plymouth, Mass., and the late Elizabeth Gendreau.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss Murphy is a banquet manager at the Algonquin Club in Boston.
She graduated from Marywood College.
Her father is a senior sales representative in Holtsville, L.I., for the data-systems division of the Grumman Corporation.
Her mother, Bernadette Murphy, is a retired president of Irish Alley Imports, an importer of Irish goods in Huntington and Sag Harbor, L.I.


Naval Depots in 3 States Face Closing
Paring Navy installations that support the fleet, a Presidential commission voted today to close large naval maintenance depots in California, Florida and Virginia that employ nearly 12,000 civilian workers.
On the panel's fourth day of final deliberations on 238 installations, the commission voted to shut down 21 installations and keep open 32 others, while 9 were either pared back or expanded.


Strength and Conditioning Coaches: The Force Is With Them
Each new Houston Oiler upon his arrival sits for a one-on-one evaluation with Steve Watterson, the Oilers' strength and conditioning coach.
Little is left uncovered.


Terrified by "Jurassic Park'? Ha! Try These
SOME THINGS YOU DON'T ever forget.
One seems to be the first movie that frightened you, leaving such an indelible mark that for days you couldn't be alone without imagining terrible things happening.
Paradoxically, it wasn't always the film meant to scare you.
For me, it was the unlikely "Annie Get Your Gun." I was 4.
My grandmother took me to see the movie at Radio City Music Hall.
She had to lead me out of the theater, tears running down my cheeks, mid-movie.
I'm not sure whether it was the 10-foot-tall Indians, with their fiercely painted faces, or Betty Hutton's singing.


Now a Round of Applause: And the Loser Is . . .
We all remember what Vince Lombardi, Leo Durocher and Billy Martin thought about losers, particularly good ones.
Perverts, social retrogrades, drooling embodiments of Communistic values was what they were.
"If there is such a thing as a good loser, then the game is crooked," is what Billy said.


Young, Homosexual And Taking Charge
To the Editor:
I applaud your article "Out and Organized" (June 13).
Being a young teen-ager grappling with my own issues of sexuality, it's nice that some of us are being recognized and that some of us aren't going to sit around and complain -- as society as a whole seems to be doing -- but instead, take charge and lead change.
We are demanding both respect for who we are and encouragement for taking action.
SHANA PEIFFER Wappingers Falls, N.Y.


A SENSE OF PLACE
SUBURBAN politicians these days must be as politically correct and "group sensitive" as their big-city counterparts.
A man on our Town Council is not a Councilman, he's a "Councilmember." And an Italian-American Councilmember from the First Ward must stand out in the rain at an African-American festival in the Fourth Ward not because he plans to run at large, but because he can't afford to disaffect the ever vigilant Jewish American liberals in his own district who helped give him the slim 50-vote margin that got him into office.
It's complicated, this new politics, this multicultural, gender-neutral, classless, ageless, inclusive acting out of the democratic process.
So much has changed so fast, or so it seems.
Well, perhaps not.


Dr. Wendell And Mr. Cobb
Dr.
Anne-Sojourner Wendell, the daughter of Cynthia Washington of New York and Donald M. Wendell of Washington, was married yesterday to Wesley Theodore Cobb Jr., the son of Mr.
Cobb of Albany and the late Betty B. Cobb.
The Rev.
Norman J. Catirc, an Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of the Transfiguration in New York.
Dr.
Wendell, who is keeping her name, is a psychologist for the California Department of Developmental Services in Sonoma.
She graduated from Wellesley College and received a master's degree in psychology from Queens College.
She earned a master's degree and a Ph.D. in educational psychology from the City University of New York.


The Short Season for Apricots
FOR the connoisseur of fresh apricots, an all-too-brief season, from mid-June to mid-July, is often full of frustration.
Unlike Goldilocks, anyone trying to find the lush, velvety fruits when they are neither too hard nor too soft but just right may have trouble.
It's the familiar yet tiresome story of fruit that is at its best when tree ripened but which rarely comes to market in that condition.
Few local growers have apricots to harvest, so they are shipped from California, the source of most apricots, and both time and safe handling preclude picking the fruit at its peak.


Sharks Player Sued on Sex Tape Charge
A Santa Clara County, Calif., woman has sued San Jose Sharks defenseman NEIL WILKINSON for allegedly videotaping a sexual encounter with her and then showing the tape at a party.
The 25-year-old woman filed the suit in San Mateo County Superior Court.
Wilkinson lives in San Mateo County.
The suit alleges that the videotape was made Dec. 2 and shown at a party on April 16.
Scott Seabaugh, the woman's attorney, said other members of the hockey team were at the party.


After a Year, Neighbors In Yonkers Live Warily
In the Crestwood section of this city with a racially troubled past, neighbors grumble to each other about the newcomers, about the graffiti on a suburban fence, the lawn that was brashly invaded by bicycle riders, the blaring music that jarred a languorous afternoon.
But such complaints also mask a collective sigh of relief.


Without a Commissioner, Padres Unload Their Stars
Where is Bowie Kuhn when we need him?
During his 15 years as commissioner, Kuhn made integrity the byword of his office.
He considered himself so much the commissioner of the game's integrity that he acted swiftly when he thought that integrity was being compromised.


How Scandal Undercut Japan's Smug Leaders
For the aging postwar rulers of Japan, the end began with a shady real estate deal: nothing too big, just a sleek glass office building in front of Kawasaki Station.
To construct the building on such a choice location in the mid-1980's, the president of a high-flying company called Recruit passed enormous amounts of unlisted stock in his company to powerful members of the governing Liberal Democratic Party.


Smitten


The Call of a Lifetime
The phone call, he knew, could change his life.
And it scared him.
He had been told to expect the call at 3 o'clock last Friday afternoon.
The call was coming from the basketball coach at American University in Washington, and Ronnell Williams, age 18, did not want to miss it.
He was the lean, 6-foot-6-inch leading scorer for Taft High School at 29 points a game and an honorable mention on the McDonald's all-America basketball team.
He was also an honor student who had succeeded in advanced placement courses like calculus and Latin and had been a student council vice president and had graduated recently in the top 10 percent of his class and who, at about the same time, was convicted of drug dealing.
His basketball scholarship hung in the balance, hung on that phone call.


Glorious Past, Hopeful Future
To the Editor:
As a 48-year-old Broadway aficionado, I was left with a bittersweet feeling by Frank Rich's overview of the Broadway scene  [ "A New Generation on Old Broadway," June 6 ] .
It brought to mind the first dramatic play I saw, "A Raisin in the Sun," and my first musical, "The Music Man." Thinking over the years and of the wonderful plays that have warmed the hearts of many, I realize that a moment in time has now passed.
I am a romantic at heart and reminisce about "High Spirits," "Golden Boy," "L'il Abner," "Royal Hunt of the Sun," "Roar of the Greasepaint," "Chicago" and on and on.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
No Meltdown at Museum
YOU scream, we all scream, for ice cream.
Well, maybe not all of us.
Eva Nagase is allergic to ice cream.
"I have a lactose intolerance," she said.
That is unfortunate, given that Ms.
Nagase is curator of the "Ice Cream for All" exhibition at the Museums at Stony Brook.
"Ice Cream for All," except Ms.
Nagase, opens today, the only day that ice cream will be on display.
This is one historical perspective where the historical object is missing.


Immunization Closer to Home
"A Hartford Hospital's Siberian Connection" (May 30) describes a laudable program of home immunization by nurse Linda Conroy, underwritten by the Greater Hartford Jaycees, in an effort to reach poor children who do not make it to central clinics or doctors for their shots.
The program is described as unique in the United States, and inspired by the medical practice in Siberia, now copied in Hartford.


The Short Season for Apricots
FOR the connoisseur of fresh apricots, an all-too-brief season, from mid-June to mid-July, is often full of frustration.
Unlike Goldilocks, anyone trying to find the lush, velvety fruits when they are neither too hard nor too soft but just right may have trouble.
It's the familiar yet tiresome story of fruit that is at its best when tree ripened but which rarely comes to market in that condition.
Few local growers have apricots to harvest, so they are shipped from California, the source of most apricots, and both time and safe handling preclude picking the fruit at its peak.


New Approaches To Menopause
All too often Long Island women with troubling menopausal symptoms, and even those with no symptoms at all, are automatically advised by their physicians to begin hormone-replacement therapy, in effect, a lifelong program of medication.
As the article points out, there are healthful alternatives.
Why are so many physicians ignoring these alternatives, opting instead for drugs?


SUCCESSION FIGHT IN MANDELA GROUP
The long-awaited struggle over who will succeed Nelson Mandela as head of the African National Congress broke unexpectedly into the open this week, exposing visceral divisions in the organization that expects to lead South Africa's first post-apartheid government.
The contest is not explicitly about ideology.
Both leading candidates are generally regarded as Western-oriented moderates, conciliators who have helped many nervous whites swallow the idea of black rule.


POSTINGS: Broadway and 79th; Filene's Basement Coming
A well-known though fictional Manhattanite, Artur Sammler of Saul Bellow's 1970 novel, "Mr. Sammler's Planet," would walk the Upper West Side habitually pursuing "esthetic consumption of the environment." These days, neighborhood pedestrians are more likely to practice conspicuous consumption of the merchandise.
And that opportunity is certain to increase in November, when Filene's Basement opens its first Manhattan store, at the northeast corner of Broadway and 79th Street.
The brand-name and designer-fashion off-price retailer will take over both floors and the basement at 2220-6 Broadway, a total of 32,000 square feet.
The building formerly housed an outlet of the now defunct Lionel Kiddie City Toys.
"When I saw Kiddie City was going out I thought it was a natural for Filene's Basement," said Robert H. Gibson of Helmsley Spear, who represented the 52-store chain in the deal.
"And when I got their people to come down, they felt the same way."


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Dr. David D. Waters; Patients Deserve Credit for Changing Habits
DR.
DAVID D. WATERS is the new chief of cardiology at Hartford Hospital in Hartford and the chief of clinical cardiology at the University of Connecticut School of Medicine in Farmington.
His dual appointment represents an effort by the institutions toward cooperation instead of competition.
Dr.
Waters, who is 47, came to Connecticut after serving as a staff cardiologist at Montreal Heart Institute of Canada and as a clinical professor at the University of Montreal School of Medicine.


The Crown Gets A Double Take
To the Editor:
The crown from Michel Marriott's "Car Aromas Fit for a King" (June 6) looks all too familiar.
Why, it's the old Imperial margarine emblem!
Only now it has been liberated . . . from kitchen table to auto dashboard.
CHERYL ANN HERMAN New York


Don't Tax, Don't Cut, Don't Panic Over Deficit
To the Editor:
With virtually no votes to lose, the Administration must now reconcile a House version of its economic plan that counts on the ill-fated British thermal unit tax and a Senate version that substitutes other unpopular taxes and spending cuts.
A better substitute for the energy tax: Nothing!


An Eastern Canyon
MANY of us, in our enthusiasm for exotic foreign travel, tend to overlook the native wonders in our own backyard.
Nowhere is this more true than in the Eastern part of the country, where pristine wilderness gave way to industrialization and deforestation long ago.
But in many of these areas the forests have grown back and industry has moved on, leaving quiet, unnoticed regions ripe for rediscovery.
I happened upon such a surprise last year on a weekend canoe trip with a group of neighbors from Washington, D.C.
One of them had arranged for a two-day trip on Pine Creek in north-central Pennsylvania, about a six-hour drive from Washington and an equal distance from New York City.


BEST SELLERS: June 27, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
46
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
4
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $24.) A lawyer in pursuit of his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
3
4
4
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $23.95.) A former naval officer tracks down a terrorist conspiracy headed by a vengeful woman.
4
3
15
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
5
6
132
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
6
5
11
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
7
8
8
GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Delacorte, $27.50.) Cordial relationships and terrorism between the Japanese and foreigners in Yokohama in 1862.
8
1
CRUEL &amp; UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Scribners, $21.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates mysteries involving a man executed for murder.
9
7
8
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences when she covers a story.
10
9
10
THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
11
1
PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $22.) The stresses and strains that befall a mother and her adopted Cherokee daughter.
12
10
9
A SEASON IN PURGATORY, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $22.) The political and social machinations of a wealthy Irish Catholic family.
13
11
3
PAPER DOLL, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) Spenser tracks the killer of an upper-crust Boston woman to her past in a small South Carolina town.
14
7
ANGEL, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $23.) The reunion of four people is transformed by the appearance of two celebrated men.
15
1
DECEPTION, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $19.95.) The romantic and chaotic experiences of a young woman who is raising unruly nephews in Regency England.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
41
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
1
46
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
3
8
2
THE FIFTIES, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $27.50.) A journalist's social, political, economic and cultural history of the 1950's.
4
3
7
THE REAL ANITA HILL, by David Brock. (Free Press, $24.95.) A journalist's account of the relationship between the law professor and Clarence Thomas.
5
6
7
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
6
5
19
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians and others about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
7
9
10
THINKING OUT LOUD, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) Essays on current topics by the New York Times columnist.
8
7
28
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
9 *
4
4
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Morrow, $20.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
10
3
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $17.95.) Life in a tiny Georgia town; by a first-grade teacher and radio commentator.
11
1
DAYS OF GRACE, by Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad. (Knopf, $24.) The memoirs of the late tennis star.
12
11
32
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under Government debt.
13
15
2
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Beacon, $15.) A Princeton professor assays issues affecting black Americans and suggests ways for addressing them.
14
12
7
CULTURE OF COMPLAINT, by Robert Hughes. (New York Public Library/Oxford University, $19.95.) Essays critical of current cultural trends.
15
38
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
9
A WOMAN'S WORTH, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $17.) Advice for women.
2
2
50
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf.
3
3
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
4
4
15
BEATING THE STREET, by Peter Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Investing.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 12, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
BALKAN GHOSTS: A Journey Through History, by Robert D. Kaplan. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) A reporter's gallery of heroes and villains who made Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Romania and the former Yugoslavia the sweethearts they are.
FATHERHOOD IN AMERICA: A History, by Robert L. Griswold. (Basic Books, $24.) The modern American dad, this historian argues, has changed a lot since World War II -- he's now more pal than patriarch.
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Turtle Bay/Random House, $17.) A memoir describing how the author, "interrupted in the music of being 17," spent two years of her youth as a mental patient.
HOW I CAME WEST, AND WHY I STAYED: Stories, by Alison Baker. (Chronicle, paper, $9.95.) Fiction about adventurous souls who find that the final frontier is themselves.
LENIN'S TOMB: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire, by David Remnick. (Random House, $25.) Decline and fall, observed by a Washington Post reporter in the Soviet Union, 1988-91.
LIFE'S DOMINION: An Argument About Abortion, Euthanasia, and Individual Freedom, by Ronald Dworkin. (Knopf, $23.) Mr.
Dworkin contends that the relevant choices proceed from the idea that life is sacred, and that therefore the state must not interfere.
MEN, WOMEN, AND AGGRESSION, by Anne Campbell. (Basic Books, $22.) Why are men more violent than women?
Learned attitudes, says this inquiry into the roots of aggression.
ORDINARY TIME: Cycles in Marriage, Faith, and Renewal, by Nancy Mairs. (Beacon, $20.) An account of spiritual growth and discovery.
THE PUGILIST AT REST: Stories, by Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $18.95.) A collection of short stories that portray prizefighters and war heroes surviving, but just barely.
A RIVER SUTRA, by Gita Mehta. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $20.) The setting for these interlocking stories is an idealized India, free of political and religious violence.
SAVE ME, JOE LOUIS, by Madison Smartt Bell. (Harcourt Brace, $23.95.) The grifters and drifters in this novel think they're pretty good guys, but their actions suggest otherwise.
SPY TRADER: Germany's Devil's Advocate and the Darkest Secrets of the Cold War, by Craig R. Whitney. (Times Books/Random House, $25.) The story of a middleman in the exchange of political prisoners during the cold war.
TINTIN IN THE NEW WORLD: A Romance, by Frederic Tuten. (Morrow, $22.) An American novelist introduces a French comic strip hero to the temptations of the real world.
UNITED STATES: Essays 1952-1992, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $37.50.) In essays and articles written over four decades, the author expounds on sex, politics, literature and other phenomena, including himself.


John Coates, 86, Dies; Ex-Leader of Masonite
John M. Coates, the retired head of the Masonite Corporation, died Wednesday at a hospital in Orinda, Calif.
He was 86 and lived most of his life in Palatine, Ill.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Sports of The Times; Brits Enjoy a Better Week Than Bumbling Mets
Homesickness washes over the visting New Yorker.
It is not the burgers they insist upon selling, nor is it the corn on the cob and the hot dogs the pubs drag out to celebrate the Fourth of July.
What makes the New Yorker miss home so much is the bark of the pack, hot on the whiff of failure.
There is no Mike and there is no Mad Dog, at least not on my civilized BBC radio band, but they do have their rabid tabloids here, and they are yowling about the failure of the national cricket team and the national soccer team.
Two sports they invented, by the way.


The Primordial Ooze of a Budget Bill
IN building a house, every time a brick is laid or a room completed, the house looks more like the final product.
But a bill in Congress is not like that -- especially not such a monumental measure as the five-year deficit-reduction legislation that squeaked through the House of Representatives last month and the Senate last week.
This has gotten lost as the budget bill has moved through Congress.
Because the latest development is what makes the news, when the House or Senate has modified the energy tax, dropped a tax break or a new spending program or made some other change in the legislation, it has often appeared that the bill was unraveling further.


A Mystic Pizza Parlor Finds Fame Is Not Fleeting
FIVE years ago a low-budget movie that had been shot in Mystic and Stonington had its premiere in Mystic, in a little movie theater in a shopping center.
It was a fitting locale.
"Mystic Pizza" was not a blockbuster film; it was a little film about the lives of three young women who work in a pizza parlor, and featured a cast of virtual unknowns: Julia Roberts, who took second billing to a 16-year-old named Annabeth Gish, and Lili Taylor.
The movie surprised a lot of people, including the critics.
It was well directed by Donald Petrie, whose first feature film it was, well acted, and a welcome relief from some of the sludge being pumped out in the name of entertainment.
It also made money.
It cost $6 million to shoot and in the first six weeks netted more than $9 million.
It helped to push Julia Roberts into stardom.
It also helped to push the real Mystic Pizza into stardom.
Brother in New London
Mystic Pizza was the local pizza parlor for the village, operated by a Greek couple, Steve and Fofi Zelepos, who had come to America in the early 70's and to the Connecticut shore because one of Mr.
Zelepos's brothers was a tailor in New London and could help him acclimate to the new country.


A Plan for Yellowstone's Problem Grizzlies: Put Them on Display
Every year, as more and more people descend on Yellowstone National Park to discover its natural wonders, a few grizzly bears discover the pleasures of food they scrounge from humans.
They become so addicted to the taste that they become dangerous to park visitors, or, in the words of wildlife officials, they are "nuisance bears."
A developer says he has a solution: Capture the nuisance bears and build a tourist attraction around them.


Islanders Pick Name With a Ring to It
Does the name Bertuzzi sound familiar to Rangers fans?
It should.
Larry Bertuzzi was the arbitrator who last summer ruled that Eric Lindros had been traded by Quebec to the Philadelphia Flyers instead of the Rangers.
Another Bertuzzi might soon torment the Rangers.
He is Todd Bertuzzi, a grandnephew of the arbitrator, who was chosen today by the Islanders as their first choice in the National Hockey League entry draft.


Off Of
DO YOU GET ANGRY at people who get angry with you?
Do you get off on zapping people for getting off of the subject?
If so, you are a preposition freak.
Judy Stoffman of Toronto sends a photocopy of a page from Calvin Trillin's new book, "Remembering Denny," containing a passage about "the extracurricular part of Yale that Griswold had warned us off of from the start." Cries Ms.
Stoffman: "Calvin, how could you? Off of with your head!" And Ruth Fretts of Brooklyn notes the Hallmark ad: "Just ask for your certificate, worth $5 off of birthday cards purchased in June."


Dashed Hopes: When Tour Companies Go Under
EARLIER this month, Milestone Educational Institute of Cambridge, Mass., a commercial tour operator, abruptly shut its doors, leaving an estimated 5,000 students and teachers without the tickets to Europe or hotel vouchers they paid for long ago.
The Massachusetts Attorney General said complaints received immediately from schools in 27 states involving 1,160 would-be travelers showed the school groups had lost $2.4 million.
When all the complaints are gathered authorities expect a total above $6.5 million.
Massachusetts has moved against Milestone and its owner, Christopher DuMello Kenyon, who was served with lawsuit papers in England in mid-June, according to Leslie Davies, an assistant Attorney General.
The state got a restraining order to keep Mr.
Kenyon from again selling travel arrangements in Massachusetts and sued for refunds to clients, plus civil penalties and costs.


No Headline
When Bambi carries a fatal disease, his return somehow doesn't seem quite as wonderful anymore.
DAVID BURG of the National Audubon Society.  [ 32:1. ]


Fresh Air Fund Explores Career Choices
Most of the junior high school students from the Bronx who toured New York Telephone's Guardian Center in Manhattan last week have yet to settle on careers.
But for 14-year-old Toya Ford, the visit provided a chance to sample corporate life, and she seized it with gusto.
When the students filed into a boardroom to see a film on career options, Toya grabbed a seat at the head of the table so she could learn what it feels like "to be the boss."


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Tuesday
May leading indicators, percent change
0.1
0.1
May new-home sales, thousands, ann. rate
751
680
June consumer confidence index
61.5
62.5
Wednesday
May factory orders, percent change
-0.1
-0.5
Thursday
May construction spending, percent change
-0.4
0.5
June purchasing managers' index
51.1
51.6
Friday
June unemployment rate, percent
6.9
6.9
June nonfarm payrolls, change, thousands
209
150
Tuesday: C Expo begins in New York  Wednesday: Conference on "Business and the Environment" at U.N.
Thursday: Bundesbank Council meeting


How to Go Safely From Here to Fall
HERE is an oddity.
A paradox, actually.
We have an organization that the insurance companies hate, but the organization is telling us how to get safely through the summer.
The entity is called Radar, which is an acronym for the Radio Association Defending Airwave Rights, a lame-name umbrella group for the makers of radar detectors, those little black boxes that beep when they spot a trooper speed-reading up ahead.


Nigerian Military Ruler Announces New Elections
Nigeria's military leader, Gen, Ibrahim Babangida, announced tonight that there would be a new presidential election with new candidates to replace the June 12 vote that he annulled three days ago.
In a nationwide address, General Babangida did not say exactly when the new election would be held, or how it would be conducted.
But he emphasized that the two previous candidates -- Moshood Abiola of the Social Democrats and Bashir Tofa of the National Republican Convention -- had disqualified themselves from running again because of what he called their flagrant abuse of Nigeria's election laws.


TIME BOMB IN THE WHITE HOUSE
Bob Hattoy confronts the status quo in hope of righting wrongs and changing the way many Americans feel about themselves, their fellow Americans and their country. (Sound at all like candidate Clinton?)


B. J. Bures and Joseph E. Barnes
Barbara Jean Bures, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
George J. Bures of West Islip, L.I., was married yesterday to Joseph Edward Barnes, a son of Mrs.
Harry G. Barnes Jr. of Virginia Beach, Va., and the late Comdr.
Barnes, U.S.N.
The Rev.
John Wallace performed the ceremony at the Sweet Hollow Presbyterian Church in Melville, L.I.
Mrs.
Barnes, 29, is known as B. J. She graduated from the University of Michigan, from which she also received a master's degree in architecture.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecologist in Amityville, L.I.


Lightning Protection: Focus on Small Jobs
ALTHOUGH lightning can occur in any season, summer storms generally produce the largest amount.
Houses in urban and built-up suburban regions usually are at only a small risk, because lightning tends to strike just the highest points, like tall commercial buildings in such areas.
Not so in open places like parks, fields, farmland and beachfront property.
In those areas, houses, trees and often people are frequently the highest points and, thus, the most likely targets.


Stylish Furnishings on a Beer Budget
"STYLE has nothing to do with money," Tom Hogan said last Sunday.
Mr.
Hogan is an owner of Chartreuse, a new home-furnishings store in the East Village that combines the sensibilities of an aristocratic Park Avenue apartment with the price tags of a thrift shop.
Mr.
Hogan has a degree in interior design from the Parsons School of Design, and his partner, Johanna McElfresh, used to work in the French furniture department at Sotheby's.
So when you combine his eye with her expertise, you can hang a seashells-in-a-shadowbox project someone may have made in junior high ($75 for a pair) next to an old porcelain plate ($28) and an amateur flower painting ($80) and have everything look like a page from Architectural Digest (their favorite magazine).


The Gifts of Vision
Celebrating art, Adolfo's refined sense of style and the means to see it all.


Yellowstone's Landmark in Logs
PERHAPS no building embodies the myths of the American West better than the Old Faithful Inn in Yellowstone National Park, where the mere act of entering the lobby -- an enchanted treehouse come to life -- provides the same sense of awe as the wilderness itself.
For devotees of rustic architecture, the hotel, designed in 1903 by the architect Robert C. Reamer and built within oooooh-ing distance of Old Faithful, defines Yellowstone as a place as surely as the geysers and mountains that inspired it.
Its atrium lobby, one of the most dramatic and dotty log interiors ever created, is surely the only one in which the bellmen sleep in a belfry called "Bat's Alley" and guests can sip from a drinking fountain embedded in a boulder or gaze at an shiplike indoor crow's nest seven stories up.


Barbra Streisand Mixes Star Power And High Concept
Barbra Streisand, at 51, enjoys a cultural status that only one other American entertainer, Frank Sinatra, has achieved in the last half century.
On top of her longevity as a star, the recent success of her film "The Prince of Tides" and her friendship with Bill Clinton have propelled her to a new peak of power in Hollywood.
It was inevitable that this status should be reflected in Ms.
Streisand's new album, "Back to Broadway." But power cuts both ways.
While the record includes some of the most thrilling singing of Ms.
Streisand's career, it also has some of the most overbearing.
The successor to Ms.
Streisand's 1985 "Broadway Album," the new record (Columbia 44189; CD and cassette) sounds like a state-of-the-world address by a performer with some heavy wisdom to impart.
The tone of the singing is generally more stentorian than on any previous Streisand album.
And in the record's Hollywood operatic arrangements, a Pucciniesque sweetness runs neck and neck with a Spielbergian grandiosity.


True to Form, the Phoenix Offers Uncommon Fare
"I DON'T want to be predictable," said the artistic director, Bram Lewis, at the ready for the Phoenix Theater Company's sixth season, set to open Wednesday at the Performing Arts Center of the State University of New York at Purchase.
"Everyone expects us to do delightful summer comedies," Mr.
Lewis added.
Well, not exactly, even though the Phoenix did a delightful "Noises Off" three years ago.
But everyone expects the Phoenix to do Shakespeare too.
And a classic or two, be it Ibsen or an obscure Restoration comedy.
Who remembers "The Rover" in 1988?


Dale Kendrick, Vernon Barback
Elizabeth Dale Kendrick, a daughter of Ellen Kendrick of New York and the late Shildrick A. Kendrick, was married yesterday to Vernon Richard Barback, the son of Prof. and Mrs.
Ronald Barback of Tunbridge Wells, Kent, England.
The Rev.
Heather Morrison Yaden performed the ceremony at the Andover (N.J.) Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Barback is known as Dale.
She graduated from Vassar College and received a law degree from New York University.
Her father was the executive director of research and development for the College Entrance Examination Board in New York.
Her mother is a senior technical writer at the New York Clearing House, a bank transaction concern in New York.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


In America; Listen To the Children
The teen-ager called to ask if he could be excused from classes.
Something bad had happened.
He had attended a christening and a shootout had erupted.
"I have to go with my mother to visit my brother in jail," the boy told school officials.
"He's up for attempted murder. Then I'm going with her to bring my other brother's body home. He was killed in the shootout and I still have to go back to the doctor because I got shot in the pelvis."


The Night Ms. Roehm Met Ms. Roehm
NAME: Rita Wilson.
IDENTITY: Actress; wife of Tom Hanks.


Putting It in the Market
To the Editor:
"Trade Sanity With Japan" (editorial, June 16) states that the American economy suffers from a lack of savings, presumably as witnessed by the low percentage of money invested in banks, and that this low rate of bank savings has prevented American companies from raising capital for modernization.
I disagree.


53 Youths Are Selected By General Foods U.S.A.
Despite cutbacks in summer jobs, General Foods U.S.A.'s 26th yearly Operation Opportunity program for high school students starts tomorrow.
"Despite many changes at General Foods over the past 26 years, we have never wavered in our commitment to less advantaged youths," said Robert S. Morrison, president of General Foods U.S.A. and Kraft General Foods group president, who will be present for the start of the summer job program at General Foods headquarters in White Plains.


Henrietta Hung, Paul Owen Perry
Henrietta Julia Hung, the daughter of Drs.
Henry and Julia Hung of Montreal, was married there yesterday to Paul Owen Perry, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles O. Perry of Norwalk, Conn.
The Rev.
Luis M. Dolan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Ascension of Our Lord Church.
Ms.
Hung, who is keeping her name, graduated cum laude from Dartmouth College and received a master's degree in linguistics from the University of Toronto.
She is a doctoral candidate in linguistics at Brandeis University.
Her father is a professor of mathematics at Concordia University in Montreal.
Her mother is a physician at McGill University Student Health Services there.


Fourstardave Aces Poker Stakes
Fourstardave, the remarkable senior citizen of the turf, showed that he still had plenty of zip at the ripe old age of 8 when he won the Poker Stakes at Belmont Park yesterday and even broke the record for the race that he had set four years ago.
The venerable gelding, who is trained by Leo O'Brien, stalked Blare of Trumpets most of the way under a firm ride by Richard Migliore.
He took the lead entering the homestretch and then was challenged by the 7-5 favorite, Adam Smith, the British horse, who had won his last four starts.
But at the wire, Fourstardave was widening his lead to three and a half lengths over Adam Smith, who was clinging to second place by a neck over Lech.


Geoffrey Kent and Michaela Dooley
Michaela Helen Dooley, a daughter of Helen B. Dooley of Philadelphia and the late Oscar N. Dooley, was married yesterday to Geoffrey Kent, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gaylord S. Kent of Clay, N.Y.
The Rev.
Samuel B. Jordan Jr. performed the ceremony at the New Gethsemane Baptist Church in Philadelphia.
Mrs.
Kent is a registered nurse at Lankenau Hospital in Wynnewood, Pa.
She graduated from Temple University and from Hahnemann University.


TIME BOMB IN THE WHITE HOUSE
The title of Richard L. Berke's article, "Time Bomb in the White House" (June 6), was right on target.
Can we really afford this new-age brand of kamikaze politics?


Yankee Fans Stay Away, But Bronx Isn't Why
To the Editor:
Only George Steinbrenner could blame the Bronx for withering Yankee Stadium attendance (news article, June 18).
Over a decade, the Yankees' owner devastated an organization that was rebuilt only in his absence.
He made a generation of fans pay to watch games on television.
And through it all, he raised ticket prices.
Now he blames parking problems and a bad neighborhood for lagging attendance.
Is that why Yogi Berra and his friends still refuse to set foot in the stadium?
MATT BAI  New York, June 18, 1993


Bettman Adds Stein's Hat
Gary Bettman, the first-year commissioner of the National Hockey League, said today that Gil Stein's recent demotion from league president to an unspecified advisory role was a mere formality that had been agreed upon more than six months ago, when Bettman replaced Stein as chief executive officer of the league.
Bettman appeared concerned about reports that appeared today in The Chicago Tribune and The Montreal Gazette that implied that the move was a sudden and unexpected reduction in rank for the controversial Stein.
A day before, after the Board of Governors meeting, Bettman had told several dozen reporters that nothing of newsworthy importance had occurred at the meeting.


Hired


Anne Becker and Eric Isselbacher
Dr. and Mrs.
John F. Becker of Whitefish Bay, Wis., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Anne Edith Becker, to Dr.
Eric Michael Isselbacher, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Kurt J. Isselbacher of Newton Center, Mass.
An August wedding is planned.
Dr.
Becker, 32, is a resident in psychiatry at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, where her husband, 29, is a fellow in cardiology.
She and her fiance graduated summa cum laude from Harvard University, where they were elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
They received their M.D. degrees from Harvard, from which Dr.
Becker also received a Ph.D. in anthropology.


After 350 Years, A 'Q.E.D.'
Unsolved problems abound in mathematics, but none has gained such fame and notoriety as Fermat's last theorem, a cryptic statement dashed off by a French mathematician 350 years ago.
Pierre de Fermat wrote in a book margin that he had a marvelous proof but that, alas, the margin was too small for it.
Ever since, mathematicians have struggled in vain to find a proof.
But now, using modern mathmatical ideas, Dr.
Andrew Wiles of Princeton University has apparently solved the problem.
He showed that, as Fermat said, there are no positive whole number solutions to the equation xn + yn = zn when n is bigger than 2.


French Player Charged With Taking Bribe
The fix was in to assure that France's No. 1 soccer team would have an easy time winning a match en route to its fifth straight French League title, according to prosecutors in Valenciennes, France.
Forward CHRISTOPHE ROBERT of Valenciennes was charged yesterday with taking a $45,000 bribe from Olympique Marseilles.


BEST SELLERS: June 27, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
46
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $14.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
4
PLEADING GUILTY, by Scott Turow. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $24.) A lawyer in pursuit of his firm's missing partner and a multimillion-dollar fund.
3
4
4
THE SCORPIO ILLUSION, by Robert Ludlum. (Bantam, $23.95.) A former naval officer tracks down a terrorist conspiracy headed by a vengeful woman.
4
3
15
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
5
6
132
OH, THE PLACES YOU'LL GO! by Dr.
Seuss. (Random House, $12.95.) The problems of finding your way through life; in verse and pictures.
6
5
11
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
7
8
8
GAI-JIN, by James Clavell. (Delacorte, $27.50.) Cordial relationships and terrorism between the Japanese and foreigners in Yokohama in 1862.
8
1
CRUEL &amp; UNUSUAL, by Patricia D. Cornwell. (Scribners, $21.) Dr.
Kay Scarpetta investigates mysteries involving a man executed for murder.
9
7
8
I'LL BE SEEING YOU, by Mary Higgins Clark. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A television news reporter has mystifying experiences when she covers a story.
10
9
10
THE LAST COMMAND, by Timothy Zahn. (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95.) The final volume of a "Star Wars" trilogy.
11
1
PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $22.) The stresses and strains that befall a mother and her adopted Cherokee daughter.
12
10
9
A SEASON IN PURGATORY, by Dominick Dunne. (Crown, $22.) The political and social machinations of a wealthy Irish Catholic family.
13
11
3
PAPER DOLL, by Robert B. Parker. (Putnam, $19.95.) Spenser tracks the killer of an upper-crust Boston woman to her past in a small South Carolina town.
14
7
ANGEL, by Barbara Taylor Bradford. (Random House, $23.) The reunion of four people is transformed by the appearance of two celebrated men.
15
1
DECEPTION, by Amanda Quick. (Bantam, $19.95.) The romantic and chaotic experiences of a young woman who is raising unruly nephews in Regency England.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
2
41
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush H. Limbaugh 3d. (Pocket, $22.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
1
46
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $20.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
3
8
2
THE FIFTIES, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $27.50.) A journalist's social, political, economic and cultural history of the 1950's.
4
3
7
THE REAL ANITA HILL, by David Brock. (Free Press, $24.95.) A journalist's account of the relationship between the law professor and Clarence Thomas.
5
6
7
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
6
5
19
HEALING AND THE MIND, by Bill Moyers. (Doubleday, $25.) Conversations with physicians and others about the relationship of sickness to thoughts and emotions.
7
9
10
THINKING OUT LOUD, by Anna Quindlen. (Random House, $22.) Essays on current topics by the New York Times columnist.
8
7
28
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
9 *
4
4
SECRET CEREMONIES, by Deborah Laake. (Morrow, $20.) The unhappy marriages of a woman raised as a Mormon.
10
3
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $17.95.) Life in a tiny Georgia town; by a first-grade teacher and radio commentator.
11
1
DAYS OF GRACE, by Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad. (Knopf, $24.) The memoirs of the late tennis star.
12
11
32
BANKRUPTCY 1995, by Harry E. Figgie Jr. with Gerald J. Swanson. (Little, Brown, $19.95.) The collapse of America under Government debt.
13
15
2
RACE MATTERS, by Cornel West. (Beacon, $15.) A Princeton professor assays issues affecting black Americans and suggests ways for addressing them.
14
12
7
CULTURE OF COMPLAINT, by Robert Hughes. (New York Public Library/Oxford University, $19.95.) Essays critical of current cultural trends.
15
38
THE TE OF PIGLET, by Benjamin Hoff. (Dutton, $16.) Aspects of Taoist philosophy explained through the actions of an A. A. Milne character.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
9
A WOMAN'S WORTH, by Marianne Williamson. (Random House, $17.) Advice for women.
2
2
50
HARVEY PENICK'S LITTLE RED BOOK, by Harvey Penick with Bud Shrake. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $19.) Anecdotes and tips about playing golf.
3
3
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
4
4
15
BEATING THE STREET, by Peter Lynch with John Rothchild. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) Investing.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 12, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
BALKAN GHOSTS: A Journey Through History, by Robert D. Kaplan. (St. Martin's, $22.95.) A reporter's gallery of heroes and villains who made Albania, Bulgaria, Greece, Romania and the former Yugoslavia the sweethearts they are.
FATHERHOOD IN AMERICA: A History, by Robert L. Griswold. (Basic Books, $24.) The modern American dad, this historian argues, has changed a lot since World War II -- he's now more pal than patriarch.
GIRL, INTERRUPTED, by Susanna Kaysen. (Turtle Bay/Random House, $17.) A memoir describing how the author, "interrupted in the music of being 17," spent two years of her youth as a mental patient.
HOW I CAME WEST, AND WHY I STAYED: Stories, by Alison Baker. (Chronicle, paper, $9.95.) Fiction about adventurous souls who find that the final frontier is themselves.
LENIN'S TOMB: The Last Days of the Soviet Empire, by David Remnick. (Random House, $25.) Decline and fall, observed by a Washington Post reporter in the Soviet Union, 1988-91.
LIFE'S DOMINION: An Argument About Abortion, Euthanasia, and Individual Freedom, by Ronald Dworkin. (Knopf, $23.) Mr.
Dworkin contends that the relevant choices proceed from the idea that life is sacred, and that therefore the state must not interfere.
MEN, WOMEN, AND AGGRESSION, by Anne Campbell. (Basic Books, $22.) Why are men more violent than women?
Learned attitudes, says this inquiry into the roots of aggression.
ORDINARY TIME: Cycles in Marriage, Faith, and Renewal, by Nancy Mairs. (Beacon, $20.) An account of spiritual growth and discovery.
THE PUGILIST AT REST: Stories, by Thom Jones. (Little, Brown, $18.95.) A collection of short stories that portray prizefighters and war heroes surviving, but just barely.
A RIVER SUTRA, by Gita Mehta. (Nan A. Talese/Doubleday, $20.) The setting for these interlocking stories is an idealized India, free of political and religious violence.
SAVE ME, JOE LOUIS, by Madison Smartt Bell. (Harcourt Brace, $23.95.) The grifters and drifters in this novel think they're pretty good guys, but their actions suggest otherwise.
SPY TRADER: Germany's Devil's Advocate and the Darkest Secrets of the Cold War, by Craig R. Whitney. (Times Books/Random House, $25.) The story of a middleman in the exchange of political prisoners during the cold war.
TINTIN IN THE NEW WORLD: A Romance, by Frederic Tuten. (Morrow, $22.) An American novelist introduces a French comic strip hero to the temptations of the real world.
UNITED STATES: Essays 1952-1992, by Gore Vidal. (Random House, $37.50.) In essays and articles written over four decades, the author expounds on sex, politics, literature and other phenomena, including himself.


Danielle Prunier, Steven Herman
Danielle Mariette Prunier, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John H. Prunier of Riverside, Conn., was married yesterday to Steven Martin Herman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren J. Herman 3d of San Diego.
The Rev.
Dr.
Walter J. Smith, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Ann's Church in Kennebunkport, Me.
Mrs.
Herman, 26, is an account manager at Oxford Health Plans, a health maintenance organization in New York and Darien, Conn.
She and her husband graduated from the University of San Diego.
Her father is an internist at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital.
Her mother, Suzanne Prunier, owns Gardens by Suzanne Prunier, a garden design concern in Greenwich.


Arnold as Icon: From Hulk to Hero
WHEN THE FICTIONAL Jack Slater leaps off the screen into New York City in "Last Action Hero," he masquerades as the actor who plays him.
"I'm Ah-nold Braunschweiger," he introduces himself pleasantly.
The last action hero is the last man on earth who can't say the word Schwarzenegger.
Not long ago, he wasn't alone.
Now there is "Last Action Hero," a self-mocking film built around the idea that everyone knows Arnold.
The cleverest moments in this comic adventure do not come while the star plays the explosive Slater, but during a brief episode in which he plays himself.
As Arnold walks into the premiere of his new Jack Slater movie with his wife, Maria Shriver, she mutters to him: "And remember, don't plug the restaurants. I just hate it when you plug the restaurants and the gyms. It's so tacky."


They Hear America Talking
To the Editor:
How Mark Twain would howl -- and rage and cuss -- at the temerity of Shelley Fisher Fishkin and the timidity of James R. Kincaid!


Dr. Jeffrey Sachs, Shock Therapist
The lobby of the Metropole, Moscow's lovingly restored grand hotel a few blocks from Red Square, is almost deserted on this gray spring afternoon.
That's just fine with Jeffrey D. Sachs, a boyish-looking 38-year-old Harvard professor who is now probably the most important economist in the world.
He has appropriated a cluster of comfortable armchairs for a meeting with two members of his team, Americans who work full time in Russia.
The agenda is Russia's safety net or, more precisely, whether unemployed workers will be able to make ends meet.
Russia is plunging out of Communism, if not directly into a capitalist free market.
Whether this huge, humiliated nation will stoically bear the pain of the transition is far from clear, and the strength of the safety net could make the difference.


Steinbrenner Is Just One More Car Alarm
The time has come to call the Fat Man's bluff; Governor Cuomo and Mayor Dinkins have to bite the baseball, swallow and say, "You know what you can do with your ball club, George."
And make no mistake.
It is George Steinbrenner's ball club, not America's, not New York's, not yours or even mine, with all my prattle about having been born in the South Bronx and sitting with my dad as the Great DiMaggio "drifted" under fly balls.
I have been a registered Yankee fan since birth, except for those times, while covering them, when I put my passion in a blind trust.


Getting Into Buckingham
Buckingham Palace in London has announced that there will be 18 major rooms open to the public this August and September, the first time that visitors are being admitted to the palace in the five-year plan to raise money to repair burned-out Windsor Castle.
The rooms include the Green, Blue and White Drawing Rooms, the Silk Tapestry Room, the East Gallery, the Music Room, the State Dining Room, the Throne Room and the Marble Hall.
A high point of the tour will be the 155-foot-long Picture Gallery, which is hung with paintings by such masters as Rembrandt, Rubens and Van Dyck.
Travelers determined to get into the palace without waiting in line can obtain advance tickets through at least four tour companies that obtained allotments for group visits.
The catch is that the tickets are being sold as part of packages that also include hotel accommodations and-or other sightseeing trips.


Pursued


Clinton Administration Has No Plans to Arrest Sheik Now
With the help of a confidential informer operating inside a suspected bombing ring, Federal agents recorded many private conversations of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the fiery Egyptian cleric who has been blamed for inspiring terrorism in Egypt and the United States.
But after reviewing those recordings the Clinton Administration does not plan for now to arrest Mr.
Abdel Rahman, law-enforcement officials said yesterday.
The decision comes as law-enforcement and Administration officials debate how to proceed with Mr.
Abdel Rahman.
Senior officials in New York and Washington said the tapes did not reveal enough information to justify an arrest.
But others said enough evidence could have been marshaled, but there was a desire to allow Mr.
Abdel Rahman to remain free because the Government gains important intelligence about Muslim radicals by watching the people attracted to him as he works from his mosque in Jersey City.


8 Captives Are Freed In Brooklyn
A Chinese woman found weeping on a Brooklyn street early Friday led the police to a house in Sheepshead Bay where she and eight other immigrants had been held captive, some for as long as half a year, the police said yesterday.
The 21-year-old woman told detectives she was kidnapped from Kennedy International Airport a week ago, robbed of $300 and repeatedly raped by her captors.
Other victims said they were regularly beaten.


A la Carte; Restaurants in Montauk Are Beginning to Make Waves
MONTAUK is stirring.
The restaurants in this rustic port at the tip of the Island still cater to more fishermen, families, day trippers and campers than trendy Hamptons types.
But the quality of Montauk Point's eating places is improving and starting to attract more and more sophisticated diners.
A new wave of more affluent permanent residents who often went to the Hamptons to dine helped spur the change.


Frustration Taking a Toll On Gooden and Green
Dallas Green kept the door to the Mets' clubhouse closed longer than usual yesterday afternoon.
He had some things he wanted to straighten out with his players -- things related to selfish play and stupid infield errors and poor execution.
All these typical Met problems plagued the team again yesterday, as the Cardinals beat New York, 4-2, despite another solid performance by Dwight Gooden.
This time, though, Green was so furious that he didn't even bother with his typically loud-voiced tirade.
His usually ruddy face whitened with anger, Green said afterward that he was sick of the Mets' failure to produce for Gooden, their ace.


The City Can Be 'Green,' Too
To the Editor:
Mr.
Jeffreys' criticism tells me he wasn't paying attention.
By owning our own building, by recycling a 100-year-old structure and designing an energy-efficient office, the National Audubon Society will save half a million dollars this year alone, compared with paying rent for our former energy-inefficient office space.
This allows us to invest more in science, education and sanctuary management.
It is also an investment in the city, and a model for others to follow.
PETER A. A. BERLE New York, June 17  The writer is chief executive of the National Audubon Society.


From Great Lakes to the Hudson River: An Iditarod on Water for Paddlers
It's hard to say what might be the most difficult part of a new long-distance race that begins today in Chicago for kayakers and canoeists.
Would paddling through parts of the Great Lakes be tougher than 11 tedious days in the Erie Canal?
At the end of the next five weeks, competitors who cross the finish line in New York City ought to know.
The 1,000-mile race, the Finlandia Clean Water Challenge, has attracted 20 serious paddlers, 18 of whom plan to go the full course.
Designed to be the longest canoe and kayak race in the world, the event is being touted as the Iditarod of paddling.
As with the Iditarod, the grueling sled-dog competition in Alaska, weather will surely play a large part.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
I BEEN IN SORROW'S KITCHEN AND LICKED OUT ALL THE POTS By Susan Straight.
Anchor, $10.
Marietta, a fiercely self-contained black teen-ager in the South of the 1960's, tries to forge a future for herself and her twin sons.
"It is Marietta's intricate constitution, and the Gullah rhythms streaming through her mind, that give the novel its special edge and distinction," Leon Rooke said here last year.


Social Security's Identity Crisis
To the Editor:
The article states that when Social Security was established, American workers were promised that they would be guaranteed adequate money for retirement.
Not at all.
The philosophy behind Social Security is that it provides a foundation upon which individuals build financial security.
It was never intended to provide adequate money for retirement.


Europeans Tell Bosnians State Will Be Viable
Senior European foreign ministry officials sought to reassure Bosnia and Herzegovina's collective leadership today that the international community would make sure that the Bosnians were left with a viable state of their own if they agreed to negotiate an end to the civil war based on an ethnic partition of the country.
Diplomats said the European ministers hoped that by offering such assurances now, they would overcome the hostility of President Alija Izetbegovic and his Muslim allies in the collective presidency toward any negotiations based on the dissolution of Bosnia along ethnic lines.
Mr.
Izetbegovic and two other Muslims in the 10-member presidency have declined to attend the talks here, exposing a rift in Bosnia's leadership.


HAPPY EVER AFTER IN CAMELOT
As an actor who has several times experienced the stresses of touring in a show, I wish to defend Robert Goulet from Alex Witchel's characterization of his hotel "must-haves" as "quite spectacular" ("Happy Ever After in Camelot," May 23).
Although I recognize that the difficulties of an actor's work may not compare with the grueling nature of certain tasks, touring with a show, particularly in the leading role, is physically exhausting and emotionally demanding.


New Threats Prompt Increases in Security
Life in New York City has changed in many ways, some small, some large, since terrorist bombings have been added to the list of urban fears.
A large potted fern is mysteriously absent from the elevator bank (because big plants can hide little bombs).
There is an unexplained delay in the delivery of an oddly shaped package from the mail room (because someone was suspicious of its contents).


Back in Fashion


Familiar Score: Perception 1, Reality 0
SCRATCH any market participant, and you're sure to find something of a hysteric, braced to think the worst on the slightest bit of bad news.
That fact emerged resoundingly over the past two weeks, as currency traders holding yen made a dash for the exits after a Japanese political revolt doomed Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa's Government, threatening decades of rule by his Liberal Democratic Party.
For five months, economic fundamentals -- from the Japanese trade surplus to signs of economic recovery -- had helped push the dollar down against the yen, to a record close of 105.08 yen.
But on June 18, when Mr.
Miyazawa lost a vote of confidence in the Japanese Diet, traders threw out fundamentals, pushing the dollar up more than three yen.


Two Communities Savor Victory Over Pentagon Plans for Cutbacks; Lots of Hard Work Yield Good Night Of Sleep in Groton
Frank O'Beirne Jr. said today that he was looking forward to his first good night's sleep in months after hearing that the Base Realignment and Closure Commission was unanimously recommending that the Navy maintain its submarine base here.
Mr.
O'Beirne, a retired Navy captain and one of the leaders of a coalition formed to save the base, helped perform a computer analysis that showed that closing other facilities could save up to $1.6 billion in the next seven years.
He made six trips to Washington to share those results with the commission staff, and one trip to Boston to testify at a regional hearing.


One-Game Spot A Better Format
To the Sports Editor:
Dave Anderson recently decried the proposed three-tier wild-card playoff format for baseball ("When Second Best Is Not Near the Best," The Times, May 16).
He demonstrated that much of the excitement and urgency of the divisional pennant races would be lost if such a system were enacted.
Several scenarios were presented showing how a team may choose to glide to a second-place finish rather than strive for first place.
After all, the only advantage to finishing first would be a one-game home field advantage in the first round of a best three--of-five playoff with the second-place team.


YELTSIN PRESSING TALKS ON CHARTER
President Boris N. Yeltsin sent Russia's constitutional conference back for a third round of work today, confirming that major differences remained between Moscow and the outlying regions over the basic political shape of a proposed federation.
Speaking briefly at a full session of the 700 delegates, Mr.
Yeltsin declared that the "intensive work" of the conference had succeeded in crafting a single draft from competing documents and innumerable proposals.


'Women and Wood' in Katonah Uses Forms as Metaphors
WORKING in a thicket of branches stuck with toy guns, the artist mused on her theme.
"I've always been taken by scenes in movies with arrows coming out of the woods, and with the whole idea of secret revenge," said Jerilea Zempel, whose construction, "Environmental Protection," is part of the show "Women and Wood: The Metaphorical Use of Forms" at the Katonah Museum of Art.
The show of works by eight sculptors was organized by Corinne Robins, an author, teacher and critic whose not-so-secret revenge has long been to bring more attention to women artists.
"I've done co-ed shows, but I am a feminist curator," said Ms.
Robins, who added that women must still struggle for their place on the art scene.


Experts Change Guides to Using Drugs for H.I.V.
An independent panel of experts created by the Government has recommended a major shift in the strategy for treating people infected with H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
The new recommendations, issued Friday night after a three-day meeting at the National Institutes of Health, provide greater flexibility than the current ones.
Although the new guidelines are not official Federal health policy, they are expected have a strong influence on doctors who care for patients with H.I.V. and AIDS.


Technology; Rethinking the Refrigerator
WHEN the Clinton Administration recently announced a "revolutionary development" in environmentally friendly refrigerator technology, the adjectives flowed like Freon through a cooling coil.
"This is an exciting, technological breakthrough," Carol M. Browner, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, said in the news release.
"We believe this invention will do for the refrigerator and air conditioning industry what the microchip did for the computer."


In America; Listen To the Children
The teen-ager called to ask if he could be excused from classes.
Something bad had happened.
He had attended a christening and a shootout had erupted.
"I have to go with my mother to visit my brother in jail," the boy told school officials.
"He's up for attempted murder. Then I'm going with her to bring my other brother's body home. He was killed in the shootout and I still have to go back to the doctor because I got shot in the pelvis."


World Markets; Can Soros Be Right on Real Estate?
SINCE he made a reported $1.5 billion in currency trading during the turmoil in the European monetary system last fall, George Soros has enjoyed the clout of the investor whose judgments become self-fulfilling.
When Mr.
Soros said earlier this month that the mighty German mark was overvalued, traders dumped the currency, causing it to fall.
When he invested in gold several weeks ago, other investors piled in after him, driving up gold prices.


TIPS FOR TIGHTWADS
I was delighted to read Amy Dacyczyn's "Tips for Tightwads" (June 6).
It was one of the few traces of reality I've seen in the Magazine for a number of years.
I would like to think this represents a shift from the 1980's mentality at last.
MARY SULLIVAN West Hartford, Conn.


Greeks Bearing Useful Gifts
Paul Himmelein, an artist, discovered Chartreuse the day it opened, and the shop bought some of his work.
Mr.
Himmelein paints designs based on ancient Greek art on small pieces of found furniture like stools and night stands.
This exuberant octopus was suggested by a Minoan sea creature.
It's rendered in reddish orange on a black footstool ($375).


In Cleaner Harbor, Creatures Eat the Waterfront
Mariners used to joke that New York City was a "clean harbor" -- a quick way of saying that the water pollution was so severe that it killed any organisms attached to the hulls of their ships.
But now the tables have turned: the waters around New York are so much cleaner that voracious mollusks and crustaceans have returned and are devouring the waterfront.
After decades of effort to reduce the pollution from sewage and petrochemicals that fouled the harbor, officials from the city and from New York and New Jersey have had trouble accepting the idea that clean water somehow poses a problem.


Wickman Runs Out Of Luck in Yank Loss
They are talking about something called Orioles magic.
In the streets.
In the bars.
In the dugout.
Maybe it sounds corny, but the superb results make the talk difficult to dispute.
The Orioles actually defeated the unbeatable Bob Wickman tonight.
How much more magical can a team get?
Wickman, the fortunate Yankee pitcher who had won 11 straight games and had lost only once in his major league career, was confronted with the most magical team in baseball tonight.


REBELS WITH A CHECKBOOK
Preston Lerner's article on the hot-rod culture, "Rebels With a Checkbook" (May 30), was truly a personal delight for me to read.
My brother and I grew up pinching every penny to help make ends meet in our family.
Al's dream was someday to own a look-twice, customized, one-of-a-kind hot rod.
Last year, four months shy of his 40th birthday, he found a radical, 1923 Ford T-bucket roadster for sale.
I told him, on the spot, to go for it!


Conversations/William Kristol; A Conservative Cheerfully Argues That 'Family Values' Has a Future
So why should we care about values issues after the 1992 campaign, after the Murphy Brown imbroglio and the backlash to the Republican National Convention?
Haven't the liberals basically won on issues like abortion?
Shouldn't we all just settle down and talk about the economy?
"To the contrary," says William Kristol, former chief of staff to Vice President Dan Quayle, now a conservative strategist trying to chart the movement's future.
"Despite the clumsiness with which those issues were raised in 1992, the fact is that values issues -- to use your phrase -- are back stronger than ever."


A Grand Hotel, But Not What You'd Call Homey
"Rather chilly, don't you think?" said a friend I encountered the other day in the lobby of the new Four Seasons Hotel on East 57th Street in Manhattan.
And indeed, the scuttlebutt about this I. M. Pei-designed tower, surely the most talked-about new hotel in New York in years, is that all this limestone and onyx and Danish beechwood paneling has yielded a building that, besides being terribly expensive (reportedly $1 million a room), is about as far from warm and cuddly as a hotel can get.
Well, yes.
The Four Seasons is anything but the model of Hotel as Teddy Bear.
But even though Mr.
Pei and his associate architect, Frank Williams, do disdain the current taste for intimate, boutiquey hotels, I would not write off the Four Seasons so quickly.
For this 52-story building harks back to the great hotels of New York's past, to the romantic towers of the 1920's and 30's that are still the defining presence of the skyline.
The real ancestor of this building is not the rest of Mr.
Pei's work but the Waldorf-Astoria.


Movies and Music Try to Live as One
Each June the latest sound equipment is trotted out at the Consumer Electronics Show here.
This year the audio industry also exhibited something else: acute symptoms of a split personality.
One segment of the audio trade is marching blithely into the multimedia future -- one in which audio-video home theaters provide satellite-relayed, computer-based services.
The other group is sticking strictly with audio, clinging to such traditional concerns as musical fidelity and tonal nuance.


But How Did Fermat Do It?
So now another bold mathematician thinks he has proved Fermat's last theorem, the most notorious mathematical puzzle of all time.
And some of the world's leading mathematicians think he just might have done it.
But one would be wise to wait just a bit before declaring victory.
Proving this theorem has frustrated the best mathematical minds for more than three and a half centuries; several previous claims withered away under intense scrutiny.
The theorem itself is deceptively simple.
Every student is taught in geometry the old formula for linking the square of the hypotenuse of a right triangle with the squares of the other two sides, namely a  + b  = c .
But Pierre de Fermat, a 17th century French mathematician, had the insight that the formula would not work for any higher powers.
There are no positive whole numbers that will fit the equation a  + b  = c  , or any such formula raised to even higher powers.


Rethinking 42d St. For Next Decade
"IT'S going to be a more beautiful Times Square in a hurry," Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said last August, as four giant office towers on 42d Street were postponed in favor of an interim rehabilitation of existing buildings.
But "hurry" means something different on 42d Street than almost anywhere else.
After all, it has been 10 years since Mr.
Cuomo said, "Today we have laid the final cornerstone to rebuild the most famous crossroads in the world."


Youngster at Trigger Of Machine Gun
What could you have been thinking of when you ran the photo of the small boy trying out a machine gun?  [ Long Island Journal, June 13 ] .
How exciting it must have been for him to have the opportunity to get behind a real machine gun.
The next step is getting behind a real gun, and using it.
Anyone who has ever been a child, or the parent of one, knows the lifelong effect of early experiences on children.
What will be the future dream of the little boy who got his picture in the paper or of the thousands of others who see it?


The Short Season for Apricots
FOR the connoisseur of fresh apricots, an all-too-brief season, from mid-June to mid-July, is often full of frustration.
Unlike Goldilocks, anyone trying to find the lush, velvety fruits when they are neither too hard nor too soft but just right may have trouble.
It's the familiar yet tiresome story of fruit that is at its best when tree ripened but which rarely comes to market in that condition.
Few local growers have apricots to harvest, so they are shipped from California, the source of most apricots, and both time and safe handling preclude picking the fruit at its peak.


Reporter's Notebook; Policy Sublime: A White House Tennis Handbook
President Clinton is a regular runner, a semiregular golfer and an avid basketball couch potato.
Tennis, he leaves to others.


Harkness Park: Another View
I cringed when I read the description of the "well-kept formal gardens" at Harkness Memorial Park in the story on summer music festivals (June 13).


As Expected, Senators Make Daigle Top Pick
As expected, center Alexandre Daigle of the Victoriaville Tigres was selected first over all by the Ottawa Senators in the National Hockey League entry draft today at le Colisee.
His agent and the Nordiques immediately announced that they had come to an agreement for a five-year contract.
Although the deal has not been signed, it is estimated that it will pay Daigle about $12 million over five seasons.


Savoring the Appeal of Japanese Treats
IT IS 8 o'clock on a Saturday night and the Nagashima restaurant in Jericho is jammed.
At a small table in the corner, two burly young men share sushi.
Nearby a group of spirited teen-agers sip miso soup, and a family with young children devours a fresh-fruit platter.
Nagashima is an especially appealing and deservedly popular Japanese restaurant.
It is a hit not only with health-conscious Americans, but also with huge numbers of Japanese.


The Primordial Ooze of a Budget Bill
IN building a house, every time a brick is laid or a room completed, the house looks more like the final product.
But a bill in Congress is not like that -- especially not such a monumental measure as the five-year deficit-reduction legislation that squeaked through the House of Representatives last month and the Senate last week.
This has gotten lost as the budget bill has moved through Congress.
Because the latest development is what makes the news, when the House or Senate has modified the energy tax, dropped a tax break or a new spending program or made some other change in the legislation, it has often appeared that the bill was unraveling further.


A Plan for Yellowstone's Problem Grizzlies: Put Them on Display
Every year, as more and more people descend on Yellowstone National Park to discover its natural wonders, a few grizzly bears discover the pleasures of food they scrounge from humans.
They become so addicted to the taste that they become dangerous to park visitors, or, in the words of wildlife officials, they are "nuisance bears."
A developer says he has a solution: Capture the nuisance bears and build a tourist attraction around them.


Is Lollapalooza Losing Its Outsider Status?
The people who put on the Woodstock festival were smart: They didn't try an annual sequel.
Of course, after Woodstock they were broke.
The 1991 Lollapalooza Festival, which turned the farewell tour by Jane's Addiction into an alternative-rock showcase and quasi-political sideshow, made a profit, as did its 1992 follow-up.
So a third annual Lollapalooza was inevitable; it started at Thunderbird Stadium on June 18 and reaches the New York area (actually, Stanhope, N.J.) on July 12, 13 and 16.
Lollapalooza '93 places a new lineup of bands within the same setup as the 1992 version: a big stage and a smaller stage, a gathering of food and clothing vendors, hints (though, this year, little more) of political engagement.
On the big stage are Primus, Alice in Chains, Dinosaur Jr., Fishbone, Arrested Development, Front 242, Rage Against the Machine and Babes in Toyland (or, for the second part of the tour, Tool); the four bands on the smaller stage will change throughout the tour.
Because it kept last year's format with some shrinking margins -- there's no freak show, a big part of Lollapalooza '92 -- the opening show of Lollapalooza '93 was a slight letdown.
But for the moment, it's still the closest thing to an alternative-rock summit for both performers and audience.


Mexico Eases The Way for U.S. Motorists
The Mexican Government and the American Automobile Association have announced a program that will allow motorists from the United States to enter Mexico more easily by getting their tourist cards and temporary automobile permits from A.A.A.-affiliated clubs in the border states.
Motorists will also be able to use their credit cards to post the bond required, based on the value of their car, through the A.A.A.
Previously this paperwork had to be processed at border crossings; the new system is designed to overcome traffic tie-ups.
The program will go into effect on July 1 and will be available to both members and nonmembers of the A.A.A. in Texas, New Mexico and Arizona, and only to members in California.


Kelly McCaffrey, Stephen Chase
Kelly Anne McCaffrey, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James P. McCaffrey of West Norwalk, Conn., was married yesterday to Stephen Bartlett Chase, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold A. Chase of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
Alton Wasson performed the ceremony at her parent's summer home in Taconic, Conn.
Mrs.
Chase, 25, was until recently a student teacher at the West Elementary School in New Canaan, Conn.
She graduated from Rollins College.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Romanoff International, a caviar and specialty food company in Charlotte, N.C.
Her mother, Ellie McCaffrey, is an owner of Perfect Partners, a women's clothing store in Westport, Conn.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: June 27, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
49
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
2
74
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
3
19
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
2
CASTLES, by Julie Garwood. (Pocket, $5.99.) To save herself from danger, a princess agrees to marry a knight in 19th-century England.
5
63
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $5.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
6
1
SAHARA, by Clive Cussler. (Pocket, $6.50.) Dirk Pitt uncovers a plot that may extinguish all life in the world's seas.
7
1
GERALD'S GAME, by Stephen King. (Signet, $6.99.) Twenty-eight hours of horror suffered by a woman handcuffed to a bedpost.
8
26
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The investigation of a woman's death involves the American-Japanese rivalry.
9
1
THE HEIRESS BRIDE, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) The last volume of "The Bride Trilogy," set in Regency England.
10 *
6
DARKEST HOUR, by V. C. Andrews. (Pocket, $5.99.) The concluding volume in a series about the Cutlers, a plantation-owning family.
11
9
WAITING TO EXHALE, by Terry McMillan. (Pocket, $5.99.) The friendships and romances of four black women in Phoenix.
12 *
5
THE MAGIC OF YOU, by Johanna Lindsey. (Avon, $5.99.) A 19th-century British minx sets her cap for an American sea captain.
13
3
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
14
8
SHADOWFIRES, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) A woman is stalked by her supposedly deceased husband.
15
3
TURTLE MOON, by Alice Hoffman. (Berkley, $5.99.) Two damaged adults and a troubled child strive valiantly to achieve happiness.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
9
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
2
6
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President.
3
503
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
4
89
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
5 *
8
NOT FOR SALE AT ANY PRICE, by Ross Perot. (Hyperion, $5.95.) The Texas billionaire on America's economic and political problems.
6 *
110
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
7
19
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's account of her childhood and adolescence.
8
20
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A celebration of rustic France.
9 *
2
A WORLD LIT ONLY BY FIRE, by William Manchester. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) An account of the Renaissance and the Reformation.
10 *
7
WHERE THE BLUEBIRD SINGS TO THE LEMONADE SPRINGS, by Wallace Stegner. (Penguin, $11.) Essays on the American West.
11
24
REVOLUTION FROM WITHIN, by Gloria Steinem. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) The reflections of a leading feminist on self-esteem.
12 *
19
WOMEN ON TOP, by Nancy Friday. (Pocket, $5.99.) The changes in social life that have affected the sexual fantasies of women.
13
134
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
14 *
34
BACKLASH, by Susan Faludi. (Anchor/Doubleday, $12.50.) A journalist describes a war against women's rights.
15
16
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Examples of waste, with suggestions for curbing it. 16 *
6
WRITTEN BY HERSELF,
edited by Jill Ker Conway. (Vintage, $15.) An anthology of autobiographical writings by American women.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
98
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) A collection of some 500 tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
2
123
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles for success.
3
12
LIFE'S LITTLE INSTRUCTION BOOK: Volume 2, by H. Jackson Brown Jr. (Rutledge Hill, $5.95.) A second collection of tips for achieving a self-fulfilling life.
4
1
THE NEW FIT OR FAT, by Covert Bailey. (Houghton Mifflin, $7.95.) Advice about diet, exercise and weight loss.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending June 12, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Neuchatel
To the Editor: The three automates in your story, "Enchantments of a Swiss Town" by Paul Hofmann (April 18), have a cousin in the States.
An automaton built in London in 1810 by another Swiss clockmaker, Henri Maillardet, is the pride and joy of the Franklin Institute Science Museum in Philadelphia.
Our automaton is also the size of a 3-to-4-year-old boy.
He combines the talents of the Scribe and Draftsman described in your article about Neuchatel.
His repertoire includes four drawings and three poems (in French and English), all stored in his brass memory.
The lifelike movements of the puppet are activated by a complex combination of wind-up motors, cams and levers in an ornate chest that forms the automaton's base.


Wall Street; Are Investors Getting Too Wild About Harry's?
CUSTOMERS are wild about Harry's, and so is an analyst whose company took part in the Harry's Farmers Market Inc. underwriting.
But whether investors should be excited about a stock that sells at 112 times next year's estimated earnings is another matter.
Harry's, which runs warehouse-style stores that specialize in perishable foods, went public May 20 at $17 a share.
The Roswell, Ga.-based company traded as high as $20 that first day, and closed at $18.75 Friday.


Correction
An article on June 13 about French films referred incorrectly to the director Jean Aurenche.
With the movie's director, Jean Delannoy, Mr.
Aurenche was co-adapter of the Andre Gide novel on which "La Symphonie Pastorale" was based, and he wrote the screenplay with Pierre Bost.
He collaborated again with Bost on the screenplay for "Devil in the Flesh," directed by Claude Autant-Lara.


The King of Junque
Kenneth Jay Lane isn't the indignant type.
It isn't worth the bother, as he would say in the slightly languid voice that may once have been affected but is now as much a part of him as the slightly British overtone he acquired at the same time that he discovered British tailors.
Still, mention Kenneth Jay Lane and "walker" in the same sentence and he gets a bit indignant, sort of.
Maybe reproachful would be more accurate, or disappointed.


Elisabeth Schupf, Ashley Lonsdale
Elisabeth Anne Schupf, a daughter of Harriet Warm of Shaker Heights, Ohio, and New York, and Axel Schupf of New York, was married yesterday to Duncan Ashley Lonsdale, a son of Indira Lonsdale of Columbia, S.C., and Kenneth Lonsdale of Akron, Ohio.
Rabbi Martin Zion performed the ceremony at the Rockefeller Center Luncheon Club in New York.
Mrs.
Lonsdale is a vice president at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Amherst College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is the president of H. A. Schupf &amp; Company, investment advisors in New York, and is the chairman of the Jewish Museum in New York.


Stop Punishing Vietnam
France and Japan want to lend Vietnam $140 million to pay off the old Saigon regime's debts to the International Monetary Fund.
That would make Hanoi eligible for new international loans to help its market-oriented economic reforms.
It's a constructive idea.
But it has been held up until now by stubborn opposition from Washington.
Beyond a reasonable concern about missing servicemen, previous administrations have seemed determined to keep punishing Hanoi for winning the war almost 20 years ago.
President Clinton can end this counterproductive sulk by following his advisers' recommendation to let Paris and Tokyo proceed.


The Best, or Maybe Worst, Of the Talk-Show World
Greg Kinnear thought he had seen it all.
As the host of "Talk Soup," a half-hour cable program that consists of excerpts from television talk shows, Mr.
Kinnear had witnessed some of the most outrageous moments in the history of daytime television.
Every weekday, the "Talk Soup" producers comb through about 20 talk programs and select a brief segment from each; 10 segments make it into each half-hour.
Mr.
Kinnear had been exposed to some real doozies.
He had seen Lulu and Topsy Curvy, two stripper sisters who claimed, on "Sally Jessy Raphael," to have the biggest breasts in America.
He had watched in amazement as a man on "The Montel Williams Show" described having been raped by an alien.
He had seen a verbal catfight between Joan Rivers and Jessica Hahn and an out-and-out brawl between Geraldo Rivera and a member of the Ku Klux Klan.
No, there wasn't much left in the realm of talk-show infamy that could surprise Mr.
Kinnear.


Surprise Guests In the Garden
I WAS digging up my tomato patch one morning about a month ago, when I thought I saw something move.
Some little dark blip in the periphery of my vision.
A lurching kind of motion.
I looked around, but nothing was moving, except the wind in the crape myrtle.
So I decided I'd imagined it and stepped down on my spade again, with that hearty pleasure that comes from turning over good earth. (I know, you no-dig types will be writing in next week, but I come from a long line of shovelers.)


Nancy Kauzor, William Cave
Nancy Young Kauzor, a senior vice president at Dun &amp; Bradstreet Information Services in Murray Hill, N.J., and William Furman Cave, a principal of Earnings Performance Group, a financial institutions consulting company in Short Hills, N.J., are planning a July 31 wedding.


When Making Dinosaurs Scary, Less Becomes More
Is "Jurassic Park" a horror movie?
Screaming audiences seem to cry "yes!" But people love to scream on roller coasters, too, and no one thinks of that experience as horror.
Steven Spielberg's multimillion-dollar special-effects extravaganza has a roller coaster's jerking, jolting pace, and it's almost as noisy as the Coney Island Cyclone.
Yet "Jurassic Park" also tries to be horrific, not by beefing up dinosaurs but by shrinking them.
Since the earliest discovery of saurian fossils more than 150 years ago, millions of people have been intrigued, fascinated, even struck with awe by dinosaurs; but until now few have found them horrible.
Traditionally dinosaurs have inspired awe or affection rather than fear.
PBS's much-maligned Barney proves that small children would cuddle dinosaurs if they could, and Barney is far from the first cuddly dinosaur (the Flintstones had one for a pet, and decades before Dino came Windsor McKay's comic-strip Gertie and Sinclair Oil's jolly green brontosaur).


Reader, She Married Him, Alas
FROM THE HEAT OF THE DAY By Roy Heath. 159 pp. New York: Persea Books. $19.95.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
106.25
109.75
125.70
per Dollar
German Mark
1.7065
1.6805
1.5353
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.2820
1.2743
1.1938
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.4757
1.4975
1.8945
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$375.75
$371.00
$342.50
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Laura C. Gilman and Jeffrey R. Ruhe
Laura Curtis Gilman, a technical consultant for a financial software company in Greenwich, Conn., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Robert Ruhe, the president of Prime Sports Channel Networks Inc. in Woodbury, L.I., a cable television sports service.
The Rev.
Avery C. Manchester, a Methodist minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the First Church and Parish in Dedham, Mass.
Mrs.
Ruhe, a graduate of Harvard University, works for Factset Data Systems.
She is the daughter of Susan Hicks of Dedham and Lewis E. Gilman of London.
The bride's mother is a sales executive with the Interface Group, a computer trade-show company in Needham, Mass.
Mrs.
Ruhe is a stepdaughter of Robert F. Hicks.


'Life's Dominion'
To the Editor:
After reading Laurence H. Tribe's review of "Life's Dominion: An Argument About Abortion, Euthanasia, and Individual Freedom," by Ronald Dworkin (May 16), I can only wonder where the reviewer and the author have been living for the past few decades.
Haven't either of them ever considered feminist analyses of why abortion is such a bitterly, even viciously, contested issue?
Mr.
Dworkin's rarefied arguments about the intrinsic value of life miss the most fundamental point: every time a woman makes an independent choice on a reproductive issue she removes a stone from the foundations of patriarchy.


R. O. Dowling, 62, Philanthropist And Investment Banker, Is Dead
Richard O. Dowling, an investment banker and philanthropist who helped finance a computerized reading and writing program for every public school in Mississippi, died on Thursday at a hospital in Stony Brook, L.I.
He was 62 and lived in Greenwich, Conn., and Quogue, L.I.
The cause was a cerebral hemorrhage, his family said.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
MEMOIR GOODBYE JUMBO, HELLO CRUEL WORLD By Louie Anderson. Viking, $20.


Raid on Baghdad; Clinton Seemed to Shift
President Clinton's relationships with the Iraqi leader, Saddam Hussein, were uneasy and uncertain from the beginning of his Presidency.
Even as he awaited his swearing-in ceremony, American bombers were striking at Iraqi missile positions.
He began his Presidency apparently offering an olive branch to Mr.
Hussein, but Mr.
Clinton ordered a missile strike against Iraqi intelligence headquarters yesterday in retaliation for what he said was an Iraqi attempt to kill former President George Bush.
Indeed, his speech last night announcing the raids seemed as tough as Mr.
Bush's harsh comments about Mr.
Hussein.


LIFE IS SACRED
In a perfect world, almost impossible decisions, like abortion and euthanasia, would not be necessary ("Life Is Sacred. That's the Easy Part," by Ronald Dworkin, May 16).
But this is not a perfect world, and sometimes we are forced to make decisions that do not have a perfectly moral answer.


Philadelphia Inaugurates New Convention Center


Loyalty to a Strategy Must Be Tempered
IT'S a standard piece of advice in tennis that you change a losing strategy, and that goes for chess, too.
But it is quite amazing how many players fail to follow it in both games.
Consider the encounter between the grandmaster Gata Kamsky of Brooklyn and the world junior champion, international master Pablo Zarnicki of Argentina, from Round 8 of the Miguel Najdorf International Tournament in Buenos Aires, April 18-30.
After Kamsky had subtly foiled his strategy, Zarnicki pressed on with it and was nicely crushed.


Remembering
PACK MY BAG A Self-Portrait. By Henry Green. 242 pp. New York: New Directions. $18.95.


Turkey Has Far to Go on Human Rights
To the Editor:
"Christopher Gives Turks Plan to End Rights Abuses" (news article, June 13) reports from Ankara that Secretary of State Warren Christopher has asked Turkish leaders to cooperate with a detailed United States proposal to help end widespread human rights abuses in Turkey.
Mr.
Christopher also indicated that the United States would reward "better behavior" by Turkey with economic cooperation and favors.


In the Region: Westchester; Countywide Property Revaluation Urged
AS property-tax challenges soar, two county legislators believe the time is right for Westchester to embark on a countywide revaluation.
"This has long been necessary, but extremely unpopular," said Katherine S. Carsky, a Yonkers Republican who is vice chairman of the County Board of Legislators.
"But with the successful challenges all over the county, the tax burden has now shifted to those who don't go to court, and that's not fair."


Raid on Baghdad; Pentagon Statements On the Missile Attack
Following are excerpts from yesterday's Pentagon briefing about the United States missile strikes on the Iraqi military intelligence headquarters in Baghdad, as recorded by The New York Times.
STATEMENT BY LES ASPIN  Secretary of Defense  .  .  .
Tomahawk cruise missiles from the U.S.
Navy, from service vessels, were directed at the headquarters building of the Iraqi Intelligence Service.
This operation was designed to be a strong and unmistakable response by the United States to the attempt by Iraq to assassinate former President George Bush during his visit to Kuwait in April.
The assassination attempt was not an act of a small group of people acting independently.
The evidence is very conclusive that it was the work of the Iraqi Intelligence Service, and is an action that would have had to have been approved by the highest levels of Iraqi Government.
After reviewing the evidence, President Clinton ordered the Department of Defense to develop a range of options.
The President then selected one of the options, one that would be target -- one that would target directly the agency we believe immediately responsible for planning and conducting this crime.
We would put this up here, the chart up here, which gives some of the reasons for picking the headquarters of the I.I.S.
RESPONSIBLE FOR TERRORISM The Iraqi Intelligence Service, the I.I.S., is the largest of the Iraqi intelligence agencies.
It is responsible for investigating and acting against any suspected disloyalties.
It's also responsible for monitoring Iraqi citizens and political activities, and countering dissident Iraqis and opposition groups outside the country.
It is responsible -- the primary agency responsible for terrorist attacks abroad, as it tried to do in this case.
The I.I.S. has carried out numerous covert activities, including assassinations, first of Iraqi political dissidents, of defecting scientists, and of Kurdish leaders.
It has conducted a terror campaign in Kuwait, car bombings in northern Iraq, and bombing of U.N. relief convoys and attack on U.N. personnel. . .  .
STATEMENT BY GEN. COLIN L. POWELL  Chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff
As the Secretary noted, we selected as the target for this evening the Iraqi Intelligence Service headquarters.
We selected it because it is the closest thing related to the provocation.
We're quite confident that they were the ones responsible for the planning of this attempt on President Bush's life, and so we wanted to make sure we had a target that was, shall we say, nexus to the provocation.
PROPORTIONATE RESPONSE We designed the attack in a way that it would be proportionate to the attempt on President Bush's life.
The I.I.S. headquarters is responsible for the things noted here, and that Secretary Aspin has spoken to.
Located in a restricted area of downtown Baghdad, in a walled installation, it's a facility that was attacked during Desert Storm and has subsequently been rebuilt, reoccupied, and is very actively being used, and as the Secretary noted, conclusively tied to past terrorist operations abroad, and directly related to the planned assassination attempt.  .  .  .
ANSWERS BY MR. ASPIN
Q. What kind of a wake-up call do you think this sends to Saddam Hussein?
A.
I mean, if you see the building that was selected, the time of day that was selected, there's a lot of indications as to what the purpose was, and the purpose was to send a very strong message.
And the message is that that kind of behavior is just totally unacceptable. .  .  .
SETTING A TARGET What you're trying to do is go after the people responsible.
Killing Iraqi people does not go after the people who were responsible for the assassination attempt on George Bush.
Going after this building, and the I.I.S., does directly go after the people who were responsible for the attack on George Bush.
Q.
On a typical Saturday night how many people might be in the building?
And also, is it a favorite haunt of Mr.
Hussein himself?
A.
No.
I think it would be very, very unlikely that Saddam Hussein was there.
But there will be people in that building.
Q. How many?
A.
I don't know, but it's like any intelligence building.
You've got people who are there 24 hours watching communications, you presumably might have some people in there who were involved in maintenance -- clean-up crews or one kind or another.
I wouldn't want to guess. . .  .
ANSWERS BY GENERAL POWELL
Q.
Was the removal of the carrier from the Persian Gulf -- well now the replacement carrier -- part of the planning process, sort of a feint to lull Saddam Hussein into complacency?
A.
No, it was not that deliberate.
The carrier is out on its tether; it's available should we want it to come back to the Persian Gulf.
OTHER PRECAUTIONS And we are taking some other precautionary moves to make sure that should Mr.
Hussein even dream of retaliating we have more than enough force in the region to deal with it. .  .  .
ANSWERS BY MR. ASPIN
Q.
There was thought given at one time -- I thought a decision had been made, actually -- to wait until the Kuwaiti trial had reached its conclusion because of a desire not to interfere with that.
Was that just a story?
A.
I saw it reported both ways, but what we were waiting for was the conclusive decisions of the C.I.A. and the F.B.I.
Q.
And in the three things that you or General Powell mentioned, the forensic information, the other two categories, which was the most important and which -- maybe you could go into a little bit more detail about what the nature of the evidence was?
A. I think you need to talk to the people who did it rather than us.
Q.
Do you have any indication, any evidence that any of those 23 missiles went astray, did not reach the intended target area?
A. We have no such information.
Q. Are you ruling it out?
A.
I can't rule anything out until we have the basis to rule something in or out.
I have some preliminary information that a large number of them impacted where they were supposed to; whether they all did or not, we will have wait and get our assessment.
Q.
Is there any relation between the recent wave of terrorism in Europe and the arrests in New York and this?
A.
I think that again you really do need to talk to the F.B.I. about that.
I wouldn't even want to guess.


Emily Glasser, William Susman
Emily Louise Glasser, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Glasser of Lake Forest, Ill., was married last evening to William Sachs Susman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis B. Susman of Chicago.
Rabbi Alvin Rubin performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
The bride, 26, is retaining her name.
A graduate of Dartmouth College, she is a financial analyst in corporate finance at BT Securities, a subsidiary of the Bankers Trust Company in New York.
Her father is the chairman, president and chief executive of the GATX Corporation, an industrial transportation and storage company in Chicago.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13  U.S. MISSILES HIT BAGHDAD


Your Home: Co-op Bargains; A Gamble That Can Pay Off
THIS may be the perfect summer to pick up a co-op apartment in the New York City area at a bargain price -- provided you are a contrarian thinker willing to take a gamble.
For it's hardly a secret that co-ops have grown increasingly unpopular and unsalable of late.
One reason is financial.
Banks will no longer lend money to buy certain co-op units, citing higher-than-normal risks.
This is a result of the wave of sponsor defaults that swept the co-op industry in the last five years, leaving dozens of co-op corporations with cash-flow problems.


Miss Mulcahy, Mr. Rowe
Mary Elizabeth Mulcahy, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Mulcahy 3d of Mendham, N.J., was married yesterday to Matthew John Rowe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William A. Rowe of Elmwood Park, N.J.
Msgr.
Kenneth E. Lasch performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Church in Mendham.
Mrs.
Rowe, 26, is an executive secretary for the American Telephone and Telegraph Company in Short Hills, N.J.
She attended Endicott College.
Her father is the president and chief executive of the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority in East Rutherford, N.J.
Her mother, Terry Mulcahy, is a real-estate associate at Burgdorff Realtors in Mendham.


Kate Stookey, Samuel Haviland Jr.
Kate Worthington Stookey, a daughter of Lee and Byron Stookey of Brooklyn Heights, was married yesterday to Samuel St.
John Haviland Jr., a son of Frances and Samuel Haviland of Farmington, Conn.
The Rev.
Alastair Votaw performed the ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church in Southport, Conn.
Mrs.
Haviland, 28, is a teacher of a bilingual sixth grade class at Public School 154 in the Bronx.
She graduated magna cum laude from Temple University.
Her father is a social studies teacher at the Manhattan Center for Science and Mathematics.
Her mother teaches English as a second language at the Riverside Adult Learning Center in Manhattan.


Classical Taste in the U.S.
From about 1800 to 1840, Americans were fanatical about anything Greek or Roman.
The ancient civilizations influenced tastes in furniture, clothing, reading and travel.
Greece and Rome represented not only sources of prestige and esthetics, but also models of refinement at a time when the United States was shaping itself into a new republic.
"Classical Taste in America, 1800-1840," an exhibition opening today at the Baltimore Museum of Art, features more than 250 classically inspired objects, including furniture, paintings, silver, sculpture, glass, ceramics, textiles and printed materials.


When Tired Plants Need a Pick-Me-Up
SUMMER is officially here with its bright sunny days and good growing weather.
The garden should be flourishing with abundant green and beautiful flowers on sturdy stems.
If it is not, there may be good reasons.
It is possible that the plants are simply hungry, and the simplest solution is application of a plant fertilizer.
If the soil is of poor quality, lack of proper nutrition may be the cause of spindly growth and lack of strong flowers.
But if the soil is in good condition, these starvation conditions should not exist and can be easily remedied.


JUNE 20-26: A First Half-Brother?; A Californian Claims Kinship With Clinton
Paradise, Calif., a retirement hamlet in the Sierra Nevada foothills, had its 15 minutes of fame last week when one resident, Henry Leon Ritzenthaler, 55, said he was a long-lost half-brother of President Clinton.
Other residents seemed less than impressed.
"If he'd of told us, we'd have gone, 'uh, huh, sure,' " said Frank Jenks, proprietor of a video store where Mr.
Ritzenthaler is a customer.
"Hey, we're related to Clinton, too. Hillary, that's our sister."


South Africa's Rightists Blunder Into the Spotlight
For a few hours on Friday the pinstripes and position papers gave way to safari garb and pump-action shotguns, as white extremists overran the convention hall in Johannesburg where negotiators have been laboring over the shape of a new South Africa.
The militant separatists of the Afrikaner Resistance Movement led the way, shattering the glass doors with an armored truck.
Then hundreds of angry whites swarmed in to demand that the new order include an independent homeland for themselves.
After two hours they dispersed without shooting anyone -- except possibly themselves, in the foot.


Seth Lederman and Amy Seigal
Amy Lynne Seigal, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Stuart A. Seigal of Wayne, N.J., was married last evening to Dr.
Seth Lederman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Lederman of Rockville Centre, L.I.
Rabbi Joel Goor performed the ceremony at the Water Club in New York.
Mrs.
Lederman, 28, is an associate at Wolff &amp; Samson, a law firm in Roseland, N.J.
She graduated cum laude from Tulane University and received her law degree from George Washington University.
Her father is an obstetrician and gynecologist in Wayne.


Polo Benefit Today For Bosnian Children
TODAY at 3 P.M., the grounds of the Marshall Field estate in Huntington, now Caumsett State Park, will be the setting for a benefit polo match in what appears to be a resurgence of polo on Long Island.
The Long Island chapter of Save the Children, the child-care agency, will raise money to deliver aid, reunite families and continue education for children whose lives have been torn by the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina, said Susan Lassen of Cold Spring Harbor, founder and past president of the chapter.


Elizabeth Owen And John Pinto
Elizabeth Ann Owen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Owen Jr. of Hinsdale, Ill., was married there yesterday to John Joseph Pinto, a son of Pauline B. Pinto of New York and Joseph J. Pinto of North Salem, N.Y.
The Rev.
Edward Searl, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Hinsdale Golf Club.
Mrs.
Pinto, 26, graduated from Wellesley College and received a master's degree in natural resource policy from the University of Michigan.
Her father is a partner at William Blair &amp; Company, a securities brokerage in Chicago.
Her mother, Lois Owen, is an administrator at the National Ice Carving Association in Chicago.


Ms. Radomsky And Mr. Bass
Pauline Radomsky, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hyman Radomsky of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Robert Bass, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Bass of Howard Beach, Queens.
Rabbi Gerald M. Solomon officiated at Temple Shalom of Electchester in Fresh Meadows, Queens.


Zdenek Kopal, A Lunar Expert And Author, 79
Zdenek Kopal, an astronomer who was an authority on the Moon and also on the neighboring pairs of stars known as close binaries, died Wednesday at his home in Wilmslow, England.
He was 79.
The cause was prostate cancer, said his daughter Zdenka Smith of Boulder, Colo., a research physicist.


U.N. Talks Bring Haiti Leaders and Aristide Together in New York
United Nations diplomats began talks today in New York with senior Haitian political and military leaders and with Haiti's first elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, in an effort to restore him to power after 21 months of exile.
The negotiations, which came after continuing international pressure that brought tough new economic sanctions against Haiti's military leadership and its civilian allies last week, are being held on Governors Island, a tightly controlled military reservation in New York harbor.


Dividend Meetings
Following is a partial list of dividend meetings for the week of June 28: MONDAY  BellSouth Corp Disney Walt Co General Mls Inc Hartford Steam Blr Standard Prods Co Unocal Corp  TUESDAY  Supervalu Inc WEDNESDAY  Washington Gas Lt Co


Pattern of Deception Is Seen at Pentagon
Federal investigators have determined that the Pentagon misled Congress about the cost and the necessity of many weapons built in the 1980's to counter the forces of the Soviet Union.
Eight reports from a three-year study by the General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress, show a pattern of exaggeration and deception by military leaders.
The reports, which are scheduled to be discussed this week in a Senate hearing, found that the Pentagon understated the cost of nuclear missiles, overstated the radar-evading ability of new nuclear bombers and exaggerated the threat posed by Soviet defenses.


No Headline
"In the end, we won the cold war, and if we won by too much, if it was overkill, so be it." -- CASPAR W. WEINBERGER, former Secretary of Defense.  [ A10:1. ]


Elisabeth Klufer, Richard Haber
Elisabeth Joel Klufer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Klufer of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dr.
Richard Seth Haber, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Sidney A. Haber of White Plains.
Rabbi Beth Singer performed the ceremony at the Water Club in New York.
Ms.
Klufer is keeping her name.
She is the Eastern sales manager for The National Real Estate Investor and for Shopping Center World, trade magazines for the real estate industry, in New York.
She graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.


In Slovakia, Paper Thrives on Change
In this out-of-the-way capital, Tatiana Repkova edits and publishes one of Eastern Europe's most successful post-Communist newspapers.
In a country where the transition from a state economy is getting mixed signals from the Government, the weekly, Trend, has succeeded by aggressively pushing for a market economy.
Filled with fresh and analytical articles on business and the economy, Trend has seen its circulation jump six times, to nearly 20,000, since its first issue was designed and edited on an apartment floor 18 months ago.


Cliffhanger: Can Early Movies Be Saved in Time?
The art of the cinema may be forever, but the film stock is not.
A four-volume report released late last week by the Library of Congress offers, for the first time, a comprehensive survey of film preservation in the United States by film studios, archives and individuals.
Entitled "Film Preservation 1993: A Study of the Current State of American Film Preservation," the report describes a losing battle against time, with inadequately financed preservationists racing to fend off the threat posed by deterioration of film stock and to reconstruct the original versions of films that have been altered over time.


Was This Strike Necessary?
It's easy to appreciate the pressures that drove President Clinton to order an early Sunday morning missile attack on an Iraqi intelligence complex in central Baghdad.
And no sympathy need be wasted on Saddam Hussein, whose continued defiance of Security Council resolutions makes him, literally, an international outlaw.
Mr.
Clinton's show of force won predictably quick endorsement on Capitol Hill and from allied leaders.
But the American people need more information about the reasons for and propriety of Mr.
Clinton's action.
Was this -- as the Administration contends -- a wise use of force, combining the logic of retaliation and the benefit of pre-empting future terrorist strikes?


Thousands March in a Celebration of Gay Pride
With their fists raised in solidarity and their voices celebrating their pride, tens of thousands of gay men, lesbians and their supporters strolled and chanted their way down Fifth Avenue yesterday in a sprawling march that underscored the striking range of gay life in New York City.
Gay social workers, gay soccer players, gay gospel singers, gay Republicans, gay mothers, gay Harlemites, -- they all came together on a humid afternoon for the 24th annual march, which took on an added significance this year because of President Clinton's proposal to allow homosexuals to serve in the military.
What Gay America Looks Like
"I feel so moved emotionally," Miriam Ben-Shalom, one of the grand marshals of the parade, said as she watched marchers surge down Fifth Avenue and spectators three-deep jostle for views on the sidewalks.
"Look at all the people here. This is America. Do you want to see what gay America looks like? Look on this street."


Jumpstarting the Electric Car's Future
Almost everybody likes the idea of clean, quiet electric cars, but at today's relatively high prices -- from the mid-$20,000's for a small car to $100,000 for a mini-van -- almost nobody buys them.
So they remain impossible to mass-produce, which means that prices stay high.
Now, a new analysis has concluded that the impasse could be broken if Federal and state governments would commit themselves to large-scale purchases of the vehicles, an idea that some Federal officials cautiously agree has merit.


Review/Music; Pavarotti Sings, and the Great Lawn Is All Ears
Fame is an intoxicating lure for the multitudes who admire those who have achieved it.
In today's opera world, there are few singers as famous as Luciano Pavarotti, and when he gave a free concert in Central Park on Saturday evening, both hard-core opera fans and casual listeners who rarely venture into an opera house flocked to the Great Lawn to bask in the tenor's rich tone and stellar presence.
Near the end of the 130-minute concert, the Parks Department estimated the crowd at 500,000, an increase of 100,000 over the estimate provided when the concert began and quadruple the expectation earlier in the day.
Millions more watched the concert on television, nationally on a PBS broadcast and yesterday on a delayed international broadcast.
And no doubt it will have a video afterlife, as many of Mr.
Pavarotti's televised performances do.


New Immigrants Face Racial Hostility
To the Editor:
Your series, "Hidden Economy: Immigrants Underground," beginning June 13, focuses on immigrants from Asia, Latin America and Africa, implying that the relative absence of Europeans distinguishes this latest wave of immigration from its predecessors.
This is inaccurate.


Deedee Rodolitz, J. F. Jacobsohn
Diane Lynn Rodolitz, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Allan J. Rodolitz of Woodmere, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Jeremy Frederick Jacobsohn, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
James S. Jacobsohn of Cleveland Heights, Ohio.
Rabbi Sholom Stern officiated at Temple Beth El in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Mrs.
Jacobsohn, 32, is known as Deedee.
She graduated from Northwestern University and received a master's degree in history from Harvard University.
She is a candidate for a doctoral degree in American and New England studies at Boston University.
Her father is the president of Coronet Parts Manufacturing Company, a manufacturer of fluid conductors for industry, in Brooklyn.


Star of Cozzene Beats (Ties) Lure
American racing needs two things, people have been saying: stars and a story line.
And it got both yesterday when Star of Cozzene ran down Lure in the homestretch to win the $500,000 Caesar's International at the Atlantic City Race Course and tie their sizzling rivalry at two victories apiece.
The two speed horses, the best on grass and maybe the best on any surface, renewed their competition just half an hour after the colt Great Navigator joined the growing casualty list of thoroughbreds when he suffered a broken ankle bone during the Jersey Shore Breeders' Cup.
The accident was said by the track's veterinarians to be career threatening but probably not life threatening, and the horse was taken to the hospital with a splint and brace on his left foreleg.


More Notable Alumni of a Brooklyn School
To the Editor:
I am honored to be counted among the noted alumni of James Madison High School, alma mater of Judge Ruth Bader Ginsburg, President Clinton's Supreme Court nominee (news article, June 16), but there are, in my judgment, many others perhaps more deserving.
I think, for example, of Dr.
Samuel Thier, president of Brandeis University, and Representative Bernard Sanders of Vermont.


Victor Maddern; Actor, 67
Victor Maddern, a veteran British character actor, died on Tuesday in London.
He was 67 and lived in Suffolk in southeastern England.
The cause was cancer, The Times of London reported.


Jennifer LeBrane David A. Stewart
Jennifer LeBrane, a daughter of Bettye D. LeBrane and Ruffin LeBrane, both of Seattle, was married yesterday to David A. Stewart, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
St.
Clair Stewart of Toronto.
The Rev.
Nathaniel Hollis, a Seventh Day Adventist pastor, performed the ceremony at the Gilbert Lambuth Chapel on the campus of Paine College in Augusta, Ga.
Mrs.
Stewart, 24, is a registered nurse with the nursing program at the Medical College of Georgia in Augusta, from which she is a magna cum laude graduate.
She graduated cum laude from Spelman College.
Her father is a mental health consultant in Seattle.
Her mother is a psychiatric nurse at the Seattle Mental Health Center.


Leslie Moskowitz, David Elfenbein
Leslie Brett Moskowitz and David Henry Elfenbein, third-year medical students at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Arnold Turetsky performed the ceremony at Congregation Kneses Tifereth Israel in Port Chester, N.Y.
Mrs.
Elfenbein, 23, graduated magna cum laude from Brandeis University.
She is a daughter of Harold and Helyn Moskowitz of Huntington Beach, Calif.
Her father, now retired, was an accountant in Hawthorne, Calif., for the Northrop Corporation, the aerospace company.


Books of The Times; A City of Angels Visited by Earthlier Creatures
The Angel Carver
By Rosanne Daryl Thomas
260 pages. Random House. $20.  Creatures of Habit
Julie Baumgold
294 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.
In Brooklyn on the corner of Flatbush and Parker, there stands an empty shoe-repair shop that was once the workplace of a genius, if we are to believe the unusual fable told in "The Angel Carver," by Rosanne Daryl Thomas, whose previous book, "Complications," was published under the pseudonym Prince Charming.


METRO DIGEST
SPECTER OF TERROR: DEBATE ON ARREST OF A SHEIK
Federal law-enforcement authorities in New York concluded that Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the radical Egyptian cleric, knew details of a plot to detonate bombs across the city but were waved off arresting him at the last minute by the Clinton Administration, Government officials say.
They described the decision as a hairline call ultimately decided by Attorney General Janet Reno on legal and tactical grounds, including Mr.
Abdel Rahman's usefulness as a powerful lens through which authorities examine the murky and violent world of Islamic extremism.
Moreover, the officials concluded that some of the evidence against the sheik was "fuzzy." A1.


Can't Tell the Teams Without a Program
The Grand Alee is the main drag in this old French town.
On Saturday night, its broad roadway was filled with slowly cruising cars, its sidewalks were surging with tourists and most of the outdoor cafes' tables were packed with members of the hockey mob.
Executives, players, reporters and fans had escaped the sweltering Colisee after the National Hockey League's daylong entry draft that ended the league's annual convention that signals the end of one long season and the approach of the next.


More Notable Alumni of a Brooklyn School
To the Editor:
Your June 16 article on James Madison High School notwithstanding, Sylvia Fine Kaye never graduated from Madison.
She and her husband, Danny, were products of Thomas Jefferson, the Brownsville-East New York high school.
Sylvia graduated in 1929, Danny in 1930 -- long before Madison's foundations were laid.
I was there.
I have Sylvia's picture in my class yearbook.


World-Weary Becker Is a Kid Again at Play on Grass
It's June, and that means Boris Becker's thoughts, thoughts more often preoccupied with throwing the I Ching than with bashing tennis balls, have lightened, turned to the pleasant prospect of winning Wimbledon.
"Once we get here, once it's June," he said the other day in the midst of a discussion about a terrible spring spent on clotted clay, "I always think I have a good chance."


Visitors Instantly Embrace Rooftop Park
Gaspar Santiago, the mild-mannered director of New York's newest state park, was standing on a plaza between the outdoor pool and the baseball field when he noticed a bag of cheese popcorn in the grass.
Nearby, children were shrieking in the giant sprinkler and adults were cheering players in the Tony Fernandez Little League, but nothing could distract Mr.
Santiago from that bag of cheese corn.
"Let me just get that before it's all over the place," Mr.
Santiago said, stooping like a fussy housekeeper to pick up the cheese corn, and, while he was at it, an unsmoked cigarette, a paper napkin, a candy wrapper, a can and a plastic "I Love New York" bag.


Dance in Review
Tina Cross and Donna Jewel  Context Hall East Village
When Tina Croll and Donna Jewell shared a program of dances on June 20, the occasion was something of an artistic homecoming for Ms.
Croll.
In the 1960's and early 70's, she performed at Dance Theater Workshop, the Judson Memorial Church and other important New York dance centers.
Then she traveled in Europe and India, after which she settled in Los Angeles in 1982.
Last year, she moved back to New York.


Market Place; Southwest Airlines Earns Praise for Its Profitable Ways.
SOUTHWEST AIRLINES, rare among the big carriers because it is the only one that has made money each of the last three years, has attracted a slew of imitators among start-up airlines intent on duplicating Southwest's emphasis on lean operations and a minimum of passenger amenities.
But analysts see little threat from the copycats.
"If the start-up airlines succeed in direct competition with Southwest, they would have some impact," said Paul P. Karos, the airline analyst for First Boston.
"But that doesn't seem to be a likely possibility." First Boston recently raised its earnings estimate for Southwest's second quarter, which ends this week, as well as for the company's full-year 1993 and 1994 results.


Deficit Taking Toll on Lawmakers' Dreams of Big-Science Projects
It took more than strutting astronauts and brilliant astrophysicists to spawn the miracles of moon walking, microchips and satellite communications.
Congress wrote the checks.
But now the ink is running out.


Patents; Companies Are Developing Drugs to Stop the Body's Complement System of Proteins From Going Too Far.
MEDICAL science has been aware of the human body's "complement" system since the late 19th century, when a United States Army surgeon observed in the British journal Lancet that the corpse of someone bitten by a rattlesnake decomposed much more rapidly than the corpse of someone killed by a bullet.
The venom of poisonous snakes, it turns out, destroys the complement system, a set of proteins that acts as a front line for the immune system, killing and removing old or injured cells as well as bacteria and other foreign substances.
Indeed, when complement was first identified, it was given the Greek name alexin, which means to protect or ward off.


CHRONICLE
JULIA ROBERTS married the singer-songwriter LYLE LOVETT yesterday at a church in Marion, Ind., the actress's publicist said.
The actress, 25, met Mr.
Lovett, 35, when they filmed "The Player" in 1992, said NANCY SELTZER, who represents the actress.
It was the first marriage for both.
The wedding was planned in two days, Ms.
Seltzer said.


Bankrupt Individuals Are Fewer
After rising inexorably for nearly a decade, the number of bankruptcies filed by individuals is suddenly declining.
In five of the last six months for which data are now available, filings were markedly lower than a year earlier.
Bankruptcy experts say that the new data indicate that a significant shift has occurred.


Inishmore Island Journal; On Europe's Edge, Island Sees Tourism as Lifeline
The fiercely independent people of this limestone rock, the largest of the three Aran Islands on the western edge of Europe, recall that in the old days the fishermen did not bother to learn to swim because that would only prolong the agony of drowning.
Now, the fishing industry has shrunk because of competition from Spanish and other fleets, and the 2,000 people of the islands acknowledge that they will have to learn to swim in the bureaucratic sea of paperwork for European Community financing programs in Brussels if they are to keep these islands worth living on.
Last year the islanders, who have had television only since 1975, voted against the accord on European political union known as the Maastricht treaty, though Irish voters as a whole approved it by a wide margin.


In Rural Jails, Haitians Suffer From Isolation
In the middle of an isolated Louisiana parish, 18 dejected Haitian refugees sit in two dank, windowless jail cells, a thousand miles from the company of their countrymen at a detention center in Florida, which Federal authorities say is too crowded to house them.
Looking back on the uncertain charms of nearly six months in a rural Louisiana jail -- watery grits and overcooked rice as part of typical prison fare, metal bunks with thin pallets, and, for seven female refugees in the parish's jail for women, unwelcome sexual advances from local inmates -- several Haitians yearned in recent interviews for the Krome Avenue Detention Immigration Facility in Miami, even though Haitians there have complained of beatings and harassment.
One even wants to go home.


Diane A. Cohen and Edward Koones
Diane Alice Cohen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sidney Cohen of Livingston, N.J., was married yesterday to Edward Koones, the son of Seymour Koones of Brooklyn and the late Geraldine Koones.
Rabbi Azriel C. Fellner officiated at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
Mrs.
Koones is a securities trader at Bernard L. Madoff Investment Securities in New York.
She graduated from New York University, from which she received an M.B.A.


Valerie Frankel, Glenn Rosenberg
Valerie Ann Frankel, an associate editor at Mademoiselle magazine and author of mystery novels, and Glenn Rosenberg, a product manager at Columbia House, the music catalogue company, both in New York, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Michael Paley officiated at the home of the bride's parents, Dr. and Mrs.
Howard J. Frankel, in Short Hills, N.J.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  WEEKEND American League
BALTIMORE ORIOLES -- Placed Sherman Obando, outfielder, on the 15-day disabled list.
Called up John O'Donoghue, pitcher, from Rochester of the International League.


Child Services Can Tear Families Apart
To the Editor:
"Family Preservation and Its Victims" (Op-Ed, June 19), a diatribe by Patrick Murphy, Cook County Public Guardian, against family preservation, is based on the flawed premise that child protective services leave hard-working but impoverished families alone, and only intervene when parents, usually drug addicted, beat, rape or torture their children.


CHRONICLE
It's difficult for some foundation heads not to think of fund raising at all times.
When officers of Amfar, the American Foundation for AIDS Research, told MICHAEL WARD STOUT, president of the Robert Mapplethorpe Foundation, that they wanted to honor him with a dinner, he responded: "It ought to be a fund-raiser. You shouldn't waste the evening."
So be it, they said, and the proceeds of a $250-a-person dinner this evening for 100 guests at the restaurant Ariel &amp; Michael on East 22d Street are to go into Amfar's coffers.


Tigers Claw Way Back to Contention
The Detroit Tigers, never to be confused with the Atlanta Braves, knew going into spring training that the club needed pitching.
Desperately.
Still, when Sparky Anderson heard that David Wells, a left-handed reliever of some note, had been released by the Toronto Blue Jays, the manager was suspicious.


Bring Russia and Ukraine Into NATO Together; Economic, Not Ethnic
To the Editor:
"Ukraine Lawmakers Balk at Anti-Crisis Plan" (news article, June 16) calls Ukraine's Donbas, where an explosion of strikes has occurred, a region where a majority of the population is ethnically Russian.


Review/Opera; Mozart Comedy Opens Company's 11th Year
The Opera Festival of New Jersey is celebrating its 10th anniversary and has expanded its season to three productions from two.
This year's program, running through July 17, includes Mozart's "Magic Flute," Bizet's "Carmen" and Peter Maxwell Davies's "Lighthouse." As in the past, the company has made an effort to represent the 20th century and also has staged all the operas in English.
The inaugural performance was "The Magic Flute," at the Lawrenceville School on June 19; Michael Pratt conducted.
Ron Kadri's design for this tale of Freemasonry and sacred ceremony is simple and lucid, favoring pastel colors.
The traditional large moon-disk floats in the center; F. Mitchell Dana's lighting supplied green, purple or reddish hues, sometimes a faintly psychedelic spectrum effect.
Opaque, crystalline shapes rise to either side in the opening scene; the columns of Sarastro's palace are no more substantial.


Editorial Notebook; The Real Clarence Thomas
"I say to myself every day, there but for the grace of God, go I," said Supreme Court nominee Clarence Thomas.
He was telling the Senate at his 1991 confirmation hearing of the feelings he had for the busloads of prisoners he watched daily from his courthouse window.
The implication was that a Justice Thomas, up from the dirt poverty of Pin Point, Ga., would look out for the underdog, even a convicted one with few rights.
Yet twice in his two terms on the Court, Justice Thomas has argued in dissent that the Eighth Amendment's ban on cruel and unusual punishments should not protect prison inmates.
Last year he objected to relief for a prisoner who had suffered, he said, only minor injuries at the hands of his guards: a split lip, loosened teeth, a broken dental plate and the taunting of a supervisor who warned the guards not to have "too much fun." The other day he objected again when the Court held that a prisoner subjected to the fumes of a chain-smoking cellmate might have a constitutional complaint.


Argentina's Oil Company Going Public
Argentina takes a step on Monday that no other Latin American country has done: It is selling control of its state oil company, YPF S.A., to local and international investors.
The planned sale of nearly $2.5 billion in YPF stock after the close of trading on Monday is perhaps the most graphic illustration of the change in political and economic orientation for Argentina under President Carlos Saul Menem and, by extension, for much of the continent as it emerges from almost two decades of high inflation, protected markets, weak growth and negative industrial investment.


Blacks Rejecting Gay Rights As a Battle Equal to Theirs
Ronald Prince has lived a gay life since his mid-teens.
Now 43, he readily recalls moments when he hid his homosexuality rather than face public ridicule.
"In high school, when students would poke fun at 'faggots' or 'sissies,' I wouldn't speak up," he said.
"I'd go along with the crowd." The facade he kept up included disguising what he considered potentially effeminate mannerisms.


Pamela Reeves, Jeffrey Goldberg
Pamela Ress Reeves, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William E. Reeves of Providence, R.I., was married there yesterday to Jeffrey Mark Goldberg, a son of Ellen H. Goldberg of Malverne, L.I., and Daniel Goldberg of Baldwin, L.I.
Rabbi Wayne Franklin performed the ceremony at Temple Emanu-El.


Nielsen's New Ratings For Cable TV Draw Fire
In the latest sign that cable channels are achieving equal status with broadcast channels, the A. C. Nielsen Company has begun issuing a weekly list of the most-watched shows on cable.
Jack Loftus, the vice president of communications for Nielsen, said the company had been considering such a list for some time to supplement the weekly list of ratings for prime-time shows on ABC, CBS, NBC and Fox.
"Basic cable is now in more than 62 percent of the homes," Mr.
Loftus said.
"The average home now has 32 channels. People watch cable; they're probably interested in what the top shows are."


RAID ON BAGHDAD: The White House; Administration Finds Just Keeping a Secret Can Be a Triumph
The unexpected missile strike against Iraq's intelligence headquarters was a result of weeks of intensive planning so secret that no more than five top White House aides had any knowledge of the discussions, Clinton Adminstration officials said today.
By concealing the conclusion that Baghdad was responsible for an assassination plot against George Bush during his visit to Kuwait in April, aides provided a veil of secrecy that gave President Clinton the advantage of surprise when military retribution came.
It also helped him appear decisive and resolute in his most significant action yet as Commander in Chief.


Roy Campanella Dies


Rushing to Gather Up Cash On Northwest's Forest Floor
The high meadows of the Blue Mountains are full of wild strawberries this month, and the bear grass sprouts smell especially sweet.
But these sublimities are mere background to a rush of people crawling along the forest floor in search of mushrooms, the latest and, pound for pound, perhaps most lucrative cash crop to come out of the national forests.
Using pocket knives as their only tools, the pickers are stuffing bags with morels, chanterelles, boletus and the gold nugget of wild mushrooms, matsutakes, which sell for up to $70 a pound in Asian retail markets.


RAID ON BAGHDAD: The United Nations; U.S. Presents Evidence to U.N. Justifying Its Missile Attack on Iraq
Showing pictures of bomb components, the chief United States delegate to the United Nations presented detailed evidence today to support the Clinton Administration's case that it was legally justified in carrying out a missile attack on an Iraqi intelligence site in Baghdad.
The delegate, Madeleine K. Albright,said United States retaliation was consistent with Article 51 of the United Nations Charter, which provides for the right of self-defense, for what American officials have concluded was a plot by the Iraqi Government to assassinate former President George Bush in Kuwait.


A Final 'Dinner With Balanchine' Summarizes a Master's Legacy
In its eight-week tribute to George Balanchine, the New York City Ballet staged 73 ballets from the choreographer's 465-work repertory, staying true to his belief that the material of dance should be dance itself.
Yesterday, drawing the grand affair to a close, the company modified that dictum a bit: the material of dance became dance itself plus food, although there was no danger that the art would end up with second billing.
Using a logistical flourish that mirrored both the master's energy and his formal, not-so-simple simplicity, the Balanchine Celebration ended with a six-hour-plus, seven-course program, "Dinner With Balanchine." It was three parts ballet, three parts food and one part film-clip and spoken tribute, with 100 percent effort from hundreds of people.


MILITARY ACCUSED OF LIES OVER ARMS
Government investigators have concluded that military officials misled Congress about the cost, the performance and the necessity of many of the most expensive weapons systems built in the 1980's for nuclear war against the Soviet Union.
The Pentagon understated the cost of nuclear missiles by billions of dollars; it deliberately overstated the radar-evading ability of the new generation of nuclear bombers, and it exaggerated the threat posed by Soviet weapons and defenses, the investigators say.
Their findings are in eight secret reports from a three-year study by the General Accounting Office, an investigative arm of Congress.


Treasury Market Expects Rally in Bonds to Continue
With the Treasury bond market in the midst of a rally that has pushed yields down to their lowest level in 20 years, optimism reigns in the credit markets.
Many analysts said rates could fall further this week.
Forecasts of a sluggish economy and low inflation have been enough to reduce gradually the yield of the bellwether 30-year Treasury bond, to 6.70 percent late Friday from 7.03 percent on May 21.


RAID ON BAGHDAD: An Assessment; The Missile' Message
White House officials said today that their only regret about the missile attack on the Iraqi intelligence headquarters was that there was no CNN crew there to broadcast the event live so it could be watched in the Sudan, Iran and other countries suspected of involvement in terrorism.
Administration officials said they had no conclusive evidence that the Sudanese or Iranian intelligence services were involved with the Muslims recently arrested in the New York area and accused of plotting to bomb the United Nations and other sites.


Machine Tool Orders Drop For First Time in 3 Months
Posting their first decline in three months, orders for machine tools fell in May by nearly 9 percent.
But industry experts attributed little significance to the decline as an indicator of trouble ahead.
In its monthly report, the Association for Manufacturing Technology, a trade organization in McLean, Va., said yesterday that orders for May totaled $317.3 million, compared with $348.3 million for April, a decrease of 8.9 percent.


Marc W. Greene and Ellen Jane Field
Ellen Jane Field, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ernest R. Field of Kings Point, L.I., was married yesterday to Marc William Greene, the son of Suzanne Greene of Brookville, L.I., and the late Dr.
Robert Greene.
Rabbi Jerome Davidson performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Greene, 28, is an associate at the Wadsworth Company, an investment banking concern in New York.
She graduated from Colby College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father and her mother, Marcia K. Field, are principals of Field &amp; Field, a law firm in Manhasset, L.I.


World Economies


In New Jersey, Women Study Whitman Bid
Christine Todd Whitman is battling history in her bid to become the first woman to serve as Governor of New Jersey.
And while there is no way to gauge whether her sex alone will be a boon, a burden or an irrelevancy in the campaign, it has already begun to generate a statewide debate among women.
For some it is simply a matter of electing a woman for the sake of increasing their numbers in public office.
For others it is that as well as the litmus test of issues that have long concerned women, among them abortion, welfare and civil rights.
For still others it is a quandary made up of all these things plus the tug of partisan politics.


In Detroit Beating Case, Pillory for Cub Reporter
The judge in a police beating trial here has cited a newspaper intern for contempt for telephoning a juror while testimony was still being heard in the case.
But in an unusual twist, the judge ordered the intern, a summer employee of The Detroit News, to serve part of his five-day jail sentence in the courtroom dressed in prison garb.
The judge, who had specifically ordered reporters not to speak with jurors, said while sentencing the intern on Friday that he had mistrusted the newspaper since his childhood.
During the McCarthy era, the judge's father defended people accused of being Communists and was harshly criticized by the newspaper.


More Notable Alumni of a Brooklyn School
To the Editor:
Your June 16 article on the distinguished graduates of James Madison High in Brooklyn fails to mention the writer Irwin Shaw, author of the novels "The Young Lions" and "Rich Man, Poor Man," and of such short stories as "The 80-Yard Run" and "The Girls in Their Summer Dresses." Irwin Shaw attended James Madison from 1925 to 1929, graduating just before his 16th birthday.


BASEBALL: Sports of The Times; The Small Talk At Macombs Dam
SUNDAY morning, close to noon.
A group of runners sits on weather-beaten bleachers in Macombs Dam Park, a tiny overused fitness oasis nestled in the shadows of Yankee Stadium.
The runners have known one another for years; many of them met here at Macombs.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
When Ron Carey became president of the Teamsters, he was seen as the living representation of reform.
Now, Federal investigators say he has impeded efforts to purge the union of organized crime and his in-house reforms are half-hearted.  [ Page A1. ]
Personal bankruptcy filings have been markedly lower in recent months than they were a year earlier, possibly reversing a trend of the last decade.  [ D1. ]


Aiming for More Data About Municipal Bonds
Officials at the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board hope that investigations into New Jersey Turnpike Authority bonds will help them gain support for creating rules that would require local governments to improve their financial disclosures in years after they have issued bonds.
Richard Y. Roberts, an S.E.C. commissioner, said he was trying "to capitalize on the increased attention resulting from the New Jersey Turnpike bonds to bring into the picture the issue of secondary market disclosure." The Government is investigating whether political contributions by securities dealers influenced the awarding of New Jersey bonds to underwriters.


Dance in Review
'Cement Garden' 'Experiments and Developments in Dance'
Rebecca Ashley  The Studio  145 West 46th Street  Manhattan
Rebecca Ashley's dances were both laudably ambitious and dismayingly vague on Saturday night, when she presented a program under the auspices of the Next Stage Company, a theatrical organization directed by Gus Reyes.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Borrowed Putter Wins for Price  Nick Price, using a borrowed putter, found the touch that eluded him at the United States Open and shot a five-under-par 65 yesteray to win the Greater Hartford Open by a stroke.
Price played bogey-free golf for the final 28 holes over the Cromwell, Conn., course and finished the tournament at nine-under 271.
Dan Forsman and Roger Maltbie birdied the final hole to finish at eight under.
"I can't tell you how much this means to me," Price said.
"I played so well last week at the U.S. Open and to end up losing everything on the greens was just so hard to accept especially since I was putting so well recently. I'm just glad I found another putter." Price borrowed a putter from Denis Watson on Friday and started making some putts yesterday. (AP) Colbert Wins Seniors Championship: Jim Colbert got his only bogey of the day on 18 but still won the Senior Players Championship by one stroke over Ray Floyd, who had already finished.
Colbert shot a 69 in the final round for a 10-under 278 and collected the $180,000 winner's prize.
It was his seventh Senior victory -- but the first major.
Floyd shot a 68-279.
Al Geiberger was another shot back at 280 after a closing 66. (AP) HORSE RACING  Commander in Chief Takes Irish Derby  Unbeaten Commander in Chief added the Irish Derby to a list of triumphs yesterday in Kildare, Ireland, by holding off a late challenge from French Derby winner Hernando.
Commander in Chief, the English Derby winner, and Hernando pulled away from the other nine horses 400 yards from the finish line and turned the $550,000 race into a duel.
Pat Eddery, on Commander in Chief, pulled two lengths ahead with 150 yards to go and held off Hernando, ridden by the American jockey Cash Asmussen. (AP) AUTO RACING  Mansell Mistake Helps Fittipaldi  A mistake by Nigel Mansell and Emerson Fittipaldi's own masterful driving in the rain yesterday decided the Budweiser-G.I.
Joe's 200 Indy car race.
Mansell, the series point leader, started from the pole and led the first 27 laps on the 1.95-mile, nine-turn Portland (Ore.) International Raceway road course, with Fittipaldi never letting the Englishman get as much as a full second ahead.
Finally, the pressure paid off for the Brazilian as Mansell, the reigning Formula One champion but an Indy car rookie, braked too late going into the first turn -- a right-hander -- drove into some safety cones and had to stop while a safety worker removed a cone from beneath his Lola-Ford Cosworth. (AP) TRACK AND FIELD  Privalova Excels in European Cup
A British hurdler, Colin Jackson, and a Russian sprinter, Irina Privalova, produced the top performances yesterday on the final day of the European Cup at Olympic Stadium in Rome.
Jackson, a European champion and an Olympic silver medalist in Seoul, South Korea, won the 110-meter hurdles in 13.10 seconds, the best time in the world this year.
Privalova achieved another world best for the year in the women's 200 meters, winning in 22.30 seconds.
France's Marie-Jose Perec, the Olympic 400-meter champion, had the same time as Privalova, but was placed second after judges checked the photo finish.
Privalova earlier took the 100-meter race and anchored the Russian victory in the 400-meter relay. (AP) Mutola and Chemoiywo Post Top Times: Mozambique's Maria Mutola and Kenya's Simon Chemoiywo posted the best times in the world this year in their running events at the African championships in Durban, South Africa.
Mutola, the reigning world indoor champion at 800 meters, won the 800 in 1 minute 56.39 seconds.
She shaved two-tenths of a second off her African record, set several weeks ago in the United States.
Chemoiywo won the 5,000 meters in 13:09.68. (AP) SOCCER  Argentine Penalty Kicks Eliminate Brazil  Defending champion Argentina eliminated Brazil on penalty kicks to advance to the semifinals of the America Cup in Guayaquil, Ecuador.
After both teams scored the first five kicks, Argentine goalkeeper Sergio Goyoechea stopped Boiadeiro's shot and Jorge Borelli scored the winner.
Regulation play ended at 1-1, with Muller scoring for Brazil in the 37th minute and Leo Rodriguez for Argentina in the 69th.
"It's a pity that we lose on that Russian roulette that are the penalty kicks," Brazil Coach Carlos Alberto Parreira said.In the semifinals, Argentina will play Colombia on Thursday.
Mexico, which beat Peru, 4-2, faces Ecuador Wednesday. (AP) DOG SHOW  Cocker Spaniel First on Staten Island
A 2-year-old black cocker spaniel, Ch.
Milru's Patriot, owned by Ruth Muller and Phyllis Tabler, led a field of 1,238 dogs at the Staten Island Kennel Club's 53d all-breed show yesterday in the Wagner College football stadium.
"I like the dog's head and top-line and he stood up very well in the heat," said Dr.
Michael Manning, judging his first best in show.


O'Neal's Wish List Has Webber at Top
The Orlando Magic, who have Ping-Pong balls ready for their trophy case instead of trophies, are queued up first for Wednesday's college draft.
Their prize of a year ago, Shaquille O'Neal, has advised them to select Michigan power forward Chris Webber, and although Magic General Manager Pat Williams's response was a lukewarm "Shaq's not G.M., not at last check," they likely will follow that course and select Webber.
An alternative, of course, is Brigham Young University's Shawn Bradley, the 7-foot-6-inch missionary who as a child strengthened his grip milking a cow named Olive.


Patti Friedman And Mark Renton
Patti Friedman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Howard W. Friedman of Hewlett Harbor, L.I., was married yesterday to Mark Renton, a son of Michael P. Renton of London and Yvonne Davis of Manchester, England.
Rabbi Arnold B. Marans officiated at the St.
Regis in New York.
Mrs.
Renton graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
She was until recently an advertising director of L.A.
Style magazine, the former magazine in New York.
Her father, the retired chairman, director and founder of the Amrep Corporation, a real-estate development company in New York, is now a consultant to the company.


Serbs and Croats Mount Joint Attack on Muslim Town
Serbian and Croatian militias, once bitter enemies in the struggle over the carcass of the former Yugoslavia, are fighting together against the mostly Muslim forces of the Bosnian Government near the central town of Maglaj, United Nations officials and radio reports said today.
The radio broadcasts from Sarajevo said defenders of Maglaj were resisting a "joint attack" by units of Bosnian Serbs and Croats.
A spokesman for United Nations forces in Zagreb said that the three factions fought on Saturday with artillery, machine guns and small arms.
Another United Nations official said that fighting between the Bosnian Serbs and Croats had virtually ceased throughout the country as their militias focused on predominantly Muslim forces, and that United Nations personnel had seen hundreds of Croatian troops in buses passing through areas controlled by the Serbs.


Essay; Slapping Saddam's Wrist
The most sought-after document in the capital today is the "military options list" presented to President Clinton after the F.B.I. and C.I.A. determined that the Government of Iraq had tried to assassinate a former U.S.
President.
What were the Clinton choices after he saw the solid evidence that Saddam had tried to exact vengeance for his Desert Storm defeat?
Forget the unrealistic extremes of doing nothing, or of sending a half-million men back to the Middle East to finish George Bush's half-done job.


Likely Victors in Nigeria Election Call for Defiance of Military Rule
In what was seen as the strongest challenge to the authority of Nigeria's military rulers in recent memory, a virtual uprising against them was urged today by leaders of the political party whose candidate for president seemed the likely winner in an election this month.
The election was canceled by the military leader, Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida, who explained his decision by citing what he said was evidence of widespread fraud and vote-tampering in the primaries and in the voting on June 12.
On Saturday night, General Babangida announced that there would be new presidential elections and effectively barred the two candidates who had run from running again.


Dance in Review
Extended Dance Company
Theater of the Riverside Church
Last winter, the Extended Dance Company made a favorable impression with a choreographically fresh program that emphasized jazz-dance technique.
Jazz dance was again featured on Thursday night when the group appeared at the Theater of the Riverside Church.
And Val Suarez's "Wave," one of the notable productions of that earlier program, was as stormy as ever.


Lost Without a Trace; For the Families of Missing Persons, Allies Are Hard to Find and Questions Are Many
Mark David Zeichner vanished from his Queens apartment on a June day eight years ago, abandoning family, friends and all the trappings of a young man's life.
His clothes still hung in the closets; his toothbrush leaned against its glass.
"It was like somebody disappearing out of their skin," said his mother, Sonia Chusit.
Ever since, these questions have tortured her: Why did he go?
Where is he?
Is he living on the streets?
Was he the hitchhiker she'd just passed?
Most importantly, was her son, a manic-depressive who had once attempted suicide, alive?


Bridge
Two of the four teams to represent the United States in Chile in September have been decided here, but the others are still up for grabs.
Michael Becker of Tenafly, N.J., Ron Rubin of North Miami Beach, Fla., Bob Levin of Hallandale, Fla., Peter Weichsel of Encenitas, Calif., Ron Sukoneck of Annandale, Va., and Russ Ekeblad of Providence, R.I., won comfortably on Saturday by 62 imps against Neil Chambers of Schenectady, N.Y., John Schermer of Seattle, Roger Bates of Mesa, Ariz., John Mohan of Santa Monica, Calif., Michael Passell of Dallas and Andy Goodman of San Francisco.


RAID ON BAGHDAD: The Overview; U.S. Says Strike Crippled Iraq's Capacity for Terror
Declaring the United States missile attack against Iraq's intelligence headquarters a success, Administration officials said today that Baghdad's ability to direct terrorist acts worldwide had suffered "a major setback."
President Clinton expressed regret that Iraqi civilians had been killed in the raid early today, which was carried out in retaliation for what he said was Iraq's attempt to assassinate former President George Bush during a visit to Kuwait in April.
But on the way to church this morning, Mr.
Clinton said, "We sent the message we needed to send."


Food Store's Low Road To the Top of the Line
As a law student, Andrew Arons began a wildly successful specialty food importing business, Flying Foods.
He may or may not have introduced radicchio to the American table, as he claims, but by the time he he sold the company to Kraft Foods in 1987 for $8 million there was no denying his knowledge of the most arcane aspects of the food business.
That sale gave him money and time to figure out his next gambit in the gourmet game, and he began a long intellectual prowl.
He believes he saw the light in an aisle in a Wal-Mart, though it might have been Kmart.
The lesson was that odd-colored baby vegetables and the other goods he knew best could be turned over rapidly when sold at a low margin in a no-frills environment.


If It's Not Another 'Africa,' Please Not a 'Havana'
Sydney Pollack is nervous.
Although he's one of Hollywood's foremost film makers and has a remarkably successful track record as director of movies like "They Shoot Horses, Don't They?" "Tootsie" and "Out of Africa," Mr.
Pollack acknowledges that the failure of his last film, "Havana," several years ago left him reeling and scared.
Now he anxiously awaits the reaction to his newest movie, "The Firm," which opens on Wednesday, one day before his 60th birthday.


Hammonds Caught Up In Thrust by Orioles
There isn't a more ideal situation for a rookie coming up in June.
Baltimore is challenging Toronto, Detroit and New York in an early pennant race and the Orioles have followed a sweep of the Tigers by coming from behind to take two of three from the Yankees.
Coming up is a three-game home stand starting Monday night against the first-place Blue Jays, and 22-year-old Jeffrey Hammonds of Scotch Plains, N.J., can't hide his excitement.


Of Dinosaurs -- And Noodles
Two Japanese television commercials for Nissin Food Products' Cup Noodle -- sold in the United States as Cup o'Noodles -- took the Grand Prix at the 40th annual International Advertising Film Festival last week in Cannes, France.
The spots, created by Hakuhodo in Tokyo, feature hungry tribes chasing a dinosaur and a giant squid, which turn the tables on their pursuers.
At the festival, sponsored by Screenvision Cinema Network, 118 awards, called Lions, were presented to campaigns from 18 countries.
Agencies from Britain and Spain tied for the most Lions, at 20 each.
American agencies won 17 -- 4 gold, 8 silver and 5 bronze.


BASEBALL: Sports of The Times; In Roy Campanella, The Heart of a Hero
ONLY the medical cause of Roy Campanella's death was a surprise: heart attack.
You always thought that when Campy died, it would be from complications of having been a quadriplegic since his car skidded on an icy road in Glen Cove, L.I., and slammed into a telephone pole early in 1958.
Or from being a diabetic.
Or from pneumonia.
Or problems from his gallstone surgery three years ago.
But not his heart.
Never his heart.


U.S. and Japan Discuss Trade Goals
As bilateral trade talks began here Sunday, Japan and the United States remained divided over the issue of numerical benchmarks for measuring progress in opening Japan's markets, officials said.
The discussion, which will continue through today, is intended to set up a framework for talks between the two nations on structural issues like Japan's distribution system, and on particular trade sectors like automobiles.
The American side has said that being able to measure progress is a key requirement, a demand that Japan has rejected as "managed trade."


Woman and Child Found Slain in Bronx
The bodies of a young woman and a girl were found in a Bronx apartment yesterday afternoon, the police said.
They appeared to have been dead for several days, the authorities said.
A second child, a girl about 2 years old, was also found in the apartment, unharmed.
She was taken to Lincoln Hospital, the police said.


Review/Jazz Festival; Remembering Birdland
Sometimes things just don't turn out well, despite the best of intentions.
On Friday night at Carnegie Hall, "A Lullaby for Birdland," part of the JVC Jazz Festival and a tribute to the musicians who performed at the legendary club during the 1950's and 60's, featured a series of fine groups that did just about nothing.
It seemed as if the musicians couldn't hear each other onstage, and the sound in the hall itself was disembodied and ghostlike, as if the musicians were calling in the show over the phone.
The first group to perform consisted of Red Rodney on fluegelhorn, Lee Konitz on alto saxophone, Gerry Mulligan on baritone saxophone, John Lewis on piano, Paul West on bass and Roy Haynes on drums.
On "Apple Core," Mr.
Rodney presented a bright be-bop solo, and Mr.
Mulligan flowed gently.
The next tune, a blues, opened with Mr.
Lewis's glacial four-choruses and distilled be-bop lyricism.
Mr.
Mulligan and Mr.
Rodney riffed quietly and played with so much ease that the rhythm section's clumsiness could be overlooked for a minute; Mr.
Konitz, who was apparently having a bad night, turned in a painfully out-of-tune improvisation.


Review/Theater; A Quest for Meaning in India, With a Playful God as a Guide
God is the comeback story of the year in the American theater.
As playwrights despair over the nation's health, they increasingly look heavenward (though not necessarily to a Judeo-Christian heaven) for answers that elude them on earth.
To the list of recent spiritually inclined dramas that includes "Angels in America," "Redwood Curtain" and "Marisol" can now be added "A Perfect Ganesh," a new play at the Manhattan Theater Club by Terrence McNally, of all unlikely people.
Mr.
McNally, the urbane and ferociously funny author of "Lips Together, Teeth Apart," "Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune" and "The Lisbon Traviata," here takes a searching, if unfulfilled, journey into the mystical realms of India.
The G word in his title, which, as one line has it, "sounds like a Jewish food," is in fact a reference to the Hindu god Ganesha, who is both a Puck-like character in the play (sweetly acted by Dominic Cuskern, wearing the requisite elephant's head) and a symbol of the transcendence to which Mr.
McNally's two American heroines aspire.
Margaret Civil (Frances Sternhagen) and Katharine Brynne (Zoe Caldwell), a pair of starchy, 60-ish best friends from Connecticut taking a two-week tour of India, have good reason to seek a new deity, especially one as happy and benevolent as Ganesha.
Both women have lost first-born sons in grotesque incidents of skull-crushing violence in Greenwich Village.
Both women are temporarily fleeing tired marriages that will soon be ripped apart by new and random tragedies.


Jessica Lipschutz, Edward Deutsch
Jessica Dara Lipschutz, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Herbert Lipschutz of Warren, N.J., was married yesterday to Edward Adam Deutsch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey Deutsch of Paramus, N.J.
Rabbi Gerald Goldman officiated at the Ryland Inn in Whitehouse, N.J.
Mrs.
Deutsch, 24, graduated from Princeton University, as did her husband, and received a master's degree in education from Harvard University.
Her father is an associate clinical professor of medicine at the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School at Rutgers University in Warren and is also an internist there.
Her mother, Susan Lipschutz, is a freelance photographer there.


Elizabeth Scherl and Peter Shaerf
Elizabeth Scherl, a partner in the law firm of Anderson Kill Olick &amp; Oshinsky, and Peter Shaerf, president of Commonwealth Shipping Ltd., a ship brokerage, both in New York, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Amy Erlich officiated at the Lotos Club in New York.
The bride, 37, is the daughter of S. Dorothy Scherl of Cincinnati and the late Ely Scherl.
She graduated from Northwestern University, received a medical degree from the University of Cincinnati and a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.


Sunday in the Park With a Side of Coleslaw


This Time, Yankees Hold Onto The Lead
So many delicious chances had drifted away, so many seemingly insurmountable leads had dissipated on this road trip that the Yankees never felt safe.
So when Harold Baines hit a harmless two-out grounder to second that suddenly nicked a clump of dirt and rolled up Pat Kelly's arm with the tying run buzzing home from third in the eighth inning today, the Yankees gasped.
Not again.
Please, not this again.
Their gasps never turned to groans.
Instead, they turned to glee when Kelly deftly fielded the tricky grounder that Steve Howe induced and completed the difficult play to maintain the one-run lead.
Then the Yankees exhibited some muscle in the ninth inning, blasting the Baltimore bullpen for three runs on Danny Tartabull's monstrous two-run homer and Don Mattingly's double to escape from Camden Yards with a 9-5 victory.
Orioles Cooled Off
They could not wait to gloat, and then leave. Fast.


Mr. Stein's Spending, Then and Now
The city's Campaign Finance Board will soon rule on a provocative question about Council President Andrew Stein's campaign for re-election.
In his unofficial campaign for mayor, Mr.
Stein raised and spent about $2.7 million.
Then he decided to run for re-election to his old job instead.
Should his spending be credited to his new campaign or to his failed one?
Sounds like a technicality, but the impact of the board's decision will be anything but technical.
Mr.
Stein's opponents are participating in the city's system of public campaign financing; he is not.
He raised his millions without conforming to the strict spending and contribution limits in the city's law.
Now Mr.
Stein says he will voluntarily abide by those limits, although it's too late for him to participate in the program itself.


'An Afternoon of Jazz' to Raise Scholarship Funds


Tatiana Dimitriades, Jonathan Bass
Tatiana Anastasia Dimitriades, a violinist with the Boston Symphony Orchestra, was married yesterday to Jonathan David Bass, a concert pianist in San Jose, Calif.
The Rev.
David Cockcroft, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at Estherwood, in Dobbs Ferry, N.Y.
Rabbi Burt Aaron Siegel took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Dimitriades is keeping her name.
She graduated from Indiana University, from which she also received a master's degree in music.
She is a daughter of Ruth and Peter Dimitriades of New York.
The bride's father is a concert violinist.
Her mother, known professionally as Ruth Lansche, was a soprano in the chorus of the Metropolitan Opera and is now a voice teacher at the Hotchkiss School in Lakeville, Conn.


Few Magazines Finding A Home in Los Angeles
It may be the City of Angels, but for magazine publishers and editors Los Angeles has repeatedly proved itself to be a devilish place.
This city, which is not so much a city as a collection of dissimilar neighborhoods, has seen many of the great names in publishing come and go: Clay Felker, founder of New York magazine; Rupert Murdoch, who later found success in Los Angeles as head of a movie studio; Michael R. Levy, founder of Texas Monthly, and Harold T. P. Hayes, editor of Esquire.


Young Must Master The Learning Curve
Anthony Young is now in the book, a pitcher with the ignominious distinction of losing a major league record 24 consecutive decisions.
He has not seen a victory next to his name in a box score since April 19, 1992, and probably not even Las Vegas at this point would give odds on when fortune and Mets competence will coincide long enough for him to get another.


Bring Russia and Ukraine Into NATO Together; Too Late for Trust
To the Editor:
In "Russia Aims Its Oil Weapon" (Op-Ed, June 17), Jerry Hough shows unfamiliarity with the history of Ukrainian and Russian integration.
Since the mid-17th century integration between the two nations has resulted in the destruction of Ukrainian temporal and secular institutions, as well as the deaths of millions of people whose crime was to be Ukrainian.
Furthermore, Ukrainian culture and language suffered an onslaught of Russification.


Equity Offerings Expected This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
ABT Building Products Corp., Troy, Mich., an initial public offering of 2.8 million common shares.
Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about a protest by police officers over the perjury conviction of an officer in New York City's 34th Precinct misidentified a neighborhood in the precinct in some editions.
It is Washington Heights.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-7  U.S.
CALLS ATTACK A SUCCESS  U.S. officials declared the missile strike on Baghdad's intelligence headquarters a success, saying Iraq's ability to direct terrorist acts worldwide had suffered "a major setback." A1  OBJECT LESSON IN MIDEAST  News analysis: White House officials apparently intended the missile strike on Baghdad as an object lesson for any other government that might be involved in plotting terrorism against the U.S.
A1


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In a New Television Campaign, Perrier Tries to Ride a Wave of Tiny Bubbles to a Rebound in U.S. Sales.
THE American marketer of Perrier hopes to put the fizz back into lagging sales with advertising that celebrates something much more basic than the brand's cachet: its bubbles.
A series of television commercials, which begin running this week, are silent but for the sounds of a bottle opening, the effervescence of the mineral water within and a glory-hallelujah wave of "Aaaahhhs" from an unseen choir.
To give the carbonation added character, special effects make objects on screen -- city lights, golf balls, sunflowers -- rise to the sky, bubble-like, as each bottle is uncapped.


Solidarity and Pride Along Fifth Avenue


Rita Wecker and David Brickman
Rita Lynn Wecker, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin R. Wecker of Dobbs Ferry, N.Y., was married yesterday to David Meyer Brickman, a son of Dr.
Anthony Brickman of Lawrenceville, N.J., and Ravelle Brickman of New York.
Rabbi Shlomo Balter officiated at the National Arts Club in New York.
The bride and the bridegroom graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, he cum laude.


Ali Headgear Sold At Boxer Benefit
Headgear that Muhammad Ali wore in training and later signed brought $5,500 yesterday in a fund-raising auction for Sergei Artemiev at the Trump Taj Mahal.
The Russian-born lightweight contender underwent emergency brain surgery to remove a blood clot following a March 21 bout at the Taj Mahal.
Nearly $20,000 was raised toward the Brooklyn resident's medical bills.


Gibson Is Message To Bullpen
The transaction will not grab big headlines.
The Yankees simply exchanged one thirtysomething left-handed reliever for another when they released Neal Heaton today and recalled Paul Gibson from Class AAA Columbus.
But there were intriguing elements to the minor move.
Gibson and Heaton have been friends since they were teen-agers on Long Island and grew up playing baseball with and against each other.
They even attended a major league tryout at Yankee Stadium together.
There was also the sidelight that Gibson was released by the Mets earlier this month, a fact hard to ignore since Gibson arrived at Camden Yards today carrying a Mets suitcase and garment bag.


Ex-Deputy Leading Field To Become Schools Chief
Bernard R. Gifford, one of the three remaining candidates under consideration as New York City's next schools chancellor, goes into final interviews with the Board of Education today as the front-runner because he is favored by some board members and so far faces no organized opposition and because the other two finalists have liabilities.
Mr.
Gifford, who is a native New Yorker, is a former deputy chancellor in the city who is now teaching at the University of California at Berkeley.


Miss Greenberger and Mr. Rosovsky
Rachel Pam Greenberger, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Norton J. Greenberger of Mission Hills, Kan., was married yesterday to Michael Rosovsky, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Henry Rosovsky of Newton, Mass.
Rabbi Morris Margolies and Rabbi Alan Cohen jointly officiated at the Beth Shalom Synagogue in Kansas City, Mo.
Mrs.
Rosovsky, 26, is a science and mathematics teacher at Brookwood School in Manchester, Mass.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is a professor of medicine and the chairman of the department of medicine at the Kansas University School of Medicine in Kansas City, Kan.


Those With AIDS Need Messages of Hope
To the Editor:
We fear the pessimism of "The Unyielding AIDS Epidemic" (editorial, June 17) creates the misimpression that we have little to offer those who suffer from this terrible disease.


The Scarlet Number: Young Drops 24th
The people asked the silliest of questions.
"Don't you want the record, Anthony?" they asked, wide-eyed, as they hovered over his table.
"Wouldn't it be nice to have it? To be in the record books?"


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Letterman's Gone, but NBC Stands to Profit on His Past
The sorrow at NBC over David Letterman's parting last week may have been more sour than sweet, but it is not as if the network has nothing but memories to show for its relationship of nearly 11 1/2 years with the star.
After all, the network owns the best years of Mr.
Letterman's professional life: 1,809 hours worth.
So if NBC chooses to do so, it can continue to make money from him long after he goes to CBS and becomes the enemy.
But it could not do this without giving him more exposure, a business tactic that some may question.


Barneys Takes On Uptown Set
Over the last month at Bloomingdale's flagship store on Lexington Avenue and 59th Street, workers have installed gleaming white marble steps to replace the worn, scuffed black flights that have linked the ground floor to the bustling mezzanine level for 15 years.
The stairs are perhaps the most telling evidence of the consternation wrinkling the brows of the merchants running the luxurious stores in one of the world's most fabled shopping districts, the area centered on 57th Street and Fifth Avenue.


Review/Jazz Festival; For Gilberto Gil, a Bilingual Birthday
Gilberto Gil, the great Brazilian singer, songwriter, and guitarist, was the host of his own joyous 51st birthday party at Avery Fisher Hall on Saturday evening.
In a JVC Jazz Festival event that had the informal atmosphere of a family musicale, Mr.
Gil was joined by friends who included the fiery Brazilian diva Gal Costa, and Elaine Elias, a Brazilian pianist who led a trio.
Among the handful of Brazilian pop stars of international reputation who emerged from the Brazilian state of Bahia, Mr.
Gil reaches the most deeply into the African side of his music's Afro-Caribbean roots.
Although his music can be very lyrical, it can also be percussive, and many of his songs have the quality of secularized ceremonial chants.
The figure he cut onstage on Saturday was that of wise, sophisticated flower child, part priest, part cultural emissary, from whom music erupts as naturally as water gushing from a tropical spring.


Review/Television; Survivors Lost in Space But Tethered to Hitchcock
Finally getting around to Mondays as it continues to flesh out a complete prime-time schedule, Fox Broadcasting is falling back on a television staple: movies.
Expanding to a weekly series, "Fox Night at the Movies" will offer both theatrical releases -- last Monday's was "The Babe" starring John Goodman -- and made-for-television movies.
Tonight's premiere, at 8, is "Lifepod," which, though set in the year 2168, is "inspired by" the 1944 Alfred Hitchcock film "Lifeboat."
"Lifeboat," adapted by Jo Swerling from a John Steinbeck story, was about shipwreck survivors drifting about the ocean during World War II.
Its extraordinary cast included Tallulah Bankhead, Walter Slezak, Hume Cronyn and Canada Lee.
"Lifepod," written by Pen Densham ("Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves") and M. Jay Roach, is about survivors of a spaceliner explosion drifting through space beyond the range of search cruisers.
Its serviceable cast is headed by Ron Silver and Robert Loggia.
Mr.
Silver directed.


Quotations That Win or Lose Elections
NO ONE knows for sure at what moment Abraham D. Beame lost the 1977 mayoral race, but the night he appeared on "We, the Jury" is as good a guess as any.
Mr.
Beame, who had been elected four years earlier on the slogan, "He Knows the Buck," spent much of the program on the defensive, seeking to acquit himself of criticism, just leveled by the Securities and Exchange Commission, that he had misled New Yorkers about city finances.
Mr.
Beame insisted, instead, that only because of his stewardship had bankruptcy been averted.


Despite Change, Reform Is Slow In the Teamsters
When Ron Carey became president of the International Brotherhood of Teamsters last year, he was regarded as the living representation of reform.
After decades of control by organized crime at the teamsters, it was goodbye to corruption, Mr.
Carey vowed.
But Federal investigators say Mr.
Carey has yet to meet the high standard he set for himself as the first democratically elected head of the 1.4 million-member union.


Dance in Review
Terry Creacy and Stephen Koester
Tisch School of the Arts  New York University
Terry Creach and Stephen Koester can be depended on for intriguing repertory and dancing that is explosively physical yet witty.
And that was what the two men, who have danced together since 1980, presented Thursday night.


After Losing It All, No Bitterness Shows
Having been indicted, booked, fingerprinted, tried, convicted, ousted as one of New York State's most powerful lawmakers and, last week, cleared by a Federal appeals court, Mel Miller seemed to need only one thing as he talked about his two-and-a-half-year ordeal: a drummer to go bah-dum-dum as he tossed off one-liners.
Of the prosecutor: "Do I want to go over and punch him in the mouth? No. First of all, it's probably a felony."


Dance in Review
Nanette Bearden Contemporary Dance Theater  Marymount Manhattan Theater
There were some fine solo performances in the varied program that the Nanette Bearden Contemporary Dance Theater presented on Friday night.


Japan's Leading Parties Crushed in Tokyo Elections
Japan's two leading political parties received dismal results today in municipal elections here as an independent new party rocketed onto center stage, making the outcome a harbinger of crucial elections for Parliament next month.
If the results are indeed a signal, they suggest that a coalition government of opposition parties may have to be formed after the voting for the lower house of Parliament on July 18.
Ordinarily, voting for the 128-member Tokyo municipal assembly would have attracted only modest attention here.
But the vote took on the feel of a referendum in the wake of a political crisis that threatens to hand the governing Liberal Democratic Party its first loss of a majority in Parliament in 38 years.


RAID ON BAGHDAD: Reaction; European Allies Are Giving Strong Backing to U.S. Raid
With rare unanimity, the European allies reacted with approval today to the United States missile strike against Iraq.
Britain, Italy and Germany, all of whose leaders were apparently informed about the plans shortly before the strike began, all gave strong backing to the move today despite reports of civilian casualties.


Maia Gahtan and Leif W. Haase
Maia Gahtan, the daughter of Roben and Evelyn Gahtan of Berkeley, Calif., was married yesterday in Weston, Conn., to Leif Wellington Haase, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin R. Haase of Chester, Nova Scotia.
The Rev.
James Avery, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the ceremony at the Cobb's Mill Inn.
The bride, 27, and her husband, 28, are doctoral candidates at Yale University, she in Renaissance studies and he in American studies.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yale and received a master's degree in art history from the University of Chicago.
Her father, who is retired, was an architect in San Francisco.
Her mother is a senior reference librarian at the Berkeley Public Library.


SHEIK WAS AWARE OF BOMBING PLOT, U.S. OFFICIALS SAY
Federal law-enforcement authorities in New York concluded that Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the radical Egyptian cleric, knew details of the plot to detonate bombs across the city and assassinate several officials but were waved off of arresting him at the last minute by the Clinton Administration, Government officials said today.
The officials described the decision -- debated in a series of meetings last Tuesday -- as a hairline call ultimately decided by Attorney General Janet Reno on legal and tactical grounds, including Mr.
Abdel Rahman's usefulness as a powerful lens through which authorities examined the murky and violent world of Islamic extremism.
Evidence Called 'Fuzzy'
Moreover, as they considered preparing an arrest complaint, the officials concluded that some of the evidence against the sheik was "fuzzy," as one put it, although investigators were convinced -- on the basis of electronic monitoring -- that he knew about the plot.
Their information was less clear about his precise role and how directly he was involved in specific actions, like selecting targets.


Roy Campanella, 71, Dies; Was Dodger Hall of Famer
Roy Campanella, the top National League catcher of his day whose career with the Brooklyn Dodgers was cut short by an automobile accident that left him paralyzed, died Saturday night at his home.
He was 71 and lived in Woodland Hills, a suburb of Los Angeles.
The cause was a heart attack, a spokesman for the Los Angeles Dodgers said.


INSIDE
Haiti Talks Under Way
United Nations diplomats began talks in New York with Haiti's military leader and its exiled President, hoping to restore him to power.
Page A3.
Tokyo Sends a Message
Japan's leading parties did poorly in Tokyo elections, which were seen as a referendum on the country's national political scandal.
Page A3.
Rare Latin American Oil Sale
Argentina is taking a step no other Latin American country has tried: selling control of its state oil company to stock-market investors.
Page D1.
Popular New State Park
In the four weeks since Riverbank State Park opened atop a sewage treatment plant in Harlem, people have been using it in droves.
Page B1.
Embarrassment of Losses
Mets pitcher Anthony Young's 24th consecutive loss set a major league record.
SportsMonday, page C1.


6-Month Extension For Marlboro Offer
Philip Morris U.S.A. will extend its costly Marlboro merchandise promotion for six months.
The estimated $200 million promotion, believed to be the most expensive ever sponsored by an American cigarette marketer, was to have expired at the end of August, but will now run through February.
Karen Daragan, a spokeswoman for Philip Morris in New York, said Friday that the promotion, called the "Marlboro Adventure Team," was being extended because response had exceeded expectations.
Close to nine million smokers are participating, she added.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday None  Tuesday Leading Indicators . . .
May New-Home Sales . . .
May New-Home Prices . . .
May  Wednesday  Factory Orders . . .
May Farm Prices . . .
June  Thursday  Construction Spending . . .
May  Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday  Employment . . .
June


Holyfield Plods Way to Victory
It was a bout of such resounding disappointment that dozens of fans left their $300 ringside seats before the final round even started.
Riddick Bowe had slipped out of the Convention Center five rounds earlier.
A sluggish, often-winded Evander Holyfield, once the picture of health, plodded his way to a victory over Alex Stewart on Saturday night, but it did nothing for his image or that of the heavyweight division.


Romina Field And Oded Weiss
Romina Field, the daughter of Carl and Pearl Field of Briarwood, Queens, was married yesterday to Oded Weiss, a son of Dina Weiss of Ramat Hasharon, Israel, and the late Yigal Weiss.
Rabbi Moshe Turk performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
The bride, 25, is an associate at Roberts &amp; Holland, a New York law firm.
She graduated summa cum laude from Columbia University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received a law degree from Harvard University.


U.S.-Born Suspect in Bombing Plots: Zealous Causes and Civic Roles
In the winter of 1989, Clement Rodney Hampton-El, the one American-born suspect arrested thus far in New York's terrorist bombing plots, was back home in a hospital bed in Brooklyn, proudly recuperating from leg and arm wounds he suffered as a fervid Black Muslim combatant in the far-off Afghanistan war.
"Many people have come here to see who this Rambo is after all," a visitor recalled Mr.
Hampton-El's declaring zealously.
"I tell them it's something they will have to decide in their own mind."


Hamlin Treats Victory As More Than Comeback
Shelley Hamlin won the second golf tournament today since she had breast-cancer surgery two years ago, but don't call her courageous or inspirational.
"Determined and stubborn is a better description than courageous or anything else," the 44-year-old Hamlin said today after winning the $450,000 ShopRite L.P.G.A.
Classic at the Greate Bay Resort and Country Club.
"People come up to me and tell me I'm an inspiration. I'm just an ordinary person."


Bring Russia and Ukraine Into NATO Together
To the Editor:
"Talking Sense to Ukraine" (editorial, June 21) makes clear that we first have to start talking sense to ourselves about Ukraine.
Your idea of a comprehensive security package for Ukraine is an essential step if we want Ukraine to behave in a way that fits into our own security conceptions and preferences.


TENNIS: Rotter on the Court!; Keeping Tabs on the Tabloids at Wimbledon
The Rotters were on the trail of Andre Agassi.
"Who's going to ask about Streisand, then?" grumbled John (Jacko) Jackson, the white-haired, ruddy-faced dean of the wolfpack of British tabloid reporters, who proudly call themselves Rotters after the tenacious German dogs, Rottweilers.


At Home Abroad; Time to Change
When hundreds of right-wing whites the other day smashed into the hall where South Africa's future is being negotiated, they achieved a paradoxical result.
They made clear how urgently necessary it is to conclude the talks and move toward a democratic government that has the legitimacy to govern.
A new South Africa has been trying to emerge for more than three years now.
But there was the old, unchanged: a gun-toting white mob hardly challenged by the police, who would surely have used at least tear gas and probably weapons against a black protest half as violent.


World Bank's Finance Arm Names Chief
Jannik Lindbaek, a Norwegian with a background in international banking, has been named head of the World Bank arm that specializes in private-sector investments in the third world, Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, the World Bank announced today.
Mr.
Lindbaek, who is now president of the Nordic Investment Bank, will take the helm of the World Bank's International Finance Corporation, based in Washington, on Jan. 1.
His title will be executive vice president.


Paula R. Kuhl, Michael Graham
Paula Rochelle Kuhl, a daughter of Honey and Harold Kuhl of Merrick, L.I., was married yesterday to Michael Jason Graham, the son of Roberta and Paul Graham of Huntington, L.I.
Rabbi Jeremiah Wohlberg performed the ceremony at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.


Sudan's Leader, Denying Plot, Visits an Icy Egypt
The Sudanese President, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, whom Egyptian authorities accuse of backing this country's Islamic militants, is trying to soothe deteriorating relations with Egypt, whose President, Hosni Mubarak, was reported to be the target of an assassination plot thwarted in New York City last week.
President Bashir arrived in Egypt today to attend a meeting of the Organization of African Unity and to try to speak with President Mubarak.
Egyptian officials, however, said late today that the President had not decided whether to receive the Sudanese leader.
The Sudan has been accused of being tied to the conspiracy suspects captured last week.


Sharon Klein, Elliott Dobin
Sharon Klein, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Klein of Roslyn Heights, L.I., was married yesterday to Elliott Scott Dobin, the son of Mrs.
Jack Dobin of New York and the late Mr.
Dobin.
Rabbi Miriam Ancis performed the ceremony at the Brooklyn Botanic Garden.


Survey Shows Lack of Jobs for Blacks
A group promoting civil rights in sports released a National Basketball Association survey yesterday highlighting a wide disparity between the number of blacks and whites employed on the court and off.
In the survey covering all N.B.A. teams except the Los Angeles Lakers, the Rainbow Commission for Fairness in Athletics found 78 percent of players in the league are black and 22 percent are white.
However, 92 percent of front-office executive positions were filled by whites and the rest by blacks and, according to the survey, whites hold 88 percent of the administrative jobs and 85 percent of the support positions.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about Clement Rodney Hampton-El, a suspect in terrorist bombing plots in New York, referred incorrectly in some copies to the Brooklyn hospital in which he was shown.
It was Long Island College Hospital.


Ruling on Scientific Evidence
The Justices, voting 7 to 2, said Federal judges should decide whether scientific testimony or evidence is relevant and reliable.
Page A13.


Parlux Fragrances Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.06
2.96
3.80
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.05
3.07
3.59
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.15
3.17
3.66
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.42
5.46
6.68
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.67
6.70
7.76
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.41
7.41
8.68
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.76
5.77
6.50
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
Because of a computer entry error in editing, an article in The Home Section on Thursday about new lamps rendered a passage about a design by the Manhattan architect Jeff Vandeberg incorrectly.
The passage should have read: "He has been working off and on over the last 10 years on a lamp made from a bamboo fishing rod, nylon fishing tackle, weights, wire and incandescent Lumiline tubes. Shadeless, it can hang from a ceiling or be mounted on a wall, and by gently pulling the different weights, can be rearranged in infinite ways."


Lilly Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Mr. John, 91, Hat Designer for Stars and Society
John Pico John, the milliner known as Mr.
John, died on Friday at his apartment in Manhattan.
He was 91.
He died in his sleep, apparently of a heart attack, said his lawyer, Fred Rogge.


Empire Errors Often Used in Albany Rate Talks
Decisions by the State Insurance Department to grant rate increases to Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield over three years repeatedly cite figures that the company now says were erroneous.
Transcripts of a rate hearing and Insurance Department documents show that the erroneous figures were prominently featured in two important ways: In testimony during the hearing and in the department decisions granting the increases.


Talley Beatty Receives Scripps Dance Award
Talley Beatty, the creator of the modern dance classic "The Road of the Phoebe Snow," was coaxed into his first dance studio, in Chicago at the age of 11, by a beautiful young woman named Katherine Dunham, who had grown tired of the building being vandalized by naughty boys in the neighborhood.
Soon after, he found himself rising early for a daily ballet class that began well before the school day, a class he took in the dressing room because black children were not welcome in studios full of white ballet students.
The time was the 1930's.
Mr.
Beatty went on to become a dancer and choreographer in his own right.
And on Sunday night, he received the 1993 Samuel H. Scripps American Dance Festival Award, established in 1981 to honor "our choreographic national treasures," as Charles L. Reinhart, the director of the festival, put it.
Winners receive a sculpture and $25,000 in a ceremony at Page Auditorium at Duke University in Durham, where the summer festival takes place.


Girl Scouting Is Exhilarating, Not Some Kind of Punishment
To the Editor:
I can't imagine why you'd print Merrill Markoe's smear of the Girl Scouts.
I am co-leader of a troop that brings together girls of various races and religions who attend public, private and parochial schools.
The annual cookie drive supports our program and those of many other inner-city troops providing supervised after-school activities in neighborhoods with few other resources.
These programs could not continue without the professional staff Ms.
Markoe maligns as overpaid bureaucrats.


Barnard's President To Head Museum Of Natural History
Reaching beyond the realm of science for someone they hope will make the American Museum of Natural History more competitive with the city's other major cultural institutions, the museum's trustees yesterday named Ellen V. Futter, who has been the president of Barnard College for 13 years, as the second paid president in the institution's 124-year history.
The appointment makes Ms.
Futter, 43, who had been the youngest person ever to head a major American college, now the first woman to assume full-time leadership in New York City's top tier of museums.


Sports of The Times; Chasing The Dugout Ghosts
FOR nearly two decades, the number has burned like a low flame in Sparky Anderson's memory: 2,040.
Then the Cincinnati Reds manager, he was invited to the Dodgers' retirement party for Walter Alston at the Biltmore Hotel in Los Angeles after the 1976 season.
"Somebody was saying how Walter had won 2,040 games as the Dodger manager and I remember so vividly that number," he recalled.
"I thought, 'How could a manager win that many games anymore?' "


Long Bond At Record Low: 6.67%
Optimism that inflation will remain subdued sent interest rates lower yesterday, pushing long-term Treasury bond rates to record lows.
The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond fell to 6.67 percent, from 6.7 percent Friday, when it set the previous record low.
By midafternoon, five-year Treasury notes were yielding 5.07 percent, down from 5.1 percent late Friday.


Executive Changes
MAGNA BANCORP INC., Hattiesburg, Miss., the parent of Magnolia Federal Bank for Savings, promoted Lou Ann Poynter to president and chief operating officer from executive vice president and treasurer.
NALCO CHEMICAL CO., Naperville, Ill., named David R. Bertran senior vice president for manufacturing and logistics.


Excerpts From Ruling On Seizure of Property
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's unanimous decision today finding that the Eighth Amendment ban on excessive fines requires that there be a relationship between the seriousness of an offense and the property that is taken.
The decision, in Austin v.
United States, was unanimous.
Justice Harry A. Blackmun wrote the majority opinion, and Justices Antonin Scalia and Anthony M. Kennedy wrote concurrences.
BY JUSTICE BLACKMUN, For the Court
In this case, we are asked to decide whether the Excessive Fines Clause of the Eighth Amendment applies to forfeitures of property under 21 U.S.C.
Sections Sections 881(a)(4) and (a)(7).
We hold that it does and therefore remand the case for consideration of the question whether the forfeiture at issue here was excessive.
. . .
The purpose of the Eighth Amendment . . . was to limit the Government's power to punish.
The Cruel and Unusual Punishments Clause is self-evidently concerned with punishment.
The Excessive Fines Clause limits the Government's power to extract payments, whether in cash or in kind, "as punishment for some offense. . . ."


Cigarette Companies Try to Stage a Comeback for Some Well-Known Brands of Yesteryear.
IF everything old is new again, can one of the oldest brands of cigarettes -- so old, "old" is even part of its name -- make a comeback?
In a series of print advertisements by Ally &amp; Gargano in New York, Lorillard Inc. is trying to revive Old Gold, a cigarette that dates to 1926.
A filtered version of the virtually moribund brand is being reintroduced at a lower price as a so-called value brand, priced below premium smokes like Newport, Lorillard's best seller.


Space Station Survives a Second Time in Congress
Responding to a vigorous White House lobbying campaign, the House tonight narrowly preserved financing for the Freedom Space Station.
The defeat of an amendment to kill the station virtually assures another year of construction for the $25 billion project, but its razor-thin margin of 196 to 220 means that the station is likely to face annual life-and-death battles as expensive science research continues to lose support among deficit-conscious lawmakers.


Argentine Oil Company Sells $3 Billion in Stock
In the largest privatization on record in Latin America and one of the largest public offerings of stock in any industrial concern, the Government of Argentina today sold more than $3 billion worth of shares, or 45 percent, in its state oil company, YPF S.A.
The sale, completed by a syndicate led by First Boston and Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, was much larger than expected by market analysts.
As recently as a month ago, investment bankers were predicting it would be difficult for the YPF sale to generate $2 billion.


Mysterious Mexican Culture Yields Its Secrets
THE brooding pyramids that rise from the high basin north of Mexico City have long mystified archeologists.
Even the Aztecs, awestruck at their first sight of the monuments seven centuries ago, could not come up with an earthly explanation.
Deciding that something so grand could only have been built by the gods, they called the site Teotihuacan, "the place of the gods" in their language.
The culture of Teotihuacan (pronounced tay-oh-tee-wha-KAHN) flourished from the first century A.D. until its abrupt collapse, for as yet unknown reasons, in A.D. 750.
But almost nothing has been known about the people, their origins, the language they spoke or what they called themselves.
Compared to them, the other large civilizations of the region -- the Olmecs before them, the Zapotec and Maya who were contemporaries, and the Toltecs and Aztecs who followed -- are an open book.


Motion in Sunbeam Case
Paul B. Kazarian, who was recently ousted as chairman of the Sunbeam-Oster Company, has filed a motion to dismiss actions brought against him by the company's principal shareholders, after details emerged in depositions about how documents in his office were destroyed.
The motion, filed on Friday in Delaware Chancery Court, represents the latest step in a legal battle that has played out since January, when the Providence, R.I., consumer products company unexpectedly discharged Mr.
Kazarian, who was widely credited with engineering its turnaround.


Girl Scouting Is Exhilarating, Not Some Kind of Punishment
To the Editor:
I'm an 11-year-old Girl Scout, and I just read "Girl Scout Cookie Monster" by Merrill Markoe (Op-Ed, June 18) and found it appalling.
There may be some people who haven't had good experiences in Girl Scouting, but I would like to share my experiences.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  EVIDENCE ON BUSH PLOT GREW  The Clinton Administration delayed its formal finding that Iraq was behind a plot to kill former President Bush until it was absolutely certain, officials said.
A1  SUCCESS OF ATTACK IN QUESTION  President Clinton maintained that the American missile strike on Iraq crippled its intelligence capability, but senior Administration and intelligence officials conceded that he overstated the case.
A6


U.S. SAYS IT WAITED FOR CERTAIN PROOF BEFORE IRAQ RAID
As early as the middle of May, senior Clinton Administration officials believed that Iraq was behind a plot to kill former President Bush and that the United States would probably need to respond with military force, Administration officials said today.
But in the following weeks, the Administration carried on with an exhaustive investigation, in which American experts traveled around the world to examine bombs recovered in previous terrorist attacks, so they would present a formal judgment to President Clinton only after they were absolutely certain of the facts.


Anheuser-Busch Buys Stake In Leading Chinese Brewer
The Anheuser-Busch Companies continued its international expansion yesterday, announcing that it had purchased a 5 percent interest in the Tsingtao Brewery Company Ltd., China's largest maker of beer, for $16.4 million.
The acquisition was the first by foreign investors allowed by the Chinese Government for shares that will be sold in the national currency, yuan, on the stock exchange of Hong Kong.
Fourth Overseas Alliance
The stake purchase was Anheuser-Busch's fourth venture outside the United States this year, following deals with the leading breweries of Mexico, Italy and Japan.


Cuomo Urges Action On OTB Joint Venture
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo, declaring that time is of the essence in overhauling the horse-racing business in New York State, said yesterday that he would ask the Legislature to act quickly on several measures to stimulate the betting side of the business.
But he added that he would need to see some progress toward a merger of the New York Racing Association and New York City's Offtrack Betting Corporation before he would try to lower the tax on individual winning bets.


Nuveen Limits Itself And Profits Handsomely
For the last 20 years, few investments have been as popular with individuals, year in and year out, as municipal bonds.
Riding the coattails of that infatuation, John Nuveen &amp; Company, a Chicago firm, has emerged as one of the most profitable securities firms by dint of its various municipal bond mutual funds.
In an industry where many firms see diversification as a key to prosperity, even survival, Nuveen has sidestepped the trend by limiting itself to municipal bonds.
It is a strategy that executives justify on the ground of superior profits and a corporate philosophy that goes back to the firm's founding 95 years ago by John Nuveen, a dry goods merchant.


Review/Music; Bold and Elegant Sides Of Strauss's Mystery
Outside the San Francisco Opera on Sunday afternoon, marchers gathered for the annual gay pride procession down Market Street.
Inside, the curtain rose on Richard Strauss's "Rosenkavalier," with its opening scene of two women in bed together.
It was not an irrelevant juxtaposition.
Strauss in his younger years strove in his music to embrace everything, and the stirring of homosexual consciousness in pre-World War I Germany was not lost on him.
Or was it?
The unconventional couplings of "Der Rosenkavalier" -- between women, between a woman and a boy, between a boy dressed as a girl and a man -- could all be explained away as a bourgeois entertainer's sensationalism.
Before "Der Rosenkavalier" came "Salome," based on the play by Oscar Wilde: the title character's desire for John the Baptist plainly mirrors the playwright's desire, but the Straussian orchestra surrounds desire with disgust.


Observer; A Choice Pickle
Like everybody else in America, I want the right to choose my own doctor.
What I'd like from the government, however, is some good advice on how to do it.
When I was fresh out of school it was easy.
Having attended college with several people who went on to medical school, I simply phoned one or two and asked them which doctors to take my troubles to and which ones to avoid.
Being young, therefore gossipy and indifferent to the discipline of the medical lodge, they told me.


McGinniss Publisher Removes Disclaimer
In a sudden turnaround, the publisher of Joe McGinniss's forthcoming biography of Senator Edward M. Kennedy said yesterday that it would remove a statement from the book saying the author had invented some characters' thoughts and dialogue.
In fact, said Carolyn K. Reidy, the president of Simon &amp; Schuster, Mr.
McGinniss's publisher, the statement is partly incorrect.
"All the dialogue does have sources," Ms.
Reidy said.
"But Joe has taken biographer's license to discuss the thoughts that certain people might have had during these conversations."


William H. Riker, 72, Who Used Mathematics to Analyze Politics
Prof.
William Harrison Riker, a political scientist at the University of Rochester who fused mathematics with political analysis, died on Saturday at St.
Mary's Hospice in Rochester.
He was 72 and lived in suburban Brighton.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Showscan Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


CHRONICLE
After the curtain came down on the closing performance of "Falsettos" Sunday afternoon, WILLIAM FINN, the show's co-author, composer and lyricist, stepped forward to say farewell.
"Last August when I was in the hospital, things looked bleak, and I didn't know if I'd ever see the show again, never mind the closing perfomance," Mr.
Finn said yesterday, recalling what he said Sunday.
He had been hospitalized, he said, for an arterial malformation in the brain that was at first mistakenly diagnosed as a tumor.
So, although the closing of a show can be a sad milestone, Mr.
Finn, now in good health, did not see it that way.


Penobscot Shoe Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Split Bosnia Leadership Plans Meeting at Sarajevo
Bosnia's collective leadership, which split over a peace plan that would partition the country, is planning to meet at Sarajevo airport this week, where the members more receptive to the plan will report on their contacts here with its Serbian and Croatian authors.
Diplomats and officials here said the meeting, the first since the 10-member collective leadership split 10 days ago over whether to explore the Serbian-Croatian plan for the partition of Bosnia and Herzegovina along ethnic lines, seems likely to be crucial in the search for a peaceful settlement to the war.


Bernard Levine, an Industrialist And Cooper Union Trustee, 68
Bernard Levine, a retired industrialist and supporter of the Cooper Union for the Advancement of Science and Art, his alma mater, died last Wednesday at Tisch Hospital at New York University Medical Center.
A former resident of Malverne, L.I., he was 68 and lived in Boca Raton, Fla.
He died of complications after heart surgery, his family said.


Review/Music; Ancient Works With Modern Touch
Portions of the program presented by the Taipei Municipal Chinese Classical Orchestra on Friday night at the Taipei theater were nearly two millennia old.
The melody in praise of the plum blossom, for example, dates from the Chin Dynasty (265-420).
The composition "On the Grasslands" was first published in 1818, but is attributed to a composer in the Han Dynasty (206 B.C.-A.D. 220).
These, along with the Jewish chants for reading the Bible, are the oldest documented melodies in the world, speaking of ages far distant from ours, but with voices that still have unusual and compelling power.
As played by the acclaimed pipa virtuoso Tang Liang-xing, the music's phrases were delicate and full of nuance.
His style is never sentimental or exaggerated; it is always warm and dramatic.
His left hand, pressing the frets on this traditional Chinese lute, bent the instrument's strings to create microtonal nuances and shaped a subtle vibrato that gave vocal character to melodic lines; his right hand, each finger equipped with a plectrum, gave the music a rhythmic crispness, articulating multiple voices in what is often considered monophonic music.
In these ancient pieces, the instrument never spoke above a mezzo-piano, but it also never had to; its energy was contained by an almost ceremonial restraint.


Poll Shows Raid on Iraq Buoyed Clinton's Popularity
President Clinton's decision to attack Iraq has brought him a substantial boost in approval ratings for handling both foreign policy and his overall job as President and has diminished uncertainty over his leadership on the world stage, according to the latest New York Times/CBS News Poll.
The poll found that two-thirds of Americans surveyed supported the weekend air strike on the Iraqi intelligence headquarters in Baghdad, and six out of 10 approved of Mr.
Clinton's general dealings with Iraq, more than approved of Mr.
Clinton's handling of the crises in Bosnia and Herzegovina and Somalia.


Green Has the Mets. Wife Has the Rhododendrons. She Wins.
Dallas Green could be in Tibet, looking for plants of various strains for his wife Sylvia's garden at the farm in Pennsylvania.
He does not consider that a more attractive option than managing the Mets in Queens.
Tibet isn't his style.
Neither, though, is the current state of affairs at Shea Stadium.


Neighbors Are Stunned by Man's Confession to Murders
Joel Rifkin was raised on middle-class values and grew up in a middle-class neighborhood of neatly landscaped homes in East Meadow, L.I.
After school he worked in the local library, and his high school yearbook shows he was a member of the debating team, the winter track squad and the photography club.
His father was a construction engineer and after he died several years ago, a room in the East Meadow Public Libary was named in his honor for his work as a library trustee.


Loss of Species Is Worse Than Thought in Brazil's Amazon
THE destruction of habitat and loss of living species as a result of deforestation in the Amazon basin of Brazil is much greater than had previously been believed, according to a new analysis of satellite photographs.
But the same photographs also show that the annual rate of deforestation is lower than had been thought.
The reason for the apparent paradox, say the authors of the unusually meticulous and detailed study, is that the disruptive impact of tree-cutting on plants, animals and microbes is not confined to the cut-over area but extends deep into the remaining forest, as well as into isolated "islands" of forest in the middle of otherwise denuded acreage.
Past estimates have not taken these effects into account, but the authors of the latest analysis say that it more than doubles the area of ecological damage caused by deforestation itself.


Retired Officer Wounded
A retired New York City police officer working as a security guard was seriously wounded during a robbery yesterday morning at a Brooklyn housing project, the police said.
The robbery suspect, identified by the police as Stanley Murray, 18, of 345 Livonia Avenue, was also wounded.
Both men were in critical but stable condition at Brookdale Hospital in Brooklyn.
The retired officer, Earl Marcus, 46, and a United Parcel Service carrier were on their way to a delivery in the Van Dyke Houses at 422 Blake Avenue in Brownsville at 10:22 A.M. when they were confronted by Mr.
Murray, said Sgt.
Arthur Stoecker of the 73d Precinct Detective Squad.
The U.P.S. employee was not identified by the police because he is a witness.


Nets Sign Choice, One Year Later
Whatever happens during tomorrow's National Basketball Association draft will be another phase in what should be an active off season throughout the league.
Yesterday's developments included:


Mandela and de Klerk to Send Similar Signals on U.S. Visits
Nelson Mandela's itinerary looks like (and is) a campaign tour: New York to Los Angeles, David Brinkley and "Good Morning America," fund-raising dinners and photo ops galore.
F.
W. de Klerk's resembles (and is) the state visit of a lame-duck foreign leader.
He will spend low-profile time with policy makers.


JEWISH LOBBYIST OUSTED FOR SLURS
Thomas Dine, the executive director of the largest pro-Israel lobbying organization in America, was forced to resign his powerful post today, a week after acknowledging that he had described Orthodox Jews as "smelly" and "low class."
Mr.
Dine's resignation is the latest in a series of statements by leaders that have embarrassed the organization, called the America-Israel Public Affairs Committee, or Aipac.
David Steiner, Aipac's president, was forced to resign last November after he made exaggerated claims about the group's power to choose the members of President Clinton's Cabinet.
Vice President Harvey Friedman was censured by Aipac's board three weeks ago, after saying it was "chutzpah" -- outrageous -- for Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin to consider trading land for peace with Syria.


Dow Jones Quits Venture To Start Mexican Paper
A joint venture between The Wall Street Journal and El Norte, one of Mexico's biggest and most respected publishers, to create a daily newspaper in Mexico City has collapsed, partly over the thorny issue of control.
Even without the Journal's direct investment, El Norte executives intend to publish a new Spanish-language daily in Mexico City.
The as-yet unnamed newspaper is described as a general interest broadsheet, with a heavy emphasis on finances and stories that will appeal to the growing middle class in Mexico City.


THE SUPREME COURT: Districts in Doubt; Ruling Threatens Racial Districts, But Core Issue Is Still Undecided
A Supreme Court ruling that raises doubts about the constitutionality of a black majority Congressional district in North Carolina could generate challenges to new minority Congressional districts across the South and in urban states like Illinois and New York, legal experts said today.
But experts were divided about whether the ruling was likely to affect anything beyond the most unorthodox efforts at redistricting along racial lines.


Excerpts From High Court's Opinions on Radial Gerrymandering
Following are excerpts from the Supreme Court's 5-to-4 decision today in Shaw v.
Reno, holding that an electoral district of a "bizarre" or "irrational" shape can amount to an unconstitutional racial gerrymander, even if its purpose is to increase black representation.
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor's majority opinion was joined by Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist and by Justices Antonin Scalia, Anthony M. Kennedy and Clarence Thomas.
Justices Byron R. White, Harry A. Blackmun, John Paul Stevens and David H. Souter each filed a dissenting opinion.
FROM THE DECISION By Justice O'Connor
This case involves two of the most complex and sensitive issues this Court has faced in recent years: the meaning of the constitutional "right" to vote, and the propriety of race-based state legislation designed to benefit members of historically disadvantaged racial minority groups.
. . .
The first of the two majority-black districts contained in the revised plan, District 1, is somewhat hook-shaped.
Centered in the northeast portion of the State, it moves southward until it tapers to a narrow band; then, with finger-like extensions, it reaches far into the southernmost part of the State near the South Carolina border. . . .


Market Place; Casper the Friendly Ghost is Making No Pals on Wall Street.
IS Casper, of Friendly Ghost fame, dying all over again?
Since Harvey Comics Entertainment went public two weeks ago, secondary trading in shares in the publisher of comic books featuring Casper, Richie Rich, Baby Huey and other well-known characters has driven the stock down.


Fab Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


Seiko Places Account in Review
The Seiko Corporation of America said yesterday that it had placed its estimated $10 million Seiko Time division account in review, after 25 years at AC&amp;R Advertising in New York.
The company had earlier moved its Jaz and Pulsar brands to the Martin Agency in Richmond.
Jonathan Nettelfield, Seiko's vice president of advertising in Mahwah, N.J., confirmed reports of the review this week in trade publications, attributing the decision to changes at AC&amp;R and in the watch market.
He said that about a dozen New York-based agencies had been asked to participate, in addition to AC&amp;R, adding, "We've had a very happy relationship with AC&amp;R, but they have to prove themselves."


S.E.C. Accuses 4 of Fraud At Financial News Network
The Securities and Exchange Commission today accused four former officers of Financial News Network, the defunct cable television operation, of fraud and other securities violations for exaggerating FNN's financial results in 1989 and 1990.
By manipulating the revenues from two of FNN's related companies, United Press International and International Research Network Inc., the officers consistently inflated the revenues of the troubled enterprise, according to a complaint filed in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia.


Redundancy at F.D.A.
To the Editor:
The Food and Drug Administration is again proposing to regulate vitamins and other dietary supplements (news article, June 15).
This is one of the most important initiatives in the Federal regulation of food and drug products in recent years.


Equitrac Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


New Residents Are Staking Claims in the South Bronx


Parlux Fragrances Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Germans Protest Planned Closing Of the Schiller Theater in Berlin
The announced closing of the Schiller Theater by the Berlin Senate on Wednesday has led to the most heated protests against a cultural decision since 1989, when the Berlin wall was breached.
Over the weekend, banners hung down the theater's exterior with defiant slogans: "We're Playing On"; "We Will Not Close This Theater." In the lobbies, there were letters and telegrams of support from all over Europe.
The demonstrations at the largest and most heavily subsidized legitimate theater in the country have brought forth an extraordinary outpouring of support.
August Everding, the director of the Bavarian State Theaters and the president of the German Theater Union -- the association of all German theaters -- called the Senate's decision "scandalous" and "a declaration of cultural-political bankruptcy" and warned of a ripple effect throughout the country.


Rabbi Dovid Lifshitz, 86, Scholar Of Talmud at Yeshiva University
Rabbi Dovid Lifshitz, a chief rabbi in Poland who narrowly escaped the Nazi rise to power and became a leading professor of Talmud in New York, died yesterday at Yeshiva University's Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.
He was 86.
Rabbi Lifshitz, who lived in Manhattan, died of heart failure, said his daughter Chaya Waxman of Queens.


Retire? Gretzky Already Misses the Game
WAYNE GRETZKY misses hockey, two weeks after he hinted at retiring after the Los Angeles Kings' five-game loss to Montreal in the Stanley Cup finals.
Gretzky was back on the ice Sunday for his youth hockey camp in Quebec.
"I was in shock for about five or six days afterward," he told The Los Angeles Times in yesterday's editions.
"You get so close to winning; we battled so hard. Physically, you are so beat up and mentally tired. You do everything you can to win. You'd die to win.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
CHICAGO WHITE SOX -- Waived Carlton Fisk, catcher. National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Activated Steve Buechele, infielder, from the 15-day-disabled list.
Optioned Tommy Shields, infielder, to Iowa of the American Association.


Caps Release Langway at His Request
The Washington Capitals yesterday released a two-time Norris Trophy-winner ROD LANGWAY, allowing him time to latch on with another National Hockey League team next season.
"We still have an employment contract with Rod. We are respecting Rod's desire to continue his career and wish him the very best," said the Capitals' general manager, DAVID POILE.
Langway, 36, joined the Capitals in a five-player trade with the Montreal Canadiens before the 1982-83 season.
He immediately became team captain, and that season helped lift the Capitals into the playoffs for the first time in franchise history.
Langway, who won the Norris Trophy as the league's best defenseman in 1983 and 1984, anchored the Washington defense from then on.
Last year, however, he struggled with injuries and found his checking style no longer fit in with the Capitals' fast-paced style.
Langway played in only 21 games last season, failing to register a point.


Corrections
A chart on the Business Technology page on May 19 with an article about the Digital Equipment Corporation's new Alpha computer chip described the processing power of a 64-bit chip incorrectly.
The relationship between a 32-bit chip and a 64-bit chip like the Alpha is an arithmetical difference: a 64-bit chip can process only roughly twice as many bits of information as a 32-bit chip, not millions more.
A reader's letter dated June 16 pointed out the error.


Unofficial U.S. Military Group Will Visit Cuba
A delegation of retired American military officers and defense experts plans to visit Cuba this week to discuss ways of easing tensions between the United States military and its increasingly isolated Cuban counterpart.
Though unofficial, the visit of the five-member group promises to open a useful line of communication between the American military and the Cuban Defense Ministry, which invited the Americans and is headed by President Fidel Castro's brother, Raul.


Penobscot Shoe Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Q&amp;A
Singing Like a Bird
Q.  How do birds physically produce their songs?
A.
Instead of using vocal chords in a larynx, birds have a simpler structure called the syrinx, according to the "Manual of Ornithology," by Noble S. Proctor and Patrick J. Lynch (Yale University Press).


CUNY Board Gives Backing To a Redesign
Facing a crisis of soaring enrollments and declining finances, the trustees of the City University of New York yesterday unanimously approved a complex plan to streamline the 21-college system and lay the foundation for growth into the next century.
After months of intense, often bitter debate in and outside the university, the trustees voted 13-to-0 for a plan that makes all academic programs subject to a regular efficiency review and gives the university's Chancellor, W. Ann Reynolds, the authority to set the criteria for passing and failing those reviews.


Stride Rite reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


Colombia Says Drug Dealer May Give Up
An agreement on the surrender of Pablo Escobar Gaviria appeared once again to be within reach today, when officials said lawyers for the fugitive drug trafficker had indicated that he wanted to give himself up after nearly a year in hiding.
The lawyers have been negotiating a surrender for several months, but this is the first time that the Government appeared to seriously consider the offer.


Arrow International Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


No Headline
"We just aren't seeing the 14,000-mile trade-ins like we used to. People are holding on to their cars longer." -- HERB JURAN, a car dealer in Salem, Ore.  [ D9:2. ]


Researchers Track Pivotal Pathway That Makes Cells Divide
WITH a splendid convergence of discoveries from a broad range of disciplines, biologists at last have sketched out the crucial events that tell a cell it is time to divide.
They have traced the pilgrimage of a biochemical signal from the moment it impinges on the delicate skin of the cell, through to its arrival in the cell's deep nuclear soul, where the directive to multiply can be fulfilled.
In understanding this essential pathway of life after a quest of 13 years, molecular biologists are now gazing upon their glittering prize, a fundamental revelation into how the body grows.
The sight is astonishing to behold.
It is epic.
It deserves a crash of cymbals, a roll of the tympanum -- and a hearty guffaw.


METRO DIGEST
MAN CONFESSES TO SERIES OF KILLINGS
A 34-year-old unemployed Long Island landscaper, arrested after the New York State police discovered a body in the back of his pickup truck, has confessed to killing at least 15 prostitutes, many from New York City, and burying their bodies in remote areas, the state police said.
The discovery came after a chase that began with a traffic violation.
A1.
NEIGHBORS OFFER CLUES TO SUSPECT
Neighbors of the suspect, Joel Rifkin, who lived in East Meadow, L.I., question how little they really knew about him.
Several described him as "quiet" and "pleasant." Others called him a "loner" who, when angry, would leave in his pickup truck.
B5.
NEW YORK CITY


Vent Field Found in Atlantic
THE deep-diving submarine Alvin has found the largest field of hot water vents yet discovered in the Atlantic Ocean, according to Columbia University.
The site is on the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, about 200 miles west of the Azores.
The researchers found seven-vent area spread over 15 acres of sea floor.
Because it is at a relatively shallow depth compared with that of other vent fields and is only a day's trip from Portuguese ports in the Azores, American, British, French and Portuguese scientists want to establish a joint sea floor laboratory at the site.
"To fully understand how these hydrothermal fields operate, we need to monitor them over time," said Dr.
Charles H. Langmuir, a geochemist at Columbia's Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory who is the expedition's leader.


Government Panel on H.I.V Finds The Prospect for Treatment Bleak
Experts were predicting only recently that AIDS would by now have come to be controlled like diabetes and many other chronic diseases.
Instead, the latest studies show evidence of serious limitations in the three drugs so far licensed for use against H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
Although AZT, ddC and ddI are of some help in treating AIDS, previous assumptions that it is effective in delaying the onset of symptoms have been called sharply into question by the recent European Concorde study.


Beatrice Tobey, Artist For The New Yorker
Beatrice Tobey, a painter known for her covers for The New Yorker, died on June 19 at her home in Manhattan.
She was in her mid-80's.
The cause was Alzheimer's disease, said her son, David.


Jules J. Bond, Retired Executive Of Voice of America, Dies at 84
Jules Jerome Bond, a retired executive at the Voice of America and a noted author of cookbooks, died on June 22 at his home in Peconic, L.I.
He was 84.
The cause was injuries suffered from a fall, said one of his nephews, Roy Hemmingway of Portland, Ore.


His Bountiful Trips Feed And Succor the Hungry
BILL LEVIEN, a retired social studies teacher who wears his passions on his sleeve (the Islanders, opera, his grandchildren) has become a diplomat in his 62d year, shuttling his Toyota between the worlds of Long Island's rich and poor.
As a volunteer for Island Harvest, a 10-month-old group that coordinates the delivery of surplus food from country clubs, caterers and hotels to the growing numbers of soup kitchens, homeless shelters and other charities, Mr.
Levien must understand the needs and sensitivities of both worlds, and so connect them.


Agassi Continues Wimbledon Revue
The defending Wimbledon champion, Andre Agassi, offered up his blue-bandaged wrist to the ravages of Richard Krajicek's brutal serve today, and, surprise, lived to fight another day.
Agassi pitted his returns against a serve that knows no speed limits and, with the exception of the ninth-seeded Krajicek's 23 aces, brought it to a sorry standstill.


On My Mind; Now the Hard Part
President Clinton acted quickly, properly and in the interests of the United States by ordering the attack on Saddam Hussein's intelligence headquarters.
Now comes the hard part.
The President has to respect the intellect of Americans enough to explain to them, with all the clarity at his command, exactly what it is, this threat of terrorism at home and abroad, how it grew, what will be needed to deal with it.


Biomet Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Casino America Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Boeing Plans New Version of Popular 737
Anticipating a demand for 4,100 planes between 1997 and 2010, the Boeing Company said today that it would offer a new 737-X family of jetliners to the world's airlines.
The offering is only a first step toward acquiring sufficient orders to proceed on the new plane.
If there is sufficient interest, first deliveries would begin in late 1997, Boeing said.
The 737-X would be a derivative of the current 737, which is the best-selling commercial airplane in history, and would feature a bigger wing and new engines.
Boeing said it had begun working with more than 30 airlines in 1991 to develop a future 737 that would continue to meet their needs into the next century.
Like today's 737, it would be offered in three sizes from 108 seats to 157 seats, all in two classes.
Boeing made its announcement after the market's close.


Blue Cross Turns Into a National Scandal
To the Editor:
Nonprofit organizations have enriched American life immensely, but one venerable institution that seems to have gone sour is Blue Cross and Blue Shield.
Your June 17 and 18 reports on how Empire Blue Cross has misled the New York State Legislature, exaggerated its losses on individuals and small groups to obtain large rate increases, and kept double books describe practices that have apparently gone on for years in Blue Cross plans across the country.


Landscaper Admits to a Dozen Killings, Police Say
A 34-year-old unemployed Long Island landscaper, arrested after the New York State police discovered a body in the back of his pickup truck, has confessed to killing at least a dozen prostitutes and burying their bodies in remote parts of the New York City metropolitan region, the state police said yesterday.
They said the suspect, Joel Rifkin of East Meadow, L.I., described the string of killings after two state troopers found the decomposing body of a woman under a tarpaulin in his pickup truck when he was stopped for a traffic violation.


Honda Settles on Dealer's Charge of Bribes
The Honda Motor Company has settled a lawsuit by one of its dealers who charged that his Acura franchise had failed because Honda did not provide him with enough cars.
The suit by the dealer, Richard Nault of Concord, N.H., was settled last week just as the trial was to begin in United States District Court in Concord.
It brought to light charges of corruption against Honda and set off a Federal investigation.


800 Workers Locked Out By Staley
Nearly 800 production workers have been locked out at the A. E. Staley Manufacturing Company's huge corn processing plant in Decatur, Ill., halting a struggle in which the company imposed new contract terms and the workers responded by working to rule, hoping to slow production sufficiently to get the company to the bargaining table.
The lockout began early Sunday, when the overnight shift was told to leave the plant.
Staley officials yesterday accused the workers of sabotage in recent weeks that had made normal plant operation impossible.
But leaders of the Allied Industrial Workers of America, representing Staley workers, said that during nine months of slowdown, "there had not been one reprimand for sabotage."


Bosnian Muslims Rejected a Better Deal
To the Editor:
I read and reread "Mr. Clinton: Don't Bury Bosnia" (editorial, June 19).
My principal reaction, as one who has held your newspaper in high regard for decades, is sorrow.
As a university professor, I have had occasion to read similar editorials in student papers by zealous sophomores more interested in high-sounding rhetoric than in substance.
When caught, the sophomore could plead ignorance. But can you?


THE SUPREME COURT: Reapportionment; COURT QUESTIONS DISTRICTS DRAWN TO AID MINORITIES
A sharply divided Supreme Court ruled today that designing legislative districts to increase black representation can violate the constitutional rights of white voters.
The decision casts doubt on the redistricting that brought North Carolina its first black members of Congress since Reconstruction, and possibly on districts in other regions that have been given bizarre shapes to insure the election of minority representatives.


Haiti's Military Leaders Reported Unyielding at Talks
Talks aimed at restoring Haiti's elected President appeared close to failure yesterday as United Nations officials meeting on Governors Island in New York harbor were unable to obtain basic concessions from Haiti's military leaders, diplomats said.
They said that after more than seven hours of direct talks, the special United Nations envoy for Haiti, Dante Caputo, had been unable to persuade Haiti's army commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, to give ground on setting an early date for the return of the ousted President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Cheap Seats? Nah, N.B.A. Prefers Business Class
The Phoenix Suns-Chicago Bulls finals lacked for little in the way of competition except Chicago presented no corporate rival to the America West Arena.
The new arena, named for the Phoenix-based airline, vied for national attention with the decrepit, ancient Chicago Stadium.
No contest there.
Not having a corporate name for the old place seemed so quaint, so old-fashioned, so . . . out of touch with reality.


Trenton Matches New York's Commuter Tax
Without a dissenting vote, the New Jersey Senate approved a bill today that would assess taxes on New Yorkers who work in New Jersey by the same formula New York uses to tax workers who commute from New Jersey.
The income-tax bill now goes to Gov.
Jim Florio, who has indicated he will sign it into law.


Chess
An announced objective of the Schweizerischer Kredit-Mephisto International Tournament in early may in Munich was to train German grandmasters to reach world championship level.
In this, however, the sponsors were frustrated: foreigners ran off with the top five places in the elite, 12-entrant, round-robin competition.
First place was taken by the 20-year-old Latvian Alexei Shirov with an 8-3 score; throughout, his challenging tactical approach dominated.
Second place went to Boris Gelfand of Belerus, who for at least five years now has been condidered a potential championship opponent for Gary Kasparov.
His solid positional play got him a 7 1/2-3 1/2 score and the distinction of being the only undefeated player in the field.
In third place was Mikhail Gurevich, who has left Russia and lives in Belgium.
He slaughtered the last five finishers, a la Capablanca, but could not hold his own with the top of the field and so scored 7-4.


Large Earthquakes Can Trigger Later Tremors Many Miles Away
LARGE earthquakes can trigger tiny ones hundreds of miles away hours, days and even weeks later, scientists say.
Such remote earthquakes are small and pose no danger to people or structures, the researchers said, but they do raise profound questions about the causes of earthquakes and the hidden structures within the earth's crust.


Teachers Union Votes Authority for Its Leaders to Order a Strike
Firing a warning shot at City Hall, members of the union that represents New York City public school teachers have voted to authorize their leaders to order a strike if the city does not meet demands for a bigger pay raise.
Results released yesterday showed 48,504 members of the United Federation of Teachers voted for and 19,694 against authorizing a strike -- the first time in 18 years that rank-and-file teachers have given such support for a walkout.
The union represents about 90,000 teachers, guidance counselors and other school employees.


Editors' Note
A brief article on June 11 reported the resignation of David R. Gergen, from the all-male Bohemian Club in California after his appointment as counselor to President Clinton.
The article said the club holds two-week outings every summer at which "members run about in the woods naked."
Although similar assertions have appeared in various newspapers over the years, The Times should have cited evidence or attribution to support that description of what the members do at the outings, or should have omitted it.
Richard K. Arnold, a spokesman for the club, says it is not true.


Better Color for Diehard Mac Users
AIRPLANE cabins are wonderful places to flaunt new portable computers.
As thousands of computer buyers and sellers fly into New York this week for the PC Expo trade show, which opens today, more than a few will be flaunting their brand-new Apple Powerbook 180c's.
The 180c is the flagship of Apple Computer Inc.'s Powerbook fleet, the first Powerbook to employ an active matrix color display.
Active matrix is a flat-panel technology that produces images almost as bright and sharp as those on a desktop video monitor.


Cuomo Retreats on Plan To Reduce Hospital Costs
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo is now conceding that it is politically impossible to reduce state spending on hospitals this year, backing away from a proposal he made two months ago.
The Governor wants to use the state's control over hospital payment rates to provide more money for preventive and family care, and he had proposed to do it by making major cuts in the amount paid to hospitals.


An Office Just Right for Sunbathing


Review/Television; Why a Defeated Disease Is Back as an Epidemic
Tuberculosis is the subject of most of tonight's edition of "The Health Quarterly." This troubling report explains why a disease that was considered virtually mastered in the United States 30 years ago is once again a fast-growing epidemic that threatens to overwhelm public-health efforts in cities like New York.
One doctor says, "The system is not working."
The enemies are new strains of tuberculosis resistant to the antibiotics that have controlled the disease since the 1940's.
When wonder drugs are not taken as prescribed -- which, in the case of tuberculosis, often means several pills in specific quantities at specific times for as long as six months -- patients may be compounding their problem.
And because tuberculosis is highly contagious, one person's lapse can become another's peril.


Devils Tap Coach With A Canadien Pedigree
The Devils named their new head coach today, just as they did at this time last year and six other times in their 11-year history in New Jersey.
Last June, their man was Herb Brooks.
This time, it is Jacques Lemaire, a member of eight Stanley Cup-winning Montreal Canadiens teams as a defensive-minded center, but a person with limited experience as a head coach in the National Hockey League.


Air Transportation Holding reports earnings for Year to March 31


Bridge
Two teams seemed today to be rolling to victories that would take them to Santiago, Chile, in September to represent the United States in world championship play.
With 32 deals remaining of a scheduled 128, David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., Sam Lev of Forest Hills, Queens, Cliff Russell of Miami, Marty Bergen of Farmingdale, L.I., and Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill., led by 98 imps against a team that includes Neil Chambers of Schenectady, N.Y.


Boris Christoff, Bass, Dies at 79; Esteemed for His Boris Godunov
Boris Christoff, the Bulgarian bass whose performances as Boris Godunov virtually defined the role for several generations of singers and operagoers, died yesterday at his home in Rome.
He was 79.
The Associated Press reported the cause as the effects of a stroke he suffered six years ago.


COMPANY NEWS
AST RESEARCH INC., Irvine, Calif., said yesterday that it expected its revenue to grow by at least $2.5 million a year after its purchase of the computer-making business of the Tandy Corp. of Fort Worth.
DELTA AIR LINES INC., Atlanta, has agreed to distribute $4.6 million in cash and 20,000 free tickets to 529 former Pan Am flight attendants as settlement of a class-action lawsuit filed against Delta by the flight attendants.


An Agenda for Albany
Lots of old news from Albany.
Once again, the lawmakers are showing their preference for late-and-sloppy over early-and-orderly.
The Republican-dominated State Senate is again standing in the way of legislation banning the sale of assault weapons, as well as a meaningful bill setting stronger penalties for hate crimes.
The Legislature is again failing to restructure New York City's wayward Board of Education by putting it under mayoral control, and is bowing to union pressure by not reforming the Wicks law, which costs local governments millions by preventing them from awarding construction contracts to a single low-bid contractor.


Baton Broadcasting reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Clinton Overstates Impact Of Raid, His Aides Warn
President Clinton maintained today that the United States missile attack on Iraq had crippled its intelligence capacity, but senior Administration and intelligence officials conceded that he had overstated the case.
Mr.
Clinton told reporters this morning that he had received a report from the national security adviser, Anthony Lake, "confirming that we did in fact cripple the Iraqi intelligence capacity, which was the intent of the action."


Stock Loss For Northern Telecom
Investors erased $2 billion off the market value of the stock of Northern Telecom Ltd. yesterday in the wake of its Friday announcement that the company would post a second-quarter loss because of weak sales in its main telecommunications equipment business.
Analysts said the difficulties of Northern Telecom, based in the Toronto suburb of Mississauga, partly reflected the worldwide recession.
But they also said the woes of the company were a result of problems unique to its digital switching equipment, the highly complex computers that are capable of routing thousands of calls an hour over local and long-distance telephone networks.
Such central office equipment constitutes half of Northern Telecom's business.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: Andrew Wiles; Math Whiz Who Battled 350-Year-Old Problem
DR.
ANDREW WILES is a quiet, diffident man with a shy smile.
Yet he summoned the courage to invest seven years working in secret on the world's most famous math problem, a formidable challenge that has baffled the best mathematicians for more than 300 years.
Last week, despite all odds, he was able to announce that he had solved it.
It was a feat that, if sustained, will catapult the 40-year-old mathematics professor at Princeton University into the ranks of his subject's giants, assuring that the pinnacle of his career had been reached and making him, instantaneously, a sort of icon.


Review/City Ballet; Balanchine on the Menu: Dances, Friends and Food, Food, Food
"This is our Woodstock," a happy fan said in the midst of "Dinner With Balanchine" a six-and-a-half-hour gathering that concluded the New York City Ballet's two-month Balanchine Celebration with thematically linked meals and performances on Sunday.
As the final blowout, it couldn't have been bettered.
George Balanchine's ballets were on the table, as always.
But so were literally hundreds of box dinners that spectators nibbled on as part of the event at the New York State Theater.


U.S. Will Relax Disability Rules In H.I.V. Cases
Reversing a decade of more restrictive policy, the Clinton Administration will issue new rules this week to make it easier for people infected with the AIDS virus to get Federal disability benefits.
The rules, being distributed Tuesday to Social Security offices across the country, come partly in response to a lawsuit filed three years ago by 19 New York State residents.
The suit is pending before Federal District Judge Miriam G. Cedarbaum in Manhattan.


Auto Industry Has Time on Its Side
For three years, many Americans put off new car and truck purchases, sending Detroit into a deep funk and contributing to the layoffs of tens of thousands of workers.
Now 37 percent of cars and light trucks in the United States are 10 years old or older, compared with 23 percent in 1981.
And as many Americans find they have little choice but to replace their old standbys, sales of cars and light trucks have steadily accelerated.
Since April, hundreds of thousands of buyers have marched into showrooms to the great relief of auto makers and dealers -- and the United Automobile Workers.


AIDS Panel, in Final Plea, Argues Again for Action
After four years of work, the National Commission on AIDS officially ended its work today with a final report that repeats its plea for the Government to write a national plan to combat the epidemic.
At a news conference today, the commissioners said they hoped that the Clinton Administration would do better than earlier administrations in handling the epidemic, and they applauded the appointment of Kristine M. Gebbie last Friday as the White House AIDS Coordinator.


By Design; The Sneaker Takeover
Sandals are fine.
So are espadrilles and platforms.
No question about it, though: the sneaker is top dog this summer.
It's almost awesome the number of sneaker-clad feet one sees on the streets.
The running-shoe hordes are still out in full force.
For years women have been wearing these sturdy appendages, their proper shoes stowed in their totes to put on at work.


Stocks Move Up Briskly; Dow Gains 39.31, to 3,530.20
Encouraged by the continued decline in interest rates and spurred by recent evidence that the economic recovery is slowing and inflation is under control, stocks mounted a spirited drive to higher levels yesterday.
The Dow Jones industrial average racked up 39.31 more points, to 3,530.20.
It was the best one-day advance since May 19, when the index gained 55.64.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was 242.1 million shares, up from 210.4 million on Friday.


ITT Buying Desert Inn In Las Vegas
The ITT Corporation, moving ahead with its effort to enter the gambling business in the United States, announced yesterday that it had agreed to buy Desert Inn Properties of Las Vegas, Nev., for about $160 million.
The purchase, from the Tracinda Corporation, the investment company of Kirk Kerkorian, the California financier, includes the 850-room Desert Inn Hotel and Casino, its adjoining 18-hole golf course and about 35 acres of vacant land immediately adjactent to the existing complex.


White Retires After 31 Years on High Court


Blue Cross Turns Into a National Scandal; Without Insurance
To the Editor:
The repercussions of the lies and mismanagement at Empire Blue Cross-Blue Shield are felt throughout New York State.
This spring, based on Empire's pleas for assistance, the New York State Legislature passed laws making it mandatory for all insurance companies to accept all applicants, regardless of their health.
In retaliation, "for-profit" insurers applied for rate increases that have particularly affected self-employed people and small groups.


Results of DNA Tests Free 'Murderer' After 9 Years


Patterns
A Line for Marc Jacobs?
Gilmar is ready to put a hipper face on its cartoon image.
Paolo Gerani, owner of the family-controlled company, said Monday that he had met with Marc Jacobs last week and discussed helping the designer produce his own collection, in exchange for Mr.
Jacobs's consulting on Gilmar's Iceberg women's line.
"Marc is really on the right trends of the moment," Mr.
Gerani said.
Mr.
Jacobs, reached in New York, said the primary topic in the meeting was his working at Iceberg as a consultant, with the possibility of producing his own collection in the more distant future.
"The whole family is great," he said.
"We're definitely interested in doing something with them."


Review/Fashion; Cruisewear Catches All Waves
Giorgio Armani drew his jackets closer to the body and flared the legs of his trousers.
Valentino simplified the cut of his day clothes so they resembled traditional American sportswear, and Emanuel Ungaro banished his tautly draped dresses in favor of a gently flaring princess line.
They were some of the big-name European designers whose cruise collections, shown in New York last week, demonstrated that fashion was on the move, though there was no unanimity about the precise direction.
Karl Lagerfeld, as is his wont, put multiple entries in the field.
The collection that bore his name was relatively sober and avoided the body; his designs for Chloe were so light they seemed airborne. (The week before, he had introduced a young casual collection for Chanel.)


Grey Wins Review For Spirits Brands
United Distillers North America of Stamford, Conn., said last week that it had named Grey Advertising Inc. in New York as agency of record for its consolidated magazine print-buying assignment, which involves buying advertising space in excess of $30 million annually for spirits brands like Dewar's, Gordon's, Johnnie Walker and Tanqueray.
Grey, which also handles the creative portion of the Gordon's account, was awarded the assignment after a review that included Leo Burnett U.S.A. of Chicago, DeWitt Media of New York and SFM Media of New York.


Ornda Healthcorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Moderate-Income Families Staking Claim to the South Bronx
There is a sense of unreality to these well-tended residential enclaves.
Homes with red brick or pastel frame facades and quaint features like awnings, dormer windows and shutters, share blocks with rubble-strewn lots and dilapidated or fire-damaged buildings.
Lawn furniture, beds of lush flowers and chalk-white garden statues sit behind five-foot-fences of wrought iron, occasionally topped with coils of razor wire.


New Ruling Could Affect New York Redistricting
Long-stalled efforts to force the creation of a third Hispanic Congressional district in New York City may face yet another hurdle, and an existing district may face a new challenge, as a result of a ruling yesterday by the United States Supreme Court.
The Court ruled that a snaking, ribbon-thin district drawn explicitly to help elect a black candidate in North Carolina last year might not withstand Constitutional scrutiny.


CHRONICLE
Remember nature hikes and swims in frigid lakes, compulsory letters home, baseball games and cabin pranks, first kisses and, finally, not wanting to say goodbye at the end of camp?
Sixteen songwriters do.
They include JAMIE BERNSTEIN THOMAS, a daughter of Leonard Bernstein, DAVID LAWRENCE, a son of Steve Lawrence and Eydie Gorme, and ROBBY MERKIN, musical director for "Sesame Street," and they have written songs for a show called "Everything About Camp (Almost)." The musical revue will be put on by Tada, a nonprofit children's theater company at 120 West 28th Street, from July 16 to Aug. 16.


E.P.A. Finding: Tobacco's Loss?
When six major groups in the tobacco industry sued the Environmental Protection Agency last week, attacking its claim that secondhand smoke causes cancer, they said that the E.P.A.'s declaration had led to greater restrictions on smoking and, as a result, a drop in cigarette sales.
For that, they asked a Federal District Court in North Carolina to nullify the E.P.A. declaration, made in January, and grant damages to cigarette makers.


Ornda Healthcorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Kansas State Names Urick to Top Post
MAX URICK, who spent 19 years at Iowa State, was named athletic director at Kansas State University in Manhattan, Kan.
He replaces MILT RICHARDS, who resigned in January after 15 months on the job.
"Max Urick has the experience and expertise to be an outstanding athletic director at Kansas State University," said Kansas State President JON WEFALD.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday with an article about black homosexuals misidentified the Manhattan hairdresser shown.
He was Ronald Prince.


Let the Summer Games Begin


India Is Said to Cover Up Payment to Premier
An Indian stockbroker who says he made an illegal payment of $300,000 to Prime Minister P. V. Narasimha Rao has accused the Indian Government of mounting a "massive" cover-up to protect Mr.
Rao.
"I stand to gain nothing but the wrath of the present Government and the suspicion of future ones," said Harshad Mehta, who is also the central figure in a billion-dollar securities scandal.


The Final Moments of an Old School Year


Borden Ends 4-Month Hunt As New President Is Named
Borden Inc. ended a four-month search yesterday and announced that its next president and chief operating officer would be Ervin R. Shames, chairman, president and chief executive of the Stride Rite Corporation.
Mr.
Shames had spent 22 years with the General Foods Corporation and the Philip Morris Companies, as well as two years as chief executive of the Kendall Company, before joining Stride Rite in 1990.


TENNIS: The Talk of Wimbledon; No Success, Please; We're British Sports
Never mind discontent.
This is England's summer of doom, desolation, darkness, humiliation, scandal, bankruptcy, royal rue, and truly-the-end-of-the-empire blues.
Newspaper columnists assert that the dismal sports season here is a problem of national character, and a full-page headline in The Guardian last week intoned mournfully about cricket, and by extension the nation: "The Lost Idyll."


Empire Co. reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


A Fervent 'No' To Assimilation In New America
For Guilienne Audelin, a 15-year-old Haitian-American who attends a predominantly black high school in Miami, assimilation is a dirty word.
It means joining the ranks of the disaffected in her inner-city neighborhood, she said, and being stamped as a "dummy" by a broader American society that she believes does not see beyond color.
It means abandoning her immigrant parents' dreams for her future, and she simply refuses to do that.
"Nothing could stop me from trying to have a better life than we have now," she said.


Labor Overture By Northwest
Northwest Airlines said yesterday after a board meeting that it remained interested in reaching an agreement with its pilots' union to revamp its finances outside of bankruptcy court.
Even as Northwest continues to seek an accord with its pilots, it is apparently having trouble winning full support from its lenders.
A person close to the airline's bankers said late yesterday, on the condition that he not be identified, that two key lenders were balking at an agreement to ease the debt schedule of Northwest, the nation's fourth-largest carrier.


Corning Makes $575 Million Bid for Lab Company
Moving to trump a takeover bid by an aggressive competitor, Corning Inc. yesterday offered to buy the Damon Corporation for $23 a share in cash, in a deal valued at $575 million.
The offer overshadows a bid of $260 million by National Health Laboratories last week.
The spirited bidding indicates the stakes are rising rapidly as the blood-testing industry consolidates.


Talks in Japan Fail to Fashion Trade Accord for Clinton Trip
Negotiations to define a new trade relationship between the United States and Japan broke off tonight in a deadlock, making it almost certain that no agreement will by forged by the time President Clinton arrives here next week for a summit meeting of industrial nations.
The failure is a blow to President Clinton, who has made a tougher stance with Japan a centerpiece of his efforts to revive the American economy.
When they met in April, President Clinton and the Japanese Prime Minister, Kiichi Miyazawa, set a goal of developing a new framework to guide future talks on economic relations by the time the two men met again at the Group of Seven summit meeting.
Background of Upheaval
With today's development, it appears that the meeting, which begins July 7, will be missing the announcements of two major agreements.
Only last week, negotiators from the United States, Japan, Canada and the European Community failed to agree on broad measures to cut tariffs and revive global trade talks, although negotiators said there was still a chance that an accord could be reached.


Reapportion the Security Council
The United Nations, freed from paralyzing cold war vetoes, has finally begun to assume the global interventionist mission its founders had in mind.
That's encouraging, with one crucial caveat.
The apportionment of seats in the Security Council -- where questions of intervention are decided -- is outdated.
It reflects a snapshot of world power in 1945, not the reality of 1993.
Without reasonable reapportionment, the legitimacy of future U.N. actions could be called into question.


The Fans Pour In and the Yankees Pour It On
Leave it to the Yankees.
They have dodged disaster, motored around mediocrity and performed with unexpected precision this season.
Just when it seemed as if they might be finding their legitimate level and tumbling away from the baseball beasts in the American League East, they revived themselves on a boisterous night in the Bronx.
The signboard attached to Yankee Stadium dubbed the three-game set with the Tigers, "The Series." Maybe it was true one week ago, before both teams endured bouts with suspect baseball.
The Tigers lost six straight to drop out of first place and the Yankees stumbled in four out of six road games to raise questions about their pitching and their pursuit of a pennant.
No matter what the marketing, the series lost some shine.


Islamic Nations See Double Standard in U.S. Raid
Arab and Muslim countries, which normally might have been expected to support the latest American missile attack on Baghdad, have reacted coolly to the bombing of the Iraqi intelligence headquarters on Sunday.
Although few of them admire Saddam Hussein, there is a growing conviction in the Islamic world that the United States has adopted a double standard, rushing to use weapons against Muslims in Iraq, Libya and Somalia, but recoiling from similar actions against Christian Serbs and Croats committing massacres against Muslim Bosnians.


Earth Technology (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 28


A Very Private Public Servant
A Federal court in Washington has given legal meaning to the Clinton campaign slogan, "Buy one, get one free." The court found that Hillary Rodham Clinton, unpaid but hard-working, is "the functional equivalent of an assistant to the President" and not, under certain laws, a private citizen.
That means her top health advisers may legally continue to hide their work from public inspection.
It doesn't mean that they should do so.
They're still free to open their deliberations, thus honoring campaign pledges of open government.


INSIDE
Restructuring at CUNY
City University trustees approved a plan to streamline the 21-college system, making allacademic programs subject to review.
Page B1.
Threat to Close The Post
Rupert Murdoch took a step toward closing The New York Post if the F.C.C. does not move soon to grant him a regulatory waiver.
Page B2.
Replacing Aging Vehicles
After delaying car and truck purchases, many Americans are heading to showrooms and helping revive the nation's auto industry.
Page D1.


Rag Shops reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Chess
An announced objective of the Schweizerischer Kredit-Mephisto International Tournament in early may in Munich was to train German grandmasters to reach world championship level.
In this, however, the sponsors were frustrated: foreigners ran off with the top five places in the elite, 12-entrant, round-robin competition.
First place was taken by the 20-year-old Latvian Alexei Shirov with an 8-3 score; throughout, his challenging tactical approach dominated.
Second place went to Boris Gelfand of Belerus, who for at least five years now has been condidered a potential championship opponent for Gary Kasparov.
His solid positional play got him a 7 1/2-3 1/2 score and the distinction of being the only undefeated player in the field.
In third place was Mikhail Gurevich, who has left Russia and lives in Belgium.
He slaughtered the last five finishers, a la Capablanca, but could not hold his own with the top of the field and so scored 7-4.


Ways to Think About Computing
IF computers and VCR's are so smart, why do they act so dumb?
And why do they often make us feel obtuse and inadequate?
Two new books, not primarily about computers, give their own answers to these questions.
The first book is "Fuzzy Thinking: The New Science of Fuzzy Logic," by Bart Kosko (Hyperion; $24.95).
The second is "Things That Make Us Smart: Defending Human Attributes in the Age of the Machine," by Donald A. Norman (Addison-Wesley; $22.95).


Survey Urges Funds to Help Parks in Peril
New York State's parks have fallen into their worst state of disrepair in 20 years, suffering from a host of maladies ranging from algae-choked lakes and eroding beaches to trampled vegetation and clogged toilets, according to a study to be released on Tuesday.
The two-year survey by the Nelson A. Rockefeller Institute of Government, a nonprofit organization named for the former Governor, found that almost a third of the state's 150 parks face serious environmental threats as state spending for upkeep has not kept pace with increases in visitors.


Senate Approves Retaliatory Tax on New Yorkers


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Zahringer Leads Ike  George Zahringer 3d of the Stanwich Club shot a seven-under-par 65 yesterday, one stroke off the course record, in the opening round of the 54-hole Metropolitan Golf Association Ike Championship at the Preakness Hills Country Club, Wayne, N.J.
A field of 93 was reduced to 42 for today's final 36 holes, with 42 players surviving the cutoff score of 77.
The 37-year-old Zahringer, winner of the Ike title in 1989 and runner-up last year, holds a five-stroke lead over three players who shot 70's: Jerry Courville Jr. of the Shorehaven Club, and Bill Green and Pat Mucci Jr., both of the host club.
Mucci has the course record of 64.
Courville captured the Ike in 1990 and 1991.
WOMEN'S BASKETBALL  Winning for Next Year  With qualifying victories yesterday, the United States, Canada, Brazil and Cuba advanced to next year's world championships.
The United States beat Mexico, 97-54, and host Brazil downed Cuba, 98-88, to each finish with 3-0 preliminary records in the Americas qualifying tournament in Sao Paulo.
The semifinal round begins Thursday, with Cuba meeting the United States and Brazil facing Canada.
Ruthie Bolton of Auburn led the United States against Mexico (1-2) with 19 points.
In other games yesterday, Canada beat Chile, 83-42, and Puerto Rico defeated Argentina, 76-72.
The world championships will be in Melbourne, Australia, in July 1994. (AP)


Hormone Versus Insomnia
MANY elderly people who suffer from insomnia have stopped making a brain hormone that helps set the body's internal clock for waking and sleeping, an Israeli scientist reported last week.
But when the hormone, melatonin, is given in pill form two hours before bedtime, sleep improves dramatically.
"This is the first time melatonin has been found to correlate with insomnia," said Dr.
Peretz Lavie, dean of medicine at the Israel Institute of Technology in Haifa.
"It works better than I dreamed possible." He reported his findings at the annual meeting of the American Sleep Disorders Association and Sleep Research Society in Los Angeles last week.


Assuming the Pose of the Worker


U.S. Issues a Warning to Americans Overseas
Concerned that the United States attack on Baghdad and the arrest of eight people accused of plotting to set off bombs in New York City may unleash a wave of reprisals against Americans, the Clinton Administration has issued a worldwide travel advisory for United States citizens who travel abroad.


Corrections
A map yesterday with the daily summary of Balkan developments located the city of Mostar incorrectly.
It is in Bosnia and Herzegovina, not Croatia.


Career Tracks Intersect On Court
Once upon a time they were doubles partners.
They won the national 14-year-old doubles title in 1987, when Jennifer Capriati was just 11 and Lisa Raymond was 14.
"I really don't remember," Capriati said today. "Did we? O.K., I guess we did."


39 Immigrants Rescued In Three Raids in Queens
In raids on three houses in Queens yesterday, the police freed 39 Asian immigrants held captive in Queens and were considering charges against a "handful" of Asian gang members suspected of smuggling them into the country.
The first raid began shortly after 11 A.M., when officials rescued about 15 men from a squat brick house at 164-30 73d Avenue in Fresh Meadows.
In the other raids, they freed 21 men and 5 women from a house at 202-10 50th Avenue in Bayside and two men at 133-34 Blossom Avenue in Flushing.
The immigrants were taken into police custody, the officials said.
They would not say where.


Elizabeth Chapin Memorial
A memorial service for Elizabeth Steinway Chapin, a member of the New York State Council on the Arts and a volunteer for many other cultural organizations, will be held at 4:30 P.M. today at the Unitarian Church of All Souls, 1157 Lexington Avenue at 80th Street in Manhattan.
Mrs.
Chapin died on June 17 at the age of 68.


Buenos Aires Journal; Item: Menem Meets Top Model; Today It's Clinton
Much of Argentina acted like an infatuated teen-ager this month when Germany's top model, Claudia Schiffer, arrived to promote a local lingerie company.
Troops of reporters and admirers raced after her Mercedes-Benz as part of the excitement that was dubbed Schiffermania and made her front-page news for days.
As is his style, President Carlos Saul Menem was not to be left out.
Although talk shows paid $15,000 for her appearance, President Menem held two private meetings with the tall 22-year-old blonde: a 20-minute meeting at the presidential palace and then a private lunch at the presidential residence.


Murdoch to Discuss Closing Post With TV Waiver Unsure
Lawyers for Rupert Murdoch suggested today that he might shut down The New York Post within days if he does not get the regulatory approval he is seeking from the Federal Communications Commission.
To back up the thinly veiled threat, Mr.
Murdoch has scheduled a hearing in bankruptcy court in New York City for Wednesday to discuss terms for ceasing publication.
Mr.
Murdoch's management agreement with the bankruptcy court expires that day.


Earthly Concern
Earth Technology, an environmental consulting company, is in a field that many analysts say has good opportunities for growth.
An aging infrastructure and bigger waste-disposal problems provide a wide market for environmental services, the analysts say.
Yesterday, Earth Technology reported a 25 percent rise in third-quarter revenue and a rise in earnings to 19 cents a share from 6 cents.


New Faces Include Raider Ismail
When training camps open next month, among the notable new faces in new places will be Joe Montana with Kansas City, Reggie White with Green Bay and Jim McMahon with Minnesota.
Add Rocket Ismail to the list.
On July 11, the Raiders will be the first team to open camp, and Ismail is expected to be there.
The target date for his signing with the Raiders is July 6, but it could happen late this week.


Ailing Aikman Balks at Winning His Job
TROY AIKMAN wants assurances that he's not going to have to prove himself on the practice field before he'll get to play in the Cowboys' season opener Sept. 6 against Washington.
Aikman, who returned to Dallas last weekend after back surgery June 19, balked at Coach JIMMY JOHNSON's statement that "the players who practice will be the players who are playing. Whoever is in training camp is the group we'll go beat Washington with."
The most valuable player of Super Bowl XXVII could point to MICHAEL IRVIN, the wide receiver who reported long after training camp closed, as a precedent.
Tight end JAY NOVACEK, guard NATE NEWTON, safety THOMAS EVERETT and defensive end CHARLES HALEY also were sidelined with injuries but still played in 1992.


Corrections
Because of editing errors, articles on Wednesday and in some editions on Friday about Bosnia and Herzegovina referred incorrectly to the Bosnian Government's multi-ethnic collective presidency.
It has 10 members, not 9; it comprises 4 Muslims, 3 Serbs and 3 Croats.


New Museum Head


Surveillance Of Cleric Yields Little, Officials Say
Law-enforcement officials said yesterday that surveillance of Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman has produced little new information since a terrorist plot of bombings and assassinations was disrupted last week, raising questions in the short run about the utility of keeping him free as an intelligence tool.
The diminishing returns, while not surprising in the wake of last week's eight arrests, undercut, for the moment, one of the rationales Federal officials have offered for not arresting the radical Egyptian cleric, who is fighting a deportation order.


The Price of a Ship in Koch's Terms
It had been an intense afternoon of yacht-racing Saturday off Newport, R.I.
A brisk 25-knot breeze was almost too much wind for the six vintage 12-Meter sailboats competing in the two-day competition, the Wall Street Challenge Cup.
Add to that an awkward mix of amateur and professional sailors on board the 70-foot boats, and the conditions were ripe for catastrophe.
Gleam won the event, but who won was less important than what happened.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Trade negotiations broke off between the United States and Japan.
The deadlock relates to setting numerical targets for opening markets and suggests Japan is less willing to accommodate American demands in order to keep good relations.  [ Page A1. ]
Argentina sold more than $3 billion worth of shares in YPF, the state oil company.
Underwriters offered 160 million shares at $19, in the largest privatization on record in Latin America.  [ D2. ]


Books of The Times; From the Closed Mind to the Body


MDS Health Group reports earnings for Qtr to April 30


Obstacles to Cleanup; Mob Hinders, Teamster Trustee Says
A year after taking control of a teamsters local in a new tactic to eradicate Mafia and union rackets in the New York region's air-freight business, a former Federal prosecutor says he is being undermined by a rival mob-controlled local, uncooperative companies and an undercover smear campaign.
As part of the Federal Government's efforts to remove the mob from all teamsters locals, the former prosecutor, Thomas P. Puccio, was appointed in April 1992 by a Federal judge as trustee to administer Teamsters Local 295, a group that law-enforcement officials said was pivotal to the mob's infiltration of the $8 billion-a-year industry.


Image Entertainment (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to March 31


Accounts
*
Seaman Furniture Co., Woodbury, L.I., to J. Richard Smith Ltd., Melville, L.I., to handle the creative portion of its broadcast account, previously at Ziccardi &amp; Partners, New York.
Billings were estimated at $18 million. *
Stroehmann Bakeries, Horsham, Pa., to Seiter &amp; Miller Advertising, New York, to handle advertising and promotion for brands like D'Italiano, Stroehmann and Taystee, previously handled by Buntin Advertising, Nashville.
Billings were estimated at $5 million.


Blue Cross Turns Into a National Scandal; A Pro-Consumer Law
To the Editor:
Reports of Empire Blue Cross's financial misrepresentations are disturbing, and not just because they suggest that Empire may have been less than straightforward about needing rate increases.
Equally disturbing is to see legislators, commercial insurers and journalists jump to the conclusion that because Empire falsified numbers, last year's landmark insurance reforms were not needed.


THE SUPREME COURT: Property Seizures; Justices Restrict Ability to Seize Suspects' Goods
In a significant setback for prosecutors, the Supreme Court ruled unanimously today that the Constitution limits the Government's authority to seize the homes, businesses and other property of criminals and suspects.
Rejecting the Justice Department's argument in two cases, the Court found that the Eighth Amendment clause that bars "excessive fines" requires that there must be some relationship between the gravity of an offense and the property that is seized.


4 Teams to Do Battle On Field and Phone
Ask any member of the Yankees, and he doesn't hesitate to affirm that the team is a legitimate runner in the American League East race.
"We played Detroit, Toronto and Baltimore and we played with them all," Wade Boggs remarked in a typical response.
"It's going to be a four-team dog hunt."
But Jimmy Key, the member of the Yankees who has played on the most division champions, accompanied his positive response with a caveat.


Macy Says Earnings Are On Target
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company said yesterday that for the fourth consecutive month its earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, or Ebitda, were on target.
The company said that Ebitda for May 1993, was $13.3 million, or about 66 percent higher than the $8 million reported in May 1992.
R.
H.
Macy reports its financial figures monthly since it is operating under bankrutpcy law protection.


THESUPREME COURT: Supreme Court Roundup; Justices Put Judges in Charge of Deciding Reliability of Scientific Testimony
Ruling for the first time on the place of scientific evidence in Federal courtrooms, the Supreme Court today established Federal judges as active gatekeepers charged with insuring that "any and all scientific testimony or evidence admitted is not only relevant, but reliable."
The 7-to-2 decision invited judges to be aggressive in screening out ill-founded or speculative scientific theories.
The Court held that judges should focus on the reasoning or methodology behind the scientific testimony, rather than on whether the conclusions of an expert witness have won general acceptance.


A Mission Accomplished
The Presidential commission responsible for deciding which of the nation's military bases to close in an era of shrinking budgets has finished its work until 1995, and the conclusion seems to be that the system worked: politics operated only on the margins.
Of course, civic leaders and politicians from many communities that lost bases have expressed anger and dismay at the outcome.
But it was precisely to spare Congress those expressions of rage -- more specifically, to spare individual lawmakers the politically impossible task of casting votes to close installations employing thousands of workers in their districts -- that the commission was created in the first place, three years ago.


Jay Jacobs Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


People
*
Peter R. Mills was named president and chief executive at Ross Roy Inc., Bloomfield Hills, Mich., succeeding Glen W. Fortinberry, who continues as chairman.
Mr.
Mills was previously president and chief operating officer at BBDO North America, Southfield, Mich. *
Joseph F. Barletta was named president and chief executive of TV Guide magazine, assuming responsibilities of Joseph W. Cece, the former president and publisher, who was promoted to executive vice president of the magazine's American parent, News America Publishing Inc., New York; News America Publishing is in turned owned by News Corp.
The position of TV Guide publisher remains vacant.
Mr.
Barletta was previously senior vice president and chief operating officer for United States operations at Thomson Newspapers Corp., Des Plaines, Ill.


Into the Park
IT'S no picnic unless it meets the true definition: "An easy pleasure, a meal carried to be eaten outdoors, a pleasant excursion." Here are some picnic pointers:
*
Don't carry a picnic hamper wider than your hips.
Remember that the picnic earned is the picnic metabolically burned.
It is a paradox of midlife that once you have the know-how and money to acquire delicious food, you're too heavy or have too high a cholesterol count to enjoy it in good conscience.


'Snow White' Is Made Over Frame by Frame and Byte by Byte
After 56 years, "Snow White" was due for a makeover.
The film, made in 1937 as the first full-length animated feature by Walt Disney's studios, had acquired its share of dust, dirt, scratches and distortions as it was played and re-recorded over the years.
And so the Walt Disney Company, which is re-releasing the movie on Friday, recruited the Eastman Kodak Company's Cinisite subsidiary in Burbank, Calif., to repair the film masters and to correct colors that had drifted from the original animators' intentions.


Officers in Nigeria to Retire To Protest Scrapping of Vote
In a highly unusual challenge to Nigeria's military Government, at least 30 officers holding the rank of colonel and above said they would retire from the armed forces in protest against Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida's decision to annul this country's recent presidential election, a civilian official with close ties to the military said today.
The National Concord, an independent newspaper owned by Moshood Abiola, a wealthy industrialist and the presidential candidate of the Social Democratic Party, said today that about 14 colonels and 8 brigadier generals had "opted for early retirement."


Hillhaven Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Monroe Spaght, 83, A Research Chemist Who Led Shell Oil
Dr.
Monroe E. Spaght, a research chemist who became president and chairman of the Shell Oil Company, died Sunday while on vacation in the south of France.
He was 83 and had been living in London since 1965, when he became the first American managing director of the Royal Dutch Petroleum Company, Shell's parent.
The cause of death was a heart attack, his family said.


Where Will Five Stars Forward Their Mail?
Five of the country's top college players sat in a hotel conference room today, nervously contemplating their fate in Wednesday night's National Basketball Association draft.
"Wouldn't you be nervous?" asked Jamal Mashburn, the University of Kentucky star who is expected to be among the top four picks.
"You could end up on one coast, or another. You don't know what's going to happen, until it happens."


Stocks Retreat, With the Dow Falling 11.35
Stocks retreated yesterday, a day after the market made its best showing in weeks.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed at 3,518.85, down 11.35 points, giving back about a third of the gain posted on Monday.
Volume on the New York Stock Exchange was heavy at 276.3 million shares traded, up from 242.1 million on Monday, as losing issues held a slim margin over gainers, 979 to 970.


Space Station Wins Reprieve On Second Vote in the House
Responding to a vigorous White House lobbying campaign, the House has narrowly preserved financing for the space station.


John C. Condry, 54, Expert in Influence Of TV on Children
Dr.
John C. Condry, a Cornell University educator and expert on the psychology of television and its impact on children, died on Sunday at Tompkins Community Hospital in Ithaca, N.Y.
He was 54 and lived nearby in rural Freeville.
The cause was a heart attack, the university said.


Ruling on Scientific Evidence: A Just Burden
In making its first ruling ever on the proper use of scientific evidence in the courtroom, the United States Supreme Court has assured that a great many judges will be frantically playing catch-up on the basics of scientific method.
Yet lawyers and scientists on all sides of the contentious debate over how much so-called junk science is finding its way to juries said yesterday that Monday's decision, Daubert v.
Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, was a thoughtful, fair and rational response to a messy and complex issue.


AT BREAKFAST WITH: Mabel Carney Stover; Remembering Normandy
IN a bedroom drawer in Ruidoso, N.M., is a turquoise georgette nightgown trimmed with rose-point lace, bought almost half a century ago on Rue de la Paix in Paris.
"I was a bread-and-butter American woman, and I wanted something from Paris," said Mabel Carney Stover, reminiscing over breakfast last week at the Grand Hyatt Hotel in Manhattan.


Marathon to Offer Bonuses
An American man or woman finishing first in this year's New York City Marathon could earn as much as $140,000 in prize money plus a new Mercedes-Benz.
The bonus prizes were announced yesterday by the New York Road Runners Club, organizers of the Nov. 14 race.
Under the plan, any United States citizen finishing in the top five will earn double the existing prize money awarded while winning would carry a further $100,000.
For example, the men's or women's winner receives $20,000 plus the car; so an American winner would get $40,000 -- plus a $100,000 bonus.


Idaho's Homosexuals 'Coming Out' To Cast Debate in Neighborly Terms
To Dar Schmid, who grew up on a dairy farm in Idaho, a world away from the social turmoil of big cities, talk of homosexuality always seemed far removed from his life.
"I knew homosexuals existed somewhere out there," he said, "but certainly not around here."


Unrelated Kidney Donors Win Growing Hospital Acceptance
FOR most of her life, Sarah Parsons has known that a hereditary disease would eventually destroy her kidneys and that she would need a transplant.
But what she did not know and would never have guessed was that when her kidneys finally failed, her sister-in-law and three casual friends would, with no prompting, each offer her one of their kidneys and that one of these friends would end up being the donor.


Spending Will Get Us Out of This
To the Editor:
"A Budget Too Much Like Perot's" (editorial, June 23), coming on the eve of the Senate vote on the Clinton Administration's proposed budget, is a salutary reminder, in the midst of our almost total preoccupation with reducing the Federal deficit, that the ultimate purpose of all these efforts is to increase the resources that we devote to investment, both private and governmental.
Cutting the high rate of Federal Government borrowing is a necessary condition; but there is no basis for confidence that it would be sufficient.


General Mills reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


A Lost Life Remembered
Family and friends of Jenny Soto -- the 23-year-old woman identified as a possible victim of Joel Rifkin -- insisted last night that Ms.
Soto was not a prostitute, although some of her friends were.
"We knew she had friends who were prostitutes, but her family took care of her, she would never be a prostitute," said Cynthia Vega, 20, a cousin.


American Medical Holdings Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


To These Children, Border's No Barrier
Ever since Phoebe Watson showed up in 1948 to teach in this tiny village carved from the sage and mesquite along the Mexican border, the elementary school in Columbus has had a policy of truly open enrollment: more than half its 330 students come in buses from Las Palomas, the Mexican town just two miles away.
"I just never said no to any child who came in from Palomas," said Mrs.
Watson, now retired as the school's principal but serving, at the age of 82, as Mayor.
"They needed schooling. I wasn't going to be an immigration officer. I didn't care what their birth certificate said."


CHRONICLE
Ending 15 months of marital limbo and putting to rest rumors that they might reconcile, the DUKE and DUCHESS OF YORK announced on Monday that they had reached a formal separation agreement, The Associated Press reported.
The couple has lived apart since March 1992.
The announcement increased the likelihood that the Duke, 33, the second son of Queen Elizabeth II, and his wife, the former Sarah Ferguson, also 33, would seek a divorce after the two-year waiting period required by British law.
They have been married for seven years.


The Pop Life
Neville on 'Tour'
Aaron Neville has been described by critics as possessing one of the most splendid falsetto-tinged tenors in pop music.
The singer, who is deeply religious, puts it another way: "I describe it as God in me touching God in the person that hears it; at least that's what it feels like to me."
On his latest solo album "The Grand Tour" (A&amp;M), Neville covers a lot of musical territory with that tenor, including soul, rhythm-and-blues, country, gospel, rock-and-roll, Tin Pan Alley, Mardi Gras music and contemporary pop.
Eclectic musical strains will also no doubt be evident when he croons with his siblings at a Neville Brothers concert on July 24 at Central Park Summerstage at Rumsey Playfield, midpark at 72d Street.
Unlike other concerts in the Summerstage series, this one costs money -- $16.50 in advance or $18 the day of the show -- and proceeds will benefit Summerstage.


Market Place; Lifetime Products Settles Its Debts With Lucrative Spinoffs.
LOOKING to get rich?
Then forget staying up late, watching some infomercial about risk-free wealth.
Instead, head out to the public markets and manage a publicly traded company.
Sure, that sounds simple, but it's the lesson gleaned from the experience of Lifetime Products, a Dallas-based manufacturer of windshield wipers and other auto parts.
The company just sold two big operations to a senior officer and the spouse of another.
And those sales almost certainly would never have taken place, but for a series of complex transactions with its managers that left the financially troubled company deep in debt to them.


Review/Television; Schwarzkopf Returns To Vietnam
The return of a soldier to the field where he fought is inherently sobering, but the appearance of two network-news personalities trading war stories on television is obtrusively promotional.
"Schwarzkopf in Vietnam: A Soldier Returns," which also signals the return of the documentary series "CBS Reports," is an inadequate title.
For, as Dan Rather announces at the outset, this is a joint appearance.
"This is our Vietnam," he says, and reassures the audience that "the general and I are feeling good about being back." He promises that viewers will see them walking "where we once walked before." And, sure enough, there are the old "CBS Evening News" clips, with a young Dan Rather poking his head out of a Vietcong tunnel.


Still Not Good Enough on Iraq
The Clinton Administration claims to have "compelling" circumstantial evidence that Baghdad authorized the failed assassination attempt on George Bush last April.
But the evidence it has produced after three days seems too thin to justify the cruise missile attack on Iraq's intelligence headquarters last weekend.
Surely the Administration does not intend to usher in an age when nations feel free to fire weapons at each other's cities based on unilateral assertions that intelligence evidence justifies it.
President Clinton said right after the attack that he had acted because of intelligence evidence that Iraq was behind the assassination attempt.
The next day the U.S. presented its circumstantial case to the United Nations; bomb materials seized were like those used by Iraqi intelligence in the past, and the captured conspirators believed they had been working for Iraqi intelligence.
Yesterday Mr.
Clinton said the evidence "clearly indicated" Iraq's responsibility.
But nothing new had been presented.


As Mississippi Swells, Havoc in the Heartland
Not since the days of the Johnson Administration and the nights of go-go dancers doing the "Swim" has the Mississippi River seemed so high and mighty.
From St.
Louis to St.
Paul, a 500-mile stretch of the Mississippi has been closed to nearly all commercial traffic because of some of the highest flood levels since 1965, the record year.


Wilma Shannon Warburg; Philanthropist, 89
Wilma Shannon Warburg, a civic leader and philanthropist, died on Friday at her home in Middleburg, Va.
She was 89.
Mrs.
Warburg was a benefactor and board member of charitable organizations in Middleburg and New York City.
She lived in Manhattan for many years.


Honors
*
Four people have been named to the Direct Marketing Association's Hall of Fame: Joan D. Manley, former chairman of Time-Life Books; Joseph M. Segel, founder of QVC Network Inc. and the Franklin Mint; Albert Leslie Cole, former vice president and longtime general manager of the Reader's Digest Association, and William L. Howe, former chairman of Metromail Corp.
They will be honored on Oct. 26 at the association's 76th annual conference and exhibition in Toronto.


2 Men Held In a Scheme With A.T.M.
The arrests of two men accused of setting up a bogus automatic teller machine were announced today by Federal officials, who said the two were outsmarted by the very technology they employed to bilk others of more than $100,000.
Federal officials say that after obtaining secret codes with the bogus bank machine they installed in a Connecticut shopping mall in April, the two men used the information to raid customer accounts through real automatic tellers.
As a matter of course, cameras took their pictures at the real machines, which is how they were identified.


U.S. Says Bomb-Plot Suspects Talked of Blowing Up Manhattan Jewelry District
Conspirators in the foiled bombing plot to blow up the United Nations, Hudson River tunnels and the Federal building in Manhattan talked of bombing the 47th Street diamond district to kill Jews, a Federal prosecutor told a judge yesterday.
The prosecutor also said that the conspirators were aiming to explode their bombs before the rent came due on the Queens garage where they were mixing the chemicals "and that's before the end of the month."


New Museum Is in Beijing, but Who Will See It?
For years, the last place to look for a modern display of Chinese art was in China.
Now that may be changing with the opening of China's first Western-style museum here, more than a dozen years after its original sponsor first conceived of it.
The Arthur M. Sackler Museum of Art and Archeology, which opened in Beijing on May 27, has joined a string of Sackler galleries and museums around the world.
This one primarily displays relics and fossils discovered by Chinese archeologists.


Two Found Slain1
Two men were found slain in an apartment they shared at 900 West End Avenue on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, the police said yesterday.
The victims, whom the police identified as Eric C. Price and Milton A. Setzer, were killed sometime over the weekend, with their throats slashed.
The bodies were found yesterday when neighboring tenants reported that newspapers had piled up outside their 14th-floor apartment.
The police said Mr.
Setzer was a retired music director.


Fearing Move by Yankees, Cuomo Explores Idea for a New Stadium
Concluding that the Yankees might actually abandon their home in the Bronx and perhaps New York, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has begun a major push to keep the team in the city and is looking especially at a 30-acre railyard on the western edge of midtown Manhattan as the possible site of a new stadium.
The Governor's concern was underscored by the fact that he arranged a meeting for Friday with George M. Steinbrenner 3d, the team owner, to discuss possible construction of a new Yankee Stadium at the site.


Review/Music; Slyness Opens Concerts In Parks
The speeches by dignitaries and politicians that traditionally precede outdoor concerts can be soporific.
But a listener who reflexively tuned them out at the New York Philharmonic's concert on the Great Lawn of Central Park on Monday evening would have missed an uncharacteristic touch of mischievousness.
In remarks destined for a place in "The Annals of Especially Sly Buzzword Usage," Ruth W. Messinger, the Manhattan Borough President, described the Philharmonic's Mozart, Rossini and Mussorgsky program as "multicultural."
Radical multiculturalists may take umbrage at her use of their concept to describe a collection of works by dead white, European males.
But strictly speaking, she was quite right.
Huge chasms separate the cultural and musical sensibilities of these three composers, and although outdoor concerts do not normally lend themselves to the examination of such notions, Samuel Wong led the Philharmonic in performances that made a point of the program's stylistic diversity.


A Key Officer Is Leaving Citicorp Job
In a memo distributed to senior staff members last night, John S. Reed, chairman of Citicorp, announced that Sandra W. Meyer, the bank's senior officer for corporate affairs, had resigned.
One of Citicorp's so-called Group of 30 senior executives, Ms.
Meyer will begin a new job as senior partner at Clark &amp; Weinstock, a management consulting and issues management firm, in mid-July.
Ms.
Meyer's Citicorp position, rumored to be compensated in excess of a half-million dollars a year, was created for her in 1989, when Citicorp was in the midst of corporate crises that included a failed attempt to take UAL private in a leveraged buyout.
Citicorp at that point had brought in Clark &amp; Weinstock to advise it on strategic matters, providing the framework for an amiable business relationship to be established between her and the firm's two principals, Harry Clark and Davis Weinstock.


In America; Send Them Back?
The two boys were exhausted, hungry and frightened when they stepped off the plane in Los Angeles in July 1990.
Ferooz Omaid was 17 and his brother, Shikeb, was 15.
They spoke little English and had no papers.
Within minutes of their arrival at Los Angeles International Airport they were in the hands of immigration authorities.


Insurance Regulator to Reply To Criticism Over Blue Cross
In a stark rebuttal to the criticism leveled at him by United States Senate investigators, the New York State Insurance Superintendent, Salvatore R. Curiale, is prepared to tell a Senate subcommittee on Wednesday that his department diligently monitored Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield and that the insurer's financial troubles have been caused less by mismanagement than by problems in the health insurance system.
"Contrary to the charge that we were 'paralyzed by fear' of regulating Empire, we proceeded on a course that was designed to reduce and even eliminate New York State's dependence on Empire," Mr.
Curiale wrote in testimony prepared for delivery before the Senate's Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations.
Department Criticized
On Friday, the subcommittee issued a strongly worded report in which it blamed Empire for "gross mismanagement" and criticized the Insurance Department for missing even the most obvious signs of trouble.
The department behaved more like "a cheerleader for Empire's cause" than an "aggressive regulator," the report said.


Books of The Times; Black and White Together and Apart
To learn what it means to be black in the United States today, Walt Harrington, a white staff writer for The Washington Post Magazine, decided to crisscross the country and ask scores of black people what they thought and how they felt about their lives.
Bidding goodbye to his wife, Keran, who is black, and their two children, he started from their home near Washington and, during three trips in his old Isuzu Trooper through the Deep South, the urban North and the Western states, he covered 25,000 miles on his voyage of discovery.
In "Crossings," he confirms what most of us already know or surmise: blacks and whites dwell in separate worlds.
Even in a democracy, trying to break down this divide remains, as Gunnar Myrdal called it in his classic study a half-century ago, "An American Dilemma." Nevertheless, Mr.
Harrington adds the skill of an engaged reporter, a personal stake in his subject and the ability to find fresh voices to talk openly about themselves and multi-racialism.


Corrections
An article on Saturday about testimony given before a United States Senate subcommittee by two former employees of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield -- Joan Boyle and William Fuessler -- referred incorrectly to a statement about them from Empire's current chairman, Harold E. Vogt.
He said he had never met the two, who gave the first public evidence that Empire had intentionally misled the New York State Legislature and Insurance Department.
But Mr.
Vogt did not say that Empire's acting chief executive, Donald L. Morchower, had never met them.


Shores Free, Maine Isle Is Set To Celebrate the First of July
The newly appointed harbormaster, Robert Peterson, doesn't have a boat yet, but Emil Berges has offered his on loan.
The town hall, which until a few months ago was a boarded-up old Navy building, has a fresh coat of white paint, a secondhand conference table with five mismatched chairs, three plants, a donated coffee maker and a new computer.
The trash compactor is expected to arrive by boat any day.


Munoz, Yanks' Big Kid, Does Job
The kid didn't get nervous when they made the call to the bullpen late last night.
When the Yankees made him a reliever in spring training, Bobby Munoz figured that, one day, he'd have to face situations like these.
He just didn't expect it to happen so soon.
In the seventh inning, there was a tied score in a tight division contest, the Yankees against the Detroit Tigers, and Manager Buck Showalter wanted Munoz, his 25-year-old rookie, to pitch New York out of a jam.
Showalter went to Steve Howe first, with two outs and the bases loaded and the Yankees ahead, but Howe walked in the tying run.


On Brink of Collapse, Negotiations on Haiti Are Suddenly Revived
After appearing to be on the verge of collapse, United Nations-led talks on Haiti's political crisis were suddenly revived yesterday with the announcement by the country's army commander that he was eager to discuss conditions for preparing the return of the ousted President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
The commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, made the statement at a news conference on Governors Island in New York harbor, where the talks are being held.
It lent hope to diplomats and advisers to Father Aristide that the negotiations, which were thought to be dead as late as yesterday morning, could produce a breakthrough in the country's 21-month-old political stalemate.


METROPOLITAN GOLF REPORT
M.G.A. Metlife Ike Championship
George Zahringer 3d proved again yesterday that even at the age of 40 he is still a force in amateur golf in the metropolitan area.
Zahringer captured the 39th edition of the Ike, the stroke-play championship of the Metropolitan Golf Association, for his 27th tournament triumph.


An Extra Shot for Anthony: Knicks in Summer League
The Knicks announced yesterday they would be hosts again to the Doral Arrowwood New York Summer League at the Westchester County Center in White Plains.
Because of the league's success last year, the field has been expanded from four teams to six teams.
The league consists of squads representing the Knicks, the New Jersey Nets, the Boston Celtics, the Philadelphia 76ers and, new this year, the Washington Bullets and the Milwaukee Bucks.


New Museum Is in Beijing, but Who Will See It?
For years, the last place to look for a modern display of Chinese art was in China.
Now that may be changing with the opening of China's first Western-style museum here, more than a dozen years after its original sponsor first conceived of it.
The Arthur M. Sackler Museum of Art and Archeology, which opened in Beijing on May 27, has joined a string of Sackler galleries and museums around the world.
This one primarily displays relics and fossils discovered by Chinese archeologists.


Frustration for Medical Innovators
Early last year, American Biomed Inc., a small medical equipment company in Woodlands, Tex., filed a Food and Drug Administration application for approval to market a device that would remove cholesterol from clogged arteries by simultaneously grinding up and vacuuming out the fatty deposits.
Surgeons who had used it in trials said it worked well.
But 18 months later, the company still awaits word on when or even if its product may be sold.


New York Needs Law On Abortion Terrorists
To the Editor:
Re "Two Tasks for Albany" (editorial, June 23): Add one more to the tasks the Republican majority in the New York State Senate must take up.
Like the ban on assault weapons and the gay rights legislation, the health care facility access bill has already passed the Assembly (100-37).


Corning Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 20


Only Insurers Lose In Health Reform
To the Editor:
"The Unknown Devil," your June 22 economic analysis on health care, reports that delaying reform could prove so costly that "it would torpedo the Clinton Administration's hopes of making a difference in the lives of the less privileged."


VERIFONE JOINS IN 'SMART CARD' VENTURE
Verifone Inc., best known for its automated "swipe" machines that retailers use to clear credit-card purchases, said yesterday that it had formed a joint venture with Gemplus S.C.A. of Gemenos, France, to develop "smart cards," tiny computer-memory cards the size of credit cards, as substitutes for cash.
Terms were not disclosed.
Gemplus is the leading manufacturer of smart cards and Verifone, of Redwood City, Calif., makes the machines that use the cards, known as transaction automation systems.
The companies, citing marketing information that seven of 10 consumer transactions are done in cash, said the market for automating these transactions was "virtually untapped." In Nasdaq trading yesterday, Verifone's stock rose $1.375 a share, to $29.


Questioning of Suspect Leads to 2 More Bodies


Republican Draws Fire As Too Soft on Clinton
Anger among Republicans who believe that their leader on the Senate Judiciary Committee has been too easy on Clinton Administration nominees burst into the open today.
As a result, the President's choice for a top Justice Department post was put on hold.
The nominee, Eleanor Dean Acheson, a granddaughter of President Harry S. Truman's Secretary of State, Dean Acheson, breezed through a confirmation hearing last week.
She had already received the warm endorsement of Senator Orrin G. Hatch of Utah, the committee's ranking Republican, to head the office that recommends judicial appointments and helps set overall policy for the department.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.50
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.50
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.93
3.08
4.53
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
3.05
3.55
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.11
3.15
3.64
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.40
5.42
6.70
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.67
6.67
7.77
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.38
7.41
8.70
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.75
5.76
6.49
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


4 NETWORKS AGREE TO OFFER WARNINGS OF VIOLENCE ON TV
Hoping to stave off a federally imposed system of ratings for violence on television, the nation's four broadcast networks have agreed to provide a warning to parents that would be put on the air just before shows laden with mayhem come on.
The warning would also be made available to newspapers and magazines that publish television listings, allowing them to establish what would amount to a special coding for violent shows.


A Comeback for Steak and Potatoes
IT'S a dinner from the past: 16 ounces of sirloin steak, baked potato topped with sour cream and a lettuce-and-tomato salad with blue-cheese dressing.
This alternative menu may not satisfy that specific craving, but you may still like the results: a little flank steak, a lot of new potatoes and a salad of arugula with an unusual dressing that starts with a jar -- well, two jars, actually -- of artichoke hearts.
Steak and Potatoes Our Way, With Salad
1 pound tiny new potatoes  8 ounces flank steak  2 6-ounce jars marinated artichoke hearts  1 medium clove garlic  2 tablespoons white-wine vinegar  4 tablespoons white wine  1 teaspoon dried thyme  Freshly ground black pepper  6 ounces arugula (or other bitter greens)  12 cherry or 18 pear tomatoes, either red or yellow.
1. If using broiler, turn on.
2. Scrub potatoes; do not peel. Bring to boil in covered pot with water to cover.
3.
Trim fat from flank steak and score on the diagonal.
Prepare the stove-top grill, if you are using one.
Grill or broil steak until well browned on both sides and medium rare in the center, 7 to 10 minutes.
4.
Drain artichokes, reserving 2 tablespoons of marinade.
Place artichokes in strainer and run hot tap water over them; drain.
5.
Turn on food processor and put garlic through feed tube to mince.
Add artichokes, reserved marinade, vinegar, wine and thyme and process until the mixture is smooth.
Season with pepper.
6. Wash and dry arugula and trim stems; wash tomatoes and dry.
7.
When flank steak is cooked, cut into julienne strips on the diagonal; cut strips into 3 or 4 pieces.
8.
Drain cooked potatoes and cut into small pieces.
Combine the potatoes with steak and artichoke puree.
Mix well.
9. Arrange beds of arugula on three plates; top with salad and decorate with tomatoes.
Yield: 3 servings.
Approximate nutritional analysis per serving: 381 calories, 11 grams fat, 38 milligrams cholesterol, 220 milligrams sodium, 22 grams protein, 48 grams carbohydrate.


CHRONICLE
It may not be a stately home, but MARSHA MARTIN said she could think of no better place for her farewell party than a New York City shelter for the homeless.
Dr.
Martin, who was the director of the Mayor's Office on Homelessness and Single Room Occupancy Housing, went to Washington earlier this month to be the executive director of the Interagency Council on the Homeless.
The council, whose chairman is Henry G. Cisneros, Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, is an independent Government agency that reviews all Federal activities and programs for the homeless.
On Monday evening, about 75 friends and colleagues, many of them from city government, went to the men's shelter at 8 East Third Street, which Dr.
Martin said had been transformed from one of the city's most disreputable centers into a transitional residence for homeless men recovering from drug and alcohol abuse.


Gary Susnjara, Former President Of Saatchi Ad Agency, Dies at 53
Gary M. Susnjara, a top marketing and advertising executive, died on Sunday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 53.
The cause of death was lung cancer, his family said.


Judge Bars Storage of Spent Nuclear Fuel
In a ruling that the Government says could disrupt the Navy's nuclear-powered fleet, a Federal judge has barred the Energy Department from accepting any more spent nuclear fuel for storage at its atomic reservation in Idaho until the department completes a thorough environmental study of the area.
The order, issued late Monday by Judge Harold L. Ryan of Federal District Court in Boise, involves the 890-square-mile Idaho National Engineering Laboratory, site of the nation's only long-term storage depot for spent naval nuclear fuel.


Food Notes
Picnics With Atmosphere
A pair of charming, small new cookbooks for picnics are brimming with inventive ideas for outdoor meals.
"Picnics in the Park" by Connie McCole (Hearst Books, $12.95) offers not only 10 simple international menus with recipes but also a realistic game plan for the preparation of the picnics, which are meant for two, along with ideas for serving.
An Italian polenta cake with fresh strawberries and a small Jamaican roast loin of pork with black-bean-and-corn salad were just a few of the appealing recipes.
Chill the rose and grab the baguette.
"Picnics of Provence" by Craig Pyes (Simon &amp; Schuster, $14) offers eight Provencal menus inspired by the foods and customs of towns in the south of France.
It is illustrated with paintings by van Gogh.
This is fragrant, colorful, summertime fare beyond salade nicoise: there are garlicky roasted eggplant spread, called catoun; grilled merguez sausage with grilled sardines, and sheep's milk cheese with peaches and almonds to whet the appetite.


Eyebrows, and Issue Of Color, Are Raised
Rock Newman is getting ready to play the race card.
Newman, who favors dashikis when appearing in places where there is a crowd and who orchestrated Riddick Bowe's victory tour in Somalia and the Vatican, is now telling the boxing world it is looking for a Great White Hope.


Corning Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to June 20


Across U.S., Colleges Try to Cope With Mail Bomb Peril
Using posters, voice-mail messages and computer bulletin boards, college security officials around the country are warning faculty members to use common sense to avoid becoming the next victim of a package bomb.
Federal investigators say the two bombs that critically injured professors at Yale University and at the University of California at San Francisco last week were the latest in a series of 14 believed to have been sent by a single bomber.
Both bombs came in brown padded envelopes, one postmarked Sacramento, Calif., and the other with a return address from Sacramento.
Security officials are urging faculty members to beware of parcels with that postmark and to look for other telltale signs: packages that have protruding wires, strange odors or oil stains on their wrapping.


Hook-SupeRx Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Lincoln Center Receives A $3.25 Million Grant
Lincoln Center has received a $3.25 million grant from the Lila Wallace- Reader's Digest Fund for nine "Live From Lincoln Center" broadcasts for public television.
The money is also to be used to develop new educational and family programming for television.
Thirty-minute educational programs are to be developed as companions to six of the "Live From Lincoln Center" broadcasts.
They are to be offered to PBS stations with an option to show them before the live broadcasts.
The grant also includes seed money to explore new approaches to family programming.


Lindsay Manufacturing Co.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


'Snow White' Is Made Over Frame by Frame and Byte by Byte
After 56 years, "Snow White" was due for a makeover.
The film, made in 1937 as the first full-length animated feature by Walt Disney's studios, had acquired its share of dust, dirt, scratches and distortions as it was played and re-recorded over the years.
And so the Walt Disney Company, which is re-releasing the movie on Friday, recruited the Eastman Kodak Company's Cinisite subsidiary in Burbank, Calif., to repair the film masters and to correct colors that had drifted from the original animators' intentions.


Lindsay Manufacturing Co.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


New Museum Is in Beijing, but Who Will See It?
For years, the last place to look for a modern display of Chinese art was in China.
Now that may be changing with the opening of China's first Western-style museum here, more than a dozen years after its original sponsor first conceived of it.
The Arthur M. Sackler Museum of Art and Archeology, which opened in Beijing on May 27, has joined a string of Sackler galleries and museums around the world.
This one primarily displays relics and fossils discovered by Chinese archeologists.


U.S. Political Strategy at Tokyo Talks
With trade issues deadlocked and resistance building to American aid strategy for Russia just days before the economic summit meeting in Tokyo, the Clinton Administration has turned its attention to the group's political declaration as a way of making the meeting a success.
"There's less progress on the economic side than the political side, so we're focusing on things we can control," a senior Administration official said.


60-Minute Gourmet
TUNA has become a staple at outdoor barbecues.
Its firm, moderately oily flesh holds up well when grilled.
Better yet, it does not dry out as quickly as white-fleshed fish -- say swordfish or cod -- when you start chatting over a beer and forget about the grill for a minute.
Tuna can be marinated with all kinds of fresh herbs, and it usually needs only about 15 minutes to pick up the flavors.
Many cooks make the mistake of marinating fish and meat for hours, which breaks down the fibers on the surface and leaves them mushy.
And if they absorb too much moisture, they tend to steam, rather than char, over the coals.


Editors' Note
The Art Market column on May 7 reported an agreement by the Pace Gallery in Manhattan to handle the sale of works by Pablo Picasso from the estate of his second wife, Jacqueline.
The article said Pace was selling about 10 pictures from the estate, and it reported that Picasso experts, whom it did not identify, considered the paintings inferior in quality.


Dancers of 6 Countries Win Prizes but No Gold In Ballet Competition
Seven dancers from six countries received awards on Monday night when the fourth New York International Ballet Competition concluded with a gala at Alice Tully Hall.
The gala, for which Hillary Rodham Clinton served as honorary chairwoman, had Ann Reinking as its host and began with all the competition's dancers, judges and teachers assembled on stage.
Each was individually introduced, and the audience gave a special burst of applause to Maya Plisetskaya, the ballerina of the Bolshoi Ballet who served as one of the judges.
Gesturing toward the entire group, the competition's executive director, Ilona Copen, exclaimed, "Isn't our family beautiful?"  Solos and Pas de Deux
The performance that followed, by award winners and other competition participants, made it easy to answer that question affirmatively.
On the other hand, the fact that some of the dancers seemed lacking in stage experience and stylistic refinement made it understandable why no Gold Medals were presented this year.


Theater in Review
Lovechild  Irish Arts Center 553 West 51st Street Manhattan By Gerard Stembridge; directed by Nye Heron; musical arrangements and original compositions by Nico Kean; set by David Raphel; lighting by Judith Daitsman; costumes by Carla Gant; choreography, Josephine McNamara; sound by Mr.
Kean; vocals by Susan McKeown; production stage manager, Elizabeth English; production technician, Adrienne Walsh; production assistant, Joanna Sykes; puppet design and construction by Maria Murray and Edith Pieperhoff.
Presented by the Irish Arts Center, Jim Sheridan, chairman; Mr.
Heron, artistic director; Marianne Delaney, executive director.
WITH: Malcolm Adams, Rosemary Fine, Michael Judd, Mac Orange and Marian Quinn.


Boggs's First Yankee Home Run Is One to Remember
The swing was a mistake.
Wade Boggs was out in front of Tom Bolton's slider in the 10th inning when he pulled the ball down the right-field line, something that he rarely does.
But the ball kept sailing and sailing until it landed in the upper deck.
Home run.
What a swing.
What a homer.
What a finish.
By belting his first homer as a Yankee off his former teammate, Boggs catapulted the Yankees to a dramatic 4-3 victory over the Tigers and turned Yankee Stadium into an exciting place for the second consecutive night.
The crowd of 37,692 -- the largest to attend a night game in the Bronx since August 26, 1989 -- saw Boggs joyfully round the bases, stomp on home plate and then get swept up in a wave of Yankees.


Fund Raiser Scaled Back, but Not the Funds
President Clinton helped raise $4.2 million for the Democratic Party on Monday night at a $1,500-a-plate fund-raising dinner attended by hundreds of lobbyists and corporate contributors.
The dinner was the centerpiece of a scaled-back version of a Democratic National Committee weekend retreat that initially offered breakfast with the President for couples who donated at least $15,000.
The breakfast itself was abandoned last month in a step that party officials said was taken to avoid any appearance of impropriety, but the retreat was held anyway.


China's Rude Awakening To the Art of the Swindle
For many Chinese investors, unused to the idea of risk, a $175 million financial scandal has been a horrifying reminder that stocks and bonds can be an easy way to lose money as well as to make it.
A scandal involving "junk bonds" that promised to pay an eye-popping 24 percent interest -- twice the rate on Government bonds -- which were sold through dance hall girls, favorable newspaper articles and salesmen earning fat commissions, is reverberating throughout the Chinese political establishment.
More than 100,000 investors, including some top Chinese political officials, are angry because they have been swindled and much of their investment may be lost.
Street Demonstrations
Last week, there were protests in the streets.
And word is spreading that the jobs of some senior Government officials may be threatened.


Hillenbrand Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


France Says A Trade Pact Is Not Likely
Prime Minister Edouard Balladur of France said today that any trade agreement at next week's summit meeting of industrial nations would be impossible as long as the United States maintained its determination to impose punitive duties on European steel.
His statement in a radio interview came as a senior French official who will be attending the summit sessions in Tokyo starting on July 7 ruled out any formal accord at the meeting on lowering tariff barriers under a so-called market access agreement.


Public &amp; Private; Living In It
The very best assignment I've ever had was exactly 15 years ago.
I went out to a factory in Flushing, Queens, called Angler's Company Ltd., and I spent the summer months just hanging around so that I could write a series about the place and its people.
If I got off the Flushing line at Main Street today I bet I could walk to Angler's with my eyes closed.


Audiovox Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Wine Talk
The Visitors Bureau here was flooded with angry calls last week.
Most were from tourists wondering why they couldn't find a hotel room in the city even though France's traditional July holiday wouldn't begin for 10 days.
The answer was Vinexpo, Bordeaux's wine trade show, which takes place every two years.
It started on June 21 and ended today.
Some hotel rooms were booked two years in advance and tables at the best restaurants were reserved six months ago.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
June 25
June 18
June 26
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.5
7.3
7.4
Distillate production, daily
3.1
3.1
3.2
Gasoline stocks
222.3
225.2
223.2
Distillate stocks
106.9
106.4
102.6
Crude imports, daily
6.6
7.6
5.4
Product imports, daily
1.8
1.8
1.7
Crude stocks
353.0
352.2
330.8
Crude production, daily
6.8
6.8
7.2
Refinery utilization (%)
92.7
92.3
92.9
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Cloudy, Unstable Weather Delays Endeavour's Return


Japanese Companies Rebuff Mighty U.S. Pension Funds
America's big pension funds, which have assumed enormous influence in America's corporate board rooms recently, decided to take on Japan's corporate samurai today and they were ignored.
The occasion was a uniquely Japanese corporate ritual -- 1,901 companies simultaneously held their annual meetings today.
In public halls across the land, the winds of shareholder democracy blew, giving investors a chance, in theory, to question and vote on management policies in this period of recession, falling profits and huge losses.


COMPANY NEWS
COMPUTER SCIENCES CORP., El Segundo, Calif., said it had won a $76.8 million six-year contract to provide telecommunications support for the Defense Department.
ENVIROTEST SYSTEMS CORP., Washington, has signed a commitment letter with the United Bank of Switzerland for a $100 million, three-year revolving senior credit facility.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
More than 100,000 investors in China have been swindled in a scheme in which a small-time businessman raised $175 million by issuing bonds and then squandered the money on luxuries for himself.
For some Chinese it has been the first experience in having stocks or bonds go down instead of up.  [ Page A1. ]
American pension funds find they have no clout in Japan.
On annual-meeting day, a group of U.S. institutions voted against resolutions proposed by Japanese companies, but some of the companies denied that they had received any negative votes.  [ D1. ]


Prostitutes on Allen Street Remember Suspect From L.I.
The women who work as prostitutes along a park-like strip of Allen Street said yesterday that they recognized police photographs of Joel Rifkin and remembered him as a man who frequented the Lower East Side looking for sex.
"He used to constantly ask me out on dates, but I told him I didn't go out with strangers," said a tall, skinny woman of 30 in a short black jumpsuit.


For Healthful and Easy Picnic Salads, Go With the Grains
MANY summers ago, when a choice of tennis racquets amounted to a Dunlop or Wilson in wood, a Fourth of July picnic salad invariably meant potato or macaroni with mayonnaise.
But just as the new racquets have improved many a game, protein-filled grains and dried beans have turned ordinary side dishes into versatile, savory and often healthier alfresco feasts.
Their often earthy flavors hold their own nicely in the company of robust seasoning.
And speaking of holding, they also keep extremely well for two to three hours without refrigeration.


A Dinosaur Ruling
Justice Sandra Day O'Connor is leading her colleagues -- and the nation -- toward Jurassic Park jurisprudence.
The dinosaur of segregated politics has been buried for less than three decades in the South.
Now with her disingenuous and ahistorical attack on the Voting Rights Act in a North Carolina case, Justice O'Connor proposes to clone that dinosaur into a monster that could gobble up the nation's hard-won progress toward higher majority membership in Congress, legislatures and local governments.
The case seems a trivial one.
Its immediate object is two goofily shaped districts with bare black majorities.
Due to these majorities, North Carolina's 12-person House delegation now has two black members -- the first of their race elected from North Carolina since Reconstruction.
Previous Supreme Courts would have scoffed at the claim that this minuscule black representation amounted to discrimination against whites.


Mercer Is Charged With Trying to Fix a Fight
Ray Mercer was arraigned yesterday on a charge of sports bribery, accused of repeatedly offering Jesse Ferguson $100,000 to lose during their Feb. 6 heavyweight fight at Madison Square Garden.
District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau said Mercer, 32, was arrested Sunday in Indianapolis and was charged yesterday in Manhattan.
He was released on his own recognizance despite a request of $10,000 bail by the District Attorney's office.


JAPANESE PARTY HIT BY NEW BLOW
Just when Japan's governing party thought that its fortunes could not take another turn for the worse, the mayor of one of northern Japan's largest cities was arrested today and charged with accepting more than $900,000 in bribes in return for fixing government contracts.
Toru Ishii, the mayor of Sendai and until recently the head of the Japan's powerful Association of Mayors, was charged with directing huge public works projects to several construction companies in return for cash.


A License To Root
New York State motorists who want to flaunt their local sports allegiances can now pay to put team logos on their license plates.
Under a deal between the Department of Motor Vehicles and the four major sports leagues, car owners can replace their standard plates with the logos of the Yankees, Mets, Knicks, Rangers, Islanders, Giants, Jets, or Buffalo Bills and Sabres for an initial cost of $39.50, and a $25 annual fee.
The state expects to sell 130,000 sets of plates in the first year for revenues of $5.5 million, said Patricia Adduci, the Motor Vehicles Commissioner.


Sports of The Times; Has Hoops Left Hardball In the Dust?
UNCLE SAM, in his traditional star-spangled top hat and striped trousers and snowy goatee, and the Statue of Liberty, that distinctive femme with tiara and sandals, were sitting on stuffed chairs in their living room and watching television.
"I must confess," said Uncle Sam to Lady Liberty, "I'm starting to prefer basketball to baseball."
This scene took place in a cartoon drawing by Mischa Richter in a recent issue of The New Yorker magazine.


James Milton Voss, 76, Ex-Chairman of Caltex
James Milton Voss, former chairman of the Caltex Petroleum Corporation, died on Monday at his home in Cedar Creek, Tex.
He was 76.
He died of complications from kidney failure, said Paul T. Murphy, director of corporate affairs at the company's headquarters in Dallas.
Caltex is a joint venture of the Chevron Corporation and Texaco Inc.


U.S. and Allies Feud on Economic Goals
The United States, Japan and Germany are at loggerheads over an American proposal that the Group of Seven industrial nations set specific targets for annual economic growth when they meet next week in Tokyo, Western officials said today.
They said Japan and Germany have opposed Washington's calls for setting a 3 percent target for economic growth and setting a ceiling on the size of each country's trade deficit or surplus.


Mood Swings for Mets Have Already Started
The Mets have entered the final stages of their audition for Dallas Green.
Acts have been seen and evaluated.
And the recasting, the manager said today, will be extensive.
"There are going to be thousands of stories to write," Green told reporters before tonight's game against the Marlins.
"Change positions. Trade players. I'm ready."


Suspect Described as a Loner Who Never Left Home
Removed from his world, his head pounding and his glasses taken from him, Joel Rifkin watched the preparations for his arraignment as 17 armed guards filled the courtroom where he was charged with second-degree murder today.
Agape, he said nothing, avoiding the eyes of his 71-year-old mother, Jeanne, and his 31-year-old sister, Jan, whom he had phoned from jail the night before.
Since he last saw them, Mr.
Rifkin has gone from a nondescript unemployed landscaper who had once tended the William J. Casey estate to a suspected serial killer who, the police said, has confessed to killing 17 prostitutes.


RESULTS PLUS
BOXING  Duran Gets a Workout and the Decision  Roberto Duran came out with a victory last night, but he was taken the distance and got a solid workout in a 10-round decision over the Canadian Jacques LeBlanc in Bay St.
Louis, Miss.
The 42-year-old former champion did what he had to do to as he tries to line up a shot at a fifth title, winning a unanimous decision over the former Canadian champion in a supermiddleweight bout.
Duran (89-9) was still punching strongly in the final rounds despite an injured right hand he suffered in the fourth round.
LeBlanc (22-5-2), 29, lived up to his billing as a brawler, fighting strongly into the final minute despite a bloody nose and cut under the left eye.
All five of his professional losses are by decision.
The victory puts Duran in position to fight the two-time world champion Vinny Pazienza in October.
A victory there could put Duran in line for another title shot. (AP) BASEBALL  U.S.
Team Romps Over France  Dante Powell, Todd Helton and Russ Johnson each drove in two runs in an eight-run second inning as the United States rolled to a 16-1 victory over France in the Intercontinental Baseball Cup yesterday in Reggio Emilia, Italy.
The game was stopped after six and a half innings because of the international 10-run rule.
The victory improves the United States to 4-2 in the round-robin tournament with three games remaining. (AP)


No Headline
"Most people are against discrimination. They don't want to hate. They just need to see that we are their friends and neighbors." -- JEN RAY a lesbian college teacher in Idaho.  [ A10:3. ]


Prague Fears Being Migrant Trail's Last Stop
A 31-year-old farmer from Yugoslavia, Mazlun Buragi, stepped off a scruffy bus onto the well-kept square here after a four-country, five-day journey, and with 50 other disheveled passengers tried to arrange a taxi for his crossing into Germany.
An ethnic Albanian from Kosovo Province, dressed in a heavy leather jacket and with a peace sign tattooed on one hand, Mr.
Buragi said he was fleeing conscription by the Serbian authorities.


Book Notes
Turtle Bay's Last Effort
When Turtle Bay Books was summarily shut down by Random House Inc. in February, little remained besides wounded pride, six angry employees, and a list of orphaned books that the editors swore would have turned the young imprint around.
The employees scattered; some were absorbed into other Random House divisions, and Joni Evans, who had been awarded the Turtle Bay imprint after being removed as head of Random House's adult trade division, began working the telephones and pondering her future.


Theater in Review
Orestes  The Penn Yards 59th Street at 12th Avenue Manhattan Written by Charles L. Mee Jr.; directed by Tina Landau; sets by Kyle Chepulis; costumes by James Schuette; lighting by Brian Aldous; original music and sound by John Gromada; props by Deborah Scott; dramaturg, Gregory Gunter; production stage manager, Marjorie Goodsell Clark.
Presented by En Garde Arts.
WITH: Christopher Adams, J. Ed Araiza, Tiffani K. Barbour, William Buddendorf, Jernard Burks, Jennifer Dollard, Ramsey Faragallah, Gregory Gunter, Jennifer Harmon, Natalie Layne Kidd, Jayne Amelia Larson, Michael Malone, Sonya Martin, Jefferson Mays, Theresa McCarthy, Phaedra Philippoussis, Elizabeth Posella, Frank Raiter, Sharon Scruggs, Brendan Sexton 3d, Steven Skybell, Stephen Speights, Jeffrey Sugarman, Beau Van Donkelaar, Elvin Velez, Jean-Loup Wolfman and Stefanie Zadravec.


INSIDE
Murdoch Wins WaiverTo Acquire The Post
The Federal Communications Commission voted 2-1 to allow Rupert Murdoch to acquire The New York Post, a day before his agreement with a bankruptcy court to operate The Post was to expire.
A waiver was needed because he owns a television station in the same market.
Page B1.
U.S.
Fires at Iraqi Site
A United States warplane fired a missile at an Iraqi antiaircraft artillery site as Iraqi defiance continued, Administration officials said.
Page A3.
Nigerian Military Protests
At least 30 Nigerian officers said they would retire to protest the annulment of the presidential vote, a civilian official said.
Page A2. 'Coming Out' to a Neighbor
Faced with campaigns against gay rights, homosexuals in rural areas around the country are deciding they can no longer be silent.
Page A10.
Schools Finalist Backs Out
Bernard R. Gifford, a finalist in the search for a New York City Schools Chancellor, unexpectedly withdrew, officials said.
Page B2.


Mutual Funds Report Decline in Cash Levels
For the first time in 1993, the managers of stock mutual funds are investing more money than the public is providing.
As a result, cash levels are declining.
This comes as the public appears to be a little less enthusiastic than it was about the stock market and as companies are seeking to raise huge sums of money.
The Investment Company Institute, a trade group, reported yesterday that cash levels in stock mutual funds fell to $52.2 billion, or 9.2 percent of total assets, at the end of May, from $55.5 billion, or 10.2 percent, a month earlier.
And reports from fund groups indicate that the trend probably continued this month.
Individual Investors
It has been individual investors, many of them investing through mutual funds, who have provided most of the demand for stocks this year.
One bullish argument for the market has been that the flood of cash would continue and would keep pushing prices higher.
It has been a bit surprising to some that the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 stock index is up just 3.4 percent this year despite a net cash flow of $50.9 billion into stock funds in the first five months of the year.


U.S Indicts 31 for Extortion Plots In Minority Hiring in Construction
Thirty-one people were indicted yesterday on charges of running eight groups that violently extorted thousands of dollars from New York building contractors under the guise of obtaining construction jobs for black and Hispanic workers.
Federal attorneys in Brooklyn said 22 of the 31 indicted were arrested by F.B.I. agents and the police in raids that started yesterday.
Two others are reported to be in prison on other charges and seven have not been found.


Metropolitan Diary
CARO HELLER of Brooklyn is paying her first visit to the new Barnes &amp; Noble Superstore on the Upper West Side.
She is delighted with the numerous benches, the helpful clerks, the ample stock.
She is browsing in the sports section in an area labeled Hunting/Guns.
There, she encounters such titles as "Northeast Hunting Guide," "Hunting for Handgunners" and "Big Game Hunting and Collecting in East Africa, 1903-1926."
She spies a slim book wedged between those weighty volumes and, curious, she pulls it from the shelf.
Its title makes her day: "Bargain Hunting in Greater New York."
. . .
Dear Diary:  Increasingly, I hear stories concerning the loosening of formerly stone-voiced directory-assistance operators.
My most recent encounter with the 411 folks follows.
He: Directory asseestance.
Me, caught off-guard: Umm, Tompkins Square library branch, please.
He: Bot, ov coooorse.
Me, laughing: Ahh. Isn't it a little too early for Dracula to be up and about?
He: I guess you could call it sunlighting.
Me: Cute. But what about my number?
He: Bot, ov cooorse: 228-4747.
Me: By the way, do you change voices daily?
He: Oh, yeah. Tomorrow I'm Gandhi. -- DONNA K. LADD
. . .
Dear Diary:
At the gym recently, I overheard what must be counted as the Most Useless Directions Ever Given by Anyone to Anyone in Manhattan.
The first guy was trying to explain to the second guy the location of a certain office, and the best he could do was: "It's somewhere in midtown. I don't know the exact address, but there's a Gap on the corner." -- MICHAEL PORTANTIERE
. . .
Scene: Light-controlled thoroughfare near suburban center for the elderly.
Dramatis personae: Elderly woman; concerned citizen (me).
Elderly woman, oblivious of traffic moving at a fair clip, is trying to cross street against the light.
Concerned citizen, on opposite corner: Lady, be careful!
You're crossing against the traffic!
Elderly woman: Mind your own business! -- MURRAY GRODE
. . .
FOURTH OF JULY POEM Say, oh what do you hear on this glorious feast  on this milestone  of summer of tall-boated joy  Look to terrace and lawn  to the hordes in their shorts  through the barbecue's smoke  and the radio's blare  They sing rhapsodies there  to this land  that's been better to more  than has history's any. -- CHARLES POTTER
. . .
Dear Diary:  A one-time New Yorker, I overheard the following conversation at the Guild 45th Street Theater in Seattle while waiting to see "Much Ado About Nothing":
Woman One: Can you believe it?
Yesterday I filled an entire garbage can with morning-glory weeds.
Woman Two: Oh, yeah?
Woman One: You know where they came from?
Woman Two: No.
Woman One: My neighbor's yard.
Woman Two: Really.
Woman One: I looked over there.
He's let his entire backyard go.
It was a sea of morning-glory vines.
But there in the center was the sweetest, sweetest pink rose, just blooming its little head off.
It broke my heart.
Woman Two: Yeah.
Woman One: My neighbor's such a jerk.
Woman Two: Yeah.
And that, dear Diary, is the essence of Seattle.
In case you wanted to know. -- SUZANNE COHEN
. . .
Dear Diary:
Like many New Yorkers, I am dismayed by the trend of replacing small cinema houses with septic multiplexes.
I was therefore heartened to witness the following intimate scene after a recent showing of "Strictly Ballroom":
The credits begin to roll to a lively soundtrack.
As the lights come on, an usher can be seen tangoing down the aisle.
His partner: a ravishing broom.
He pauses for a moment.
With a rakish glance around the theater, he dips his partner just as the song ends.
To modest applause, the performance is over.
The young man straightens his vest and assumes his role of a movie-house employee. -- ATARA GRAUBARD


Dinkins Asserts He Is Better Racial Healer
Sounding what promises to be a central theme of his re-election campaign with unusual bluntness, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that he had a special understanding of New York City's racial and ethnic diversity and an ability to bridge it -- and strongly suggested that his opponent, Rudolph W. Giuliani, did not.
"On one thing there should be no doubt: the future of our city depends upon our ability to live together and work together, to realize that our great diversity of backgrounds, opinions and perspectives is our greatest gift," Mr.
Dinkins said in a luncheon speech to the City Club of New York in Manhattan.


Just Another Fish Story? Only Their Poles Know for Sure


Stein Pulls Out of Advocate Race, Saying His Political Career Is Over
One month after he abandoned his sputtering New York mayoral campaign, City Council President Andrew J. Stein just as abruptly withdrew yesterday as a candidate for re-election to his current job, which is being renamed Public Advocate.
He said he might resign before his term expires in December and would never again seek elective office.
"I'm getting out of politics," Mr.
Stein said in an interview.
"You have to be gung-ho, you have to have complete enthusiasm for it. I've had that for 25 years. It's all I've done since I was 22. I think I've made a difference. But I'm 48 and it's really time to move on."


Executive Switches Los Angeles Shops
Robert Chandler, a senior vice president and creative director at BBDO Los Angeles, has left that agency to join Ogilvy &amp; Mather Los Angeles in the long-vacant position of senior vice president and executive creative director.


Public Relations Group Adds Officer
The Public Relations Society of America in New York said yesterday that Ray Gaulke, an executive with extensive experience in the media and public relations fields, had been named to the new position of chief operating officer, effective tomorrow.


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  HOW ABOUT THOSE MIDTOWN BOMBERS?
Forging a fallback position in case efforts to keep the New York Yankees in the Bronx fail, Governor Cuomo has fixed his eyes on a 30-acre railyard on the western edge of midtown Manhattan as a possible way to keep the team from leaving New York City altogether.
A1. 31 ARRESTED IN JOBS EXTORTION SCHEME
Thirty-one people have been indicted on charges that they ran eight groups that, under the guise of obtaining construction jobs for black and Hispanic workers, violently extorted thousands of dollars from New York building contractors.
A1.


How St. Louis Gives Young People Hope
To the Editor:
I commend you for "Wanted: Summer Jobs for Teens" (Topics of The Times, June 17).
Anyone who thinks we can turn our backs on a significant portion of our young people today and not suffer for it tomorrow is mistaken.
You call for action from business.
You may be surprised to learn that St.
Louis lawyers, and lawyers across the country, are working to that end.


A Finalist for Schools Chancellor Withdraws
The search for New York City's next Schools Chancellor was thrown into 11th-hour turmoil yesterday when Bernard R. Gifford, a University of California professor who was one of three finalists and appeared to be the preferred candidate of several board members, unexpectedly withdrew from consideration, said city and school officials and Dr.
Gifford's associates.
Dr.
Gifford faxed a one-page letter to school officials yesterday afternoon outlining his decision, said a senior city official who said the letter had been read to him.
Dr.
Gifford cited personal and business conflicts as the reason for his withdrawal, said the official, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.


Sovern Era Ends at Columbia: A 'Most Extraordinary Chapter'
"The only times I heard an audience really gasp were when Salman Rushdie was introduced at a dinner in Low Memorial Library, and last April, when John Kluge announced a gift to the university of $60 million."
Michael I. Sovern, the ebullient president of Columbia University, was recently reviewing his rapidly winding down 13-year tenure with such enthusiasm that it seemed as if he were about to start all over again.


Street Vendor Crackdown Isn't Halfhearted
To the Editor:
In "Unlicensed Peddlers, Unfettered Dreams" (front page, June 14), your description of Mayor David N. Dinkins's announcement of the crackdown on illegal street vendors and their suppliers as halfhearted inaccurately characterizes New York City's most comprehensive street-vendor policy in more than 50 years.


Bridge
The playoffs to determine the 1993 United States teams ended here Monday night with an East Coast squad exacting revenge for an earlier defeat.
David Berkowitz of Old Tappan, N.J., Larry Cohen of Little Falls, N.J., Sam Lev of Forest Hills, Queens, Cliff Russell of Miami, Marty Bergen of Farmingdale, L.I., and Eric Rodwell of Naperville, Ill., won the final match by 119 imps, and will go to Chile in September along with a team that includes Michael Becker of Tenafly, N.J.
The losers were Neil Chambers of Schenectady, N.Y., John Schermer of Seattle, John Mohan of Santa Monica, Calif., Roger Bates of Mesa, Ariz., Mike Passell of Dallas, and Andy Goodman of San Francisco, who had beaten the Berkowitz team in semifinal play four days earlier.


Audiovox Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Companies Agree to Cut Ozone Smog
Pollution-control officials from the Northeast announced a summer-long program yesterday under which several companies will voluntarily reduce pollutants that cause "ozone smog" below the levels required by law.
The companies hope the plan will help them obtain pollution credits from the Federal Environmental Protection Agency that can be sold to other companies or used to allow them to expand their own plants.


Jean Bodfish Brown; Civic Leader, 52
Jean Bodfish Brown, a civic leader in New York and Chicago, died on June 18 at her home in Chicago at the age of 52.
The cause was cancer, her family said.
Mrs.
Brown was a founding member and chairwoman of the Friends of the Zoo, which worked with the New York Zoological Society to help renovate the Central Park Zoo and to foster environmental education in city schools.


American Medical Holdings Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Voting Rights Case: A Divided Court Reflects Some Unresolved Racial Issues
The Supreme Court's narrow ruling Monday that shaping legislative districts to elect more blacks may be unconstitutional showed how much the Justices reflect the deep uncertainties many Americans feel about racial preferences.
In the 5-to-4 ruling, the Justices demonstrated again that race remains the greatest unresolved issue at the hinge of law and social policy at the Court.
The majority ruled that the creation of a North Carolina Congressional district with a bizarre shape just to insure the election of a black lawmaker could violate the rights of white voters.


Ice Reveals 250,000-Year Climate Story
American scientists drilling through Greenland's massive icecap in search of information about past climate have at last reached a rocky layer assumed to lie just above bedrock, 10,013 feet beneath the surface, Michael Morrison, associate director of the project at the University of New Hampshire in Durham, said yesterday.
The annual layers of snow retrievable from the ice core contain information about weather at the time the snow fell, from which scientists can estimate the likelihood of global warming in the future.
Now that the core has reached bottom, its climatic record will extend back to 250,000 years ago.


U.S. Jet Patrolling Iraq Fires Missile at Artillery Site
Three days after an American military strike against Baghdad, a United States warplane fired a missile at an Iraqi antiaircraft artillery site today as Iraq continued to interfere with American patrols and defy United Nations sanctions, Administration officials said.
President Clinton sought to play down the significance of the incident, which came after the American aircraft was targeted by Iraqi radar as it patrolled the no-flight zone declared by the United Nations over southern Iraq.


Campus Journal; Dissidents From China Find Haven: Princeton
Su Wei, a critic and writer, set sail for Hong Kong on June 15, 1989, leaving China just 11 days after the People's Army killed hundreds of students and other pro-democracy protesters in Tiananmen Square.
His name was on the Government's "most wanted" list, and a warrant was out for his arrest.
"During that time I thought the Government was crazy, that they would use the gunshot for everybody," he recalled recently.
"When I heard that, I decided to leave China. I didn't care how."


Fed Faulted For Delay on Foreign Fees
The chairman of the House Banking Committee criticized the Federal Reserve today for not charging fees for examining the books of foreign banks with operations in the United States.
Henry B. Gonzalez, a Texas Democrat, lashed out at the central bank, rejecting the explanation that its chairman, Alan Greenspan, had offered for failing to assess the fees.
In a letter to Mr.
Gonzalez, Mr.
Greenspan said he thought that imposing the fees improperly discriminated against foreign banks vis-a-vis domestic banks, which do not have to pay them.


Hook-SupeRx Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Hillenbrand Industries reports earnings for Qtr to May 29


With an Acquisition, Joe Camel's Shop is Almost Doubling Its Billings.
THE agency that Joe Camel built is walking less than a mile to make its first acquisition.
Mezzina/Brown Inc., founded in 1991 by two former top executives of Young &amp; Rubicam New York to handle the Camel cigarette account, is buying and absorbing Wills &amp; Evans Inc., a shop about 11 blocks from Mezzina/Brown in midtown Manhattan.
Terms of the transaction, which becomes effective tomorrow, were not disclosed.


Boy Is Killed When Fighting Flares Up in South Lebanon


Review/Film: The Firm; A Mole in the Den of Corrupt Legal Lions
At the time it was published in 1991, "The Firm," John Grisham's best-selling suspense novel, was described by one critic as "mean and lean." Mean, possibly, but lean?
The book is 501 pages.
Now Sydney Pollack's film version far more accurately characterizes the source material.
The movie is extremely long (two hours and 34 minutes) and so slow that by the end you feel as if you've been standing up even if you've been sitting down.
It moves around the map a lot, from Boston to Memphis to the Caribbean to Washington, without getting anywhere.
It is also physically elaborate, the cinematic equivalent of the book's relentlessly descriptive prose.
One of its sets is reported to have required seven and a half miles of 2-by-4 lumber and 225 gallons of glue to hold it together.


Accounts
*
Associated Air Freight Inc., New Hyde Park, L.I., to Griffin Bacal Inc., New York, to handle its account, previously in-house.
Billings were not disclosed.


A Nominee For Head Of F.C.C.
President Clinton today nominated Reed Hundt, a Washington lawyer and a law school classmate, to head the Federal Communications Commission.
Mr.
Hundt, 45, will succeed Alfred Sikes, a Republican who resigned when Mr.
Clinton took office.
The acting chairman of the five-member commission, which has two vacancies, is James A. Quello.


Police Locate 2 More Bodies Buries on L.I.
Beginning what they called "a long and extensive investigation" into a Long Island man's claims that he killed 17 prostitutes, law-enforcement officials found the bodies of two women today.
As state and local authorities, using dogs and helicopters, fanned out through the region, one body was found near Kennedy International Airport and the other near a county highway in the Hamptons.


Albany's Last Chance on Ethics
This has not been a banner year for New Yorkers who had hoped that their Legislature would reduce the influence of vested interests in state and local politics and encourage fairer and more competitive elections.
Albany can gain some measure of redemption in the time remaining, but that time is swiftly running out.
The session actually began on a hopeful note.
In what is becoming a yearly ritual, the Democratic-run Assembly passed a solid reform package establishing a sensible system of public campaign financing for statewide and legislative races and for easing the state's onerous ballot access rules.


Confessions of a Passionate Picnicker
WHEN I was 5 and she was 40, our love affair with the picnic began.
My mother was unmarried.
In fact, she was wed to the idea of romance.
"Eating with nature," she said, was romantic, a word I pronounced as "romantick," predicting with psychic accuracy the tick panic that would mar picnics of the distant future.
In the 1950's, we were innocent of ticks; we dealt only with ants.
And nothing could mar the glories of those first alfresco meals.
On sunny Saturdays, my mother led me to the city parks and spread our tablecloth on the grass.
The tablecloth set boundaries around us, defining our new state of grace.
Within the red-and-white checkered world, we munched prosaic foods, what I called "samwiches," and nibbled from little baggies of washed fruit and crushed cookies.


Murdoch Gets Waiver From the F.C.C. to Buy The New York Post
The Federal Communications Commission voted, 2 to 1, today to give Rupert Murdoch the permanent waiver he needs to acquire The New York Post, a day before his management agreement with a bankruptcy court to operate the newspaper was scheduled to expire.
The vote, which came after weeks of wrangling within the F.C.C., sets the stage for Mr.
Murdoch to re-acquire the tabloid that he was forced to sell five years ago in order to satisfy Federal regulations that bar a company from owning a newspaper and a television station in the same market.


Whirlpool Takes Top Prize In Redesigning Refrigerator
The Whirlpool Corporation was declared the winner yesterday of a $30 million prize for the best design of a refrigerator that both saves energy and is gentler on the earth's protective ozone layer.
The company used refinements in conventional technology, rather than any radical new approaches, to win the award, which was offered by a consortium of electric utilities.


General Mills reports earnings for Qtr to May 30


Former U. of Miami Aide Indicted
TONY RUSSELL, a former University of Miami academic counselor, was indicted yesterday in Miami on one count of Federal financial aid fraud, capping a two-year investigation into financial aid fraud among Miami athletes.
According to the indictment, more than $220,000 in Pell Grant funds were obtained fraudulently between June 1989 and June 1991 and 356 documents were falsified by 91 present or former Miami students, all but several of them athletes.
Russell, who has acknowledged illegally securing up to $2,400 a year per athlete in Pell Grant funds in exchange for a payment of up to $100 each, has accepted a plea bargain arrangement stipulating that he plead guilty.
He faces a maximum of five years in prison, up to $440,000 in fines and may be ordered to pay restitution.


Campbell Shifting Soup Assignments
The Campbell Soup Company said yesterday that it had realigned responsibilities for its soup assignments between two of its agencies: Backer Spielvogel Bates Inc. of New York and BBDO New York.
The shift, effective immediately, is expected to eventually result in a significant increase in BBDO's total Campbell billings.
Kevin G. Lowery, a Campbell spokesman in Camden, N.J., said the realignment was intended to "come up with fresh approaches" and reflected "a renewed focus on our commitment to drive per-capita consumption of Campbell's soups through the 90's and beyond." Though he would not disclose billings involved in the realignment, he said Backer Spielvogel's billings "are not going to change dollar-wise versus last year and BBDO's billings would stand the same or could possibly be increased."


American Express Names New President
The American Express Company yesterday appointed Jeffrey E. Stiefler, the head of its IDS Financial Services unit, to be its president.
Mr.
Stiefler is a longtime protege of Harvey Golub, the company's chief executive, who was named to the additional position of chairman.
Mr.
Golub, who has been president since 1991, was named chief executive in February after James D. Robinson 3d resigned amid increasing complaints from a number of dissatisfied shareholders.
At that time, Richard M. Furlaud was named nonexecutive chairman; he will now become the chairman of the executive committee.


If the Soup Is Cold, Speak Up, Already!
ONE New Yorker describes it this way:
"I have one night off a week. If I go to a restaurant and I have a bad meal, I'm ruined. I'd rather stay at home."


Legacy of a Schools Chancellor; Fernandez's Changes May Not Live On After His Departure
As Joseph A. Fernandez moves out of the Chancellor's office at 110 Livingston Street and packs for the long drive back to Florida, he leaves behind a school system that is remarkably transformed, yet remarkably the same.
During his stormy three-and-a-half-year tenure as one of the highest-paid school officials in the country, he brought about dozens of reforms, large and small, at a rapid pace -- from the distribution of condoms in high schools, to the creation of more than 30 small theme high schools scheduled to open by the fall.
As the Board of Education prepares to appoint a new Chancellor -- a decision that could come as soon as tonight -- Mr.
Fernandez and his supporters are convinced that, despite a city budget crisis, he created a model reform administration and sowed the seeds of a renaissance in public education.


Rebel Attack in India Kills 32
Guerrillas of the Naga tribe in India's northeast ambushed an Indian Army convoy today and killed at least 32 people in one of their biggest strikes against a military target, officials said.
"It was a massive operation and well laid," said Haresh Goswami, the Chief Secretary of Manipur state where the attack was carried out as the convoy traveled through thick forests.


CHRONICLE
You don't have to be a reigning monarch to have public family squabbles.
In France, the COUNT OF PARIS, 85, whose full name is Henri Robert Ferdinand Marie Louis-Philippe d'Orleans and who is one of the two pretenders to the throne of France, is enmeshed in a lawsuit with five of his nine living children over silver, jewelry, art, furnishings and books.
The children have gone to court to stop him from selling the contents of Quinta da Anjino, a former family home near Sintra, Portugal.
The Count, his wife, Princess Isabelle d'Orleans-Bragance, and their children lived there in exile from 1945 to 1950, when it again became legal for descendants of former French kings to set foot on French soil.
The family kept the house as a vacation retreat, but then sold it a few years ago.
The contents, which Sotheby's is planning to auction in Monaco on Saturday and Sunday, are worth an estimated $3.6 million.


Personal Health
THE two most common reasons for major surgery in the United States involve a woman's childbearing organs.
No. 1 is Caesarean section, in which the womb is opened to deliver a child, and No. 2 is hysterectomy, in which the womb is removed, ending a woman's childbearing ability.
Although the number of Caesareans has risen in recent years, publicity about unnecessary gynecological surgery seems to have led to a drop in the number of hysterectomies.
In 1990, the latest year for which data are available, about 590,000 American women had hysterectomies, down from the annual peak of about 750,000 a decade ago.
But many experts believe the number of hysterectomies is still far too high.


Metzenbaum Says He Won't Seek 4th Senate Term
Senator Howard M. Metzenbaum of Ohio, sometimes irascible, often confrontational and always committed to liberalism, announced today that he would not seek election to a fourth term next year.
Mr.
Metzenbaum, a 76-year-old Democrat known for his advocacy of the poor, the aged, organized labor and consumers, said his decision was based on a desire to spend more time with his family.
"While I will retire my seat," he said in a speech on the Senate floor, "I will not retire my views or retire my voice."


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
AL -- Named Detroit manager Sparky Anderson; Baltimore manager Johnny Oates; and Toronto coaches Galen Cisco, John Sullivan and Gene Tenace coaches for the All-Star game.


On This Tour, Streets Are Paved With Stars
Dear Diary,  SAW van with sign saying, "Stardom Tours, See Hollywood in Manhattan." Wondered, what does that mean?
Thought, why not?
Called to book a seat.
Welcomed aboard by Michael Dzakulin, the 44-year-old driver and guide, originally from Belgrade.
Fellow sightseers were a woman from Sydney and a German surgeon traveling with his 18-year old son.


London Journal; A Dismal 'Season,' Right Down to Ziggy (the Rat)
The Tower Bridge opens in the heat and gets stuck.
Prince Charles hurts his back playing polo and misses the Procession of the Most Noble Order of the Garter.
The British soccer team loses -- actually loses -- to the Americans.
It's been that kind of "season" in England this year.
At a time when the parties are in full swing and the British are out there earnestly trying to have fun, with more ceremonies and horse formations than the Queen can wave a white glove at, from the races at Ascot to the Royal Regatta at Henley, things just keep going awry.


Habyan Isn't Expecting a Late Call
A bad week.
That is what John Habyan called his treacherous trips to the pitcher's mound during the latest Yankee road trip, when he threw too many sliders, surrendered too many damaging hits and saw his role in the bullpen diminish rapidly as a result.
A real bad week.
Actually, Habyan merely endured three suspect outings, but they came at inopportune times and the reliever conceded yesterday that he does not expect to be summoned in the late innings any time soon.
In the last two days, Habyan has met with Manager Buck Showalter and General Manager Gene Michael, and they have not been exchanging their favorite recipes.


Rights Report Accuses Israel's Undercover Troops
A human rights group based in the United States asserted today that Israeli undercover army units operating in the occupied territories are given "a license to kill" by their superiors and that soldiers frequently gun down Palestinians even when their own lives are not threatened.
The group, Middle East Watch, acknowledged in a report that these special squads had captured many wanted gunmen and not killed them, and it said that some Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza Strip were shot only after they drew their guns first.


Knicks Can't Dial Those Radio Trades
Soon after the Knicks followed the Cleveland Cavaliers onto the Bulls' list of playoff victims, the rumor mill -- also known as Wishful Thinker's Anonymous -- came up with the obvious solution for both teams.
The Knicks would trade Charles Oakley and Hubert Davis to the Cavaliers for Mark Price.
The Cavaliers would get their desperately needed tough rebounder and shooting guard, while the Knicks would solve their most pressing deficiency, a point guard who can create and score.


U.N. Council Blocks Arms for Bosnians
The Security Council today defeated a resolution, supported only by the United States and five nonaligned countries, that would have lifted the arms embargo against the Muslim-dominated Bosnian Government.
Britain, France and Russia abstained in a successful effort to defeat the measure.
Six countries voted in favor of the resolution; the other nine members of the Council abstained.
In order to pass, the resolution needed eight votes in favor.


Subplots Will Be Varied in Men's Quarterfinals
When it comes to the men's quarterfinals this year at Wimbledon, there's an apparent mismatch, a friendly match, a grudge match and a match that wasn't supposed to happen.
Cedric Pioline is not a name that springs to mind when potential Grand Slam quarterfinalists are discussed.
Particularly not here at Wimbledon, where a Frenchman with clay-court expertise is unheralded at best and, according to his opponent, Stefan Edberg, a dangerous floater at worst.


Straight-Set Afternoon as Graf and Navratilova Advance to Semifinals
The confidence compass had a severe bearing on all four women's quarterfinals this sunny afternoon at Wimbledon.
They were straight-set affairs, and the player who best exhibited the same endurance as the much-abused grass earned the chance to trample that grass again in Thursday's semifinal round.
That was the only pattern to emerge from four hasty matches that honed the women's final four to two Wimbledon divas and two players who have never won a Grand Slam.


Hillhaven Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


'Snow White' Is Made Over Frame by Frame and Byte by Byte
After 56 years, "Snow White" was due for a makeover.
The film, made in 1937 as the first full-length animated feature by Walt Disney's studios, had acquired its share of dust, dirt, scratches and distortions as it was played and re-recorded over the years.
And so the Walt Disney Company, which is re-releasing the movie on Friday, recruited the Eastman Kodak Company's Cinisite subsidiary in Burbank, Calif., to repair the film masters and to correct colors that had drifted from the original animators' intentions.


Philip Morris to Invest in Russian Factory
In Russia, where nearly a third of the 150 million people smoke, a pack of Marlboro cigarettes means more than prestige.
It also means power.
An outstretched hand with Marlboros has far more success in flagging taxis than an empty hand.
In the dead of a Moscow winter, that's power.
To enhance its ability to get Marlboros into Russians' hands, the Philip Morris Companies has agreed to acquire a 49 percent stake in the Krasnodar Tobacco Factory and eventually to assume a majority interest, all for about $60 million.


10 Leaders in Bosnia Try To Heal Rift Over Talks
Bosnia's fractious collective presidency met here today and agreed to seek a united position on a Serbian-Croatian peace proposal that would partition the country into three ethnic enclaves.
But there was no sign that this meant there would be any progress in the peace talks.


New York City Awaiting Ratings
After hammering out a budget agreement for the coming year earlier this month, New York City officials are waiting to see if their bonds will be downgraded by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation, a bond rating service.
An official at Moody's Investors Service, the other major rating company for municipal issues, said yesterday that its medium-grade rating on city bonds -- Baa-1 -- would be held unchanged.
But Michael J. Dorfsman, a spokesman for Standard &amp; Poor's, said, "We are still meeting with city officials and reviewing the rating."


George Stacey, 91; Decorated Interiors For Upper Classes
George Alford Stacey, a designer who decorated the homes of socially prominent Americans for more than half a century, died on Friday at the Dewitt Nursing Home in Manhattan.
He was 91 and maintained residences in Manhattan, Paris and Houdan, France.
He died after a short illness, said Anne Cheney Zinsser, a family friend.


Mets' Uncle Dwight, Marlins' Nephew Gary
Rhetoric is the day's greatest entertainment for the Mets.
The manager endlessly promises changes, today pledging to send players marching as of the All-Star Game break, 12 days away.
The players argue back and forth about who should be traded and who shouldn't.
And then, of course, there are the great debates with the soap opera twists, today's version of which was: Will Uncle Dwight ever get to play with nephew Gary?
"It's going to happen," Gary Sheffield said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9  U.S.
PUTS A-TESTS ON HOLD  President Clinton has decided that the U.S. will follow a "no first test" policy on nuclear arms.
Planned tests in the Nevada desert will be put on hold indefinitely, so long as no other tests nuclear arms.
A1  INVESTMENT SCAM IN CHINA  Thousands of Chinese investors have been swindled by a small-time businessman who raised $175 million and then squandered much of the money on luxuries for himself.
A1


U.S. SAID TO DROP PLAN FOR 9 TESTS OF NUCLEAR ARMS
Backing away from the military's desire to resume underground nuclear tests, President Clinton is preparing instead to declare that the United States will not be the first nation to resume testing of nuclear weapons, Administration officials said tonight.
The decision would allow Mr.
Clinton to avoid a confrontation with Democrats in Congress, whose permission to resume testing would be required.


Never Felt Better
The recent corrections in Hillenbrand Industries shares may be related more to weakness in other health-care suppliers than to the company's own fundamentals, analysts say.
Yesterday, the company reported second-quarter earnings of 52 cents a share, up from 41 cents for the quarter a year earlier and higher than analysts' forecasts.


Eating Well
FOR the last three days, parents have been barraged with unsettling information about pesticide residues in their children's food.
Environmental groups, which have been raising the alarm for a decade, have been joined by the National Academy of Sciences and the three Federal agencies that regulate pesticides -- the Environmental Protection Agency, the Food and Drug Administration and the Agriculture Department -- in acknowledging that the amount of pesticide residues in food is too great.
This is true especially for infants and children.
While the experts argue about how to reduce pesticide residues, parents want to know what to do.
From the Natural Resources Defense Council to the United Fresh Fruit and Vegetable Association, the refrain is: keep feeding your children fruits and vegetables, whether or not they are organic, because the benefits outweigh the risks.


Chief Retiring At Britannica
Encyclopaedia Britannica Inc. said today that Robert P. Gwinn, its chairman and chief executive, would turn over the reins of the 225-year-old enterprise to Peter Norton, the company's president and chief operating officer, on Sept. 1.
The transition will be a youth movement, Britannica style.
Mr.
Gwinn is 85; Mr.
Norton is 64, a year younger than Mr.
Gwinn was when he was named to head the company in 1973.
For the first eight years, the energetic Mr.
Gwinn was also the chairman of the Sunbeam Corporation.


Negotiators in Congress Fail To Agree on Military Budget
House and Senate negotiators struggled for six hours today but failed to agree on how much money to give to a Pentagon that had not asked for it..
The House Defense Appropriations Subcommittee began pushing $1.2 billion last month on a Defense Department that was shyly silent, and today the panel's chairman, Representative John P. Murtha, Democrat of Pennsylvania, walked out of the public session of the House-Senate conference muttering, "We're not budging.'


For Many, Human Rights Mean Life Itself; A Persistent Wrong
To the Editor:
The United States has one glaring weakness in attempting to lead the world conference on human rights in Vienna and to distinguish itself from such countries as China, Iran and Vietnam (The Week in Review, June 20).
On the issue of capital punishment, the United States is closer to those countries it seeks to condemn than to its traditional Western allies.


For Many, Human Rights Mean Life Itself
To the Editor:
Re "Human Rights: The West Gets Some Tough Questions" (The Week in Review, June 20), on the United Nations conference in Vienna:


New Data Point to Weakening U.S. Economy
In a three-pronged indication of a weakening economy, fresh reports today showed a plunge in new-home sales and unsettling, albeit moderate, declines in consumer confidence and the Government's chief forecasting index.
Although most analysts continued to expect growth for the second half of the year to exceed that of the very sluggish first half, today's data prompted expressions of concern that the risks to further expansion had grown. 'Economy Could Turn Down'
"The economy could turn down -- or it could slow down" some more, said Larry Moran, a Commerce Department economist.
He referred specifically to the three-tenths of 1 percent decline in the department's index of leading indicators for May, the fifth straight month in which the index reversed direction.
The index had risen a revised two-tenths of 1 percent in April.


