David Halvorsen; Editor, 60
David E. Halvorsen, former editor of The San Francisco Examiner, died on Wednesday at his home in San Francisco six months after diagnosis of an incurable brain tumor.
He was 60.
As city editor at The Chicago Tribune, Mr.
Halvorsen formed an investigative news team that won two Pulitzer Prizes.


Sounds Around Town
'Songs of the 40's'
Phillip Officer, "Hit the Road to Dreamland: Songs of the 40's," Russian Tea Room, 150 West 57th Street, Manhattan, (212) 265-0947.
In his memorable 1992 show devoted to the lyrics of E. Y. (Yip) Harburg, Phillip Officer displayed an emotional steadiness that was matched by his deep empathy with Harburg's populist sensibility.
Singing in a strong, serene baritone, Mr.
Officer never goes for melodrama or easy pathos.
Among the songs in his new show, in which he is accompanied by piano and violin, are "Look to the Rainbow," "This Time the Dream's on Me" and "My Foolish Heart," all ideal showcases for Mr.
Officer's no-frills soulfulness.
Shows are tonight at 9 and 11.
There is a $15 music charge and a $10 food and beverage minimum.
STEPHEN HOLDEN A Dual Talent
Annie Ross, Bottom Line, 15 West Fourth Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6300.
One of the finest jazz singers of the 1950's, Annie Ross, now 63, has built a second career as a film actress.
And in Robert Altman's "Short Cuts," in which she plays a jazzy torch singer, her two careers finally mesh.
Ms.
Ross will be performing with a quartet that appears in the film, consisting of Terry Adams on piano, Bruce Fowler on trombone, Bobby Previte on drums and Greg Cohen on bass.
The set will feature torch songs from the movie written by Bono and the Edge, Doc Pomus and Dr.
John, and Elvis Costello, among others.
Also expect to hear Lambert, Hendricks and Ross favorites like "Twisted." Shows are tomorrow at 8 and 11 P.M.
Tickets are $15.
S.
H.


Peteski Going South To Bring Title North
Is this the year you can swoop down on the Breeders' Cup and strike gold in horse racing?
A lot of people think so, including the racing officials at Santa Anita, where the $10 million day of seven races will be staged Nov. 6.
They believe this year's championships are so wide open that even racing owners from abroad won't be stopped by the memory of last fall's Breeders' Cup.
That's when 40 horses from Europe took a turbulent trans-Atlantic flight to Florida, and went home with nothing but agita after a week of high heat and humidity.


Turgeon's Still in Doubt For Opener
Still suffering from a sore left wrist, Pierre Turgeon continued to skate alone on Long Island Thursday while his Islander teammates continued their exhibition season with a game at San Jose.
Turgeon is scheduled to see a doctor on Friday morning, according to Don Maloney, the general manager, who added that Turgeon will probably miss the final exhibition game Saturday night in Los Angeles.


METRO DIGEST
WEICKER WON'T SEEK RE-ELECTION
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., the liberal Republican who built a career out of going his own way, announced that he would not seek re-election to a second term.
Mr.
Weicker said he wanted more time with his family, less intrusion by the demands of campaigning, and, perhaps, a job in private industry.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  GIULIANI HELPED BY FORMER KOCH AIDES
Four years ago, Rudolph W. Giuliani campaigned for mayor as a political outsider.
But this year, in a sign of how differently his candidacy is perceived by the political establishment, he has been receiving quiet help and tutoring from former aides to Mayor Edward I. Koch.
A1.
A prominent black minister charged that Mayor Dinkins has been falsely branded a "murderer" for the death of a rabbinical student in Crown Heights.
B4.
PICKET LINE OF BROKEN HOPES
Outside The New York Post building, members of the Newspaper Guild, some with half a century working there, watched bitterly from a picket line as other workers somberly crossed the line of their picketing friends and fellow workers.
B2.
HOSTAGES TAKEN IN BANK ROBBERY
At least two robbers accosted three bank workers as they arrived for work and held them hostage in a nerve-racking standoff with the police in Park Slope, Brooklyn.
B3.
PLAN OFFERED FOR WEST SIDE STADIUM
New York State unveiled its plan to keep the Yankees from jumping to New Jersey, proposing a $319 million, 50,000-seat stadium and a $211 million, 7,000-space parking garage south of the Jacob Javits Convention Center.
B11.
A plan to put 30 public toilets with advertising kiosks in New York City parks was hobbled when two leading operators withdrew their names from the search.
B3.
When the Mollen Commission hearings on police corruption are long over, its policy recommendations a matter of record, New York police lore will still be haunted by the young faces of the disgraced officers and the way their numbing, ugly admissions spilled out, one after the next.
B4.
REGION  NOT GUILTY PLEA IN TWO SLAYINGS
Joel Rifkin, the former landscaper from East Meadow, L.I., who told the police he had killed at least 18 women, pleaded not guilty to killing two women whose bodies were found not far from the court building in Riverhead, L.I.
B5.
WHITMAN ATTACKS FLORIO ON CRIME
Christine Todd Whitman's campaign for governor took on a sharper edge as she attacked Gov.
Jim Florio for failing to stem the tide of violent crime in New Jersey.
B5.
An advisory committee of officials from New York and Connecticut has tentatively backed a developer to operate a high-speed ferry between Shoreham, L.I., and New Haven.
B5.
Suffolk County Executive Robert J. Gaffney signed into law a measure that will require fingerprinting for welfare recipients.
B5.
Our Towns by George Judson B5
Chronicle B6


Braves to Giants: The Key's in the Mailbox, Come On In
San Francisco Manager Dusty Baker was in a continuous state of applause tonight.
First, the Atlanta Braves' score came in, then some Giants runs came in and then the National League West standings came in: A first-place tie.
The Giants wish Bill Swift could pitch every day, but every fourth day will do for now.
Swift (21-8) tossed a two-hitter before leaving in the eighth inning, his teammates fortunately found Los Angeles shortstop Jose Offerman and San Francisco had a compact 3-1 victory before 36,409 at Dodger Stadium.


When a Continent Moves, Houses Fall and Many Die
The Indian earthquake and its devastation are rooted in the slow collision of the Indian subcontinent with the Asian landmass, which created the Himalaya Mountains and causes residual tensions in the Indian tectonic plate that are periodically released in bursts of violent energy.
"The area to the south is under high compression," said Dr.
Lynn R. Sykes, a geologist at the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory of Columbia University in Palisades, N.Y.
"Compared to similar areas, it has one of the higher rates of seismic activity."


Art in Review
'De Kooning-Dubuffet: The Late Works'
Pace Gallery  32 East 57th Street, Manhattan  Through Oct. 16
The history of art has contributed its share to the mythology of aged geniuses whose last years were pinnacles of achievement (Titian, for instance).
Neither Willem de Kooning nor Jean Dubuffet can fairly be added to that list.
This ambitious exhibition, a follow-up to one three years ago at Pace that combined depictions of women by the same two artists, tries to argue the case.
There may be better late de Koonings than the ones here, but to judge from what is on view, much of which is borrowed from museum collections, Mr. de Kooning and Dubuffet each conform more to the model of Picasso, whose late paintings are often better and more substantial than common wisdom has it without rising to the levels he achieved in his earlier years.


Art in Review
William L. Hawkins
Ricco/Maresca Gallery  152 Wooster Street (near Houston Street)  SoHo  Through Oct. 23
William L. Hawkins was a self-taught artist from Kentucky who died in 1990 at the age of 94.
He began producing a solid body of paintings only in the 10 years before his death.
By that time, he had amassed a vast collection of images clipped from magazines and newspapers, examples of which he often put directly into his paintings.


California Bonds' High Yield Is 5.3%
A $213.2 million bond offering by California State Public Works was initially priced yesterday to yield a maximum 5.30 percent for a bond due in 2009 through underwriters led by Lehman Brothers.
The remaining serial refunding revenue bonds were priced to yield from 2.85 percent in 1994 to 4.05 percent in 1998, 4.80 percent in 2003 and 5.25 percent in 2008.


Expansion of Jury Rolls Needed in New York
To the Editor:
"Justice for Jurors" (editorial, Sept. 22) applauds efforts by Judith Kaye, New York State's Chief Judge, to increase juror access and comfort.


There's No Letting Up for Devils' Terreri
Although he was certain to be the Devils' top goaltender the moment Craig Billington was traded in June, there has been nothing lackadaisical about the way Chris Terreri has approached the job since the first day of training camp.
"I haven't been this excited to play in a long time, and I have no trouble pushing myself to the limit," Terreri said.
"I think it's the responsibility of everyone to push to the limit, even those who are more or less guaranteed a place on the team."


Roadway Services (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 11


Snapshots From Mets' Blight Album
The Shea Stadium clubhouse was being unpacked and unloaded.
Evacuated, really.
But for the Mets, of course, there were some things that couldn't be buried deep enough in bags -- images, memories, singular snapshots of comedy or despair or embarrassment.
How about Anthony Young's 27 straight defeats or, perhaps more to the absurd point, his one victory?
How about General Manager Al Harazin saying he deplores scapegoating one breath after announcing that he'd just fired Jeff Torborg with nearly three seasons left on the manager's contract?


At This Firm the Clients Hire Inside Consultants
What's a gaggle of recent business school graduates doing at a corporate-litigation law firm like Bickel &amp; Brewer?
Analyzing cases, poring over documents, choreographing evidence for jury presentation -- in short, doing much of the pretrial preparation that lawyers generally hand over to outside consultants.
Oh, and not so incidentally, saving clients money, lots of money, says William A. Brewer 3d, co-founder of the Dallas-based firm.
"We saved one client, Bellcore, some $100,000 in a telecommunications patent dispute," he said.
"We saved American Medical International Inc., a hospital corporation, $200,000 in a dispute with Creighton University in Omaha. And there was $500,000 in savings for Robert Woolley, chairman of a hotel properties group, in a dispute involving the Embassy Suites hotel chain."


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "BLACK COMEDY/WHITE LIARS," Roundabout Theater, 1530 Broadway, at 45th Street.
A revival of Peter Shaffer's 1967 one-act comedies.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M; Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $38 to $42.
Information: (212) 869-8400.
"IN THE SPIRIT OF FLUXUS," Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
Approximately 400 objects and documentary material, by some 40 artists, trace the genesis and resilience of this irreverent, anarchic art movement.
Through Sunday.
Hours: Today through Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Admission: $6; $5 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3676.
Closing Next Weekend  "HAND-PAINTED POP: AMERICAN ART IN TRANSITION, 1952-66," Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
Through Oct. 10.
Hours: Wednesday, Friday, Saturday and Sunday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Thursday, 1 to 8 P.M.; closed Mondays and Tuesdays.
Admission: $6; $5 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3676.


Shattered Ties and Broken Hearts: a 'Civil War' at Post
Herded behind police barricades, carrying signs in a jumbled picket line, members of the New York Newspaper Guild jeered at their colleagues in the drivers' union just before they entered cargo bays of The New York Post to return to work.
"We know you!" one guild member shouted. "We work with you! How can you do this?"


Expansion of Jury Rolls Needed in New York; Vanishing Stars
To the Editor:
"Justice for Jurors" (editorial, Sept. 23) speaks of gold stars and silver stars to laud Chief Judge Judith Kaye.
As one who has searched dime stores, variety stores and stationeries for them, I can tell you the stars are not available to award her.
I am saddened for all the schoolchildren who will never know the joy of such rewards.
POLLY SCILKEN  New York, Sept. 23, 1993


Home Video
To promote three recent hits, and to frustrate video pirates, Paramount opens a window -- wide.
October video scheduling customarily has studios jumping around the calendar in search of open release dates for forthcoming hits.
This year, though, the schedule makers have other issues to consider: allegations of theft, for instance.


Miller (Herman) Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Criticism of Raid Heartens Cult Members
While the Treasury Department's review was categorical in condemning the mistakes by top officials in charge of the Feb. 28 raid on the Branch Davidian compound, the impact on the coming trial of 11 cult members accused of murdering Federal agents was the subject of sharp dispute today.
Lawyers for some of the surviving Branch Davidians were quick to predict that the Treasury review's general depiction of Government failures, confusion and lies would bolster the Branch Davidians' case that bullets fired by cult members during the shootout came in self-defense.
Four agents of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms were killed in the shootout and 20 injured.


National Medical Enterprises Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


U.S. Seeks Less Risk In Pensions
Seeking better protection for the retirement benefits of millions of American workers, the Clinton Administration proposed legislation today to strengthen the Government's system of pension insurance by requiring companies with insufficient funds in their pension plans to make larger insurance contributions.
"The financial future of many American workers and retirees may be at risk because their pensions are underfunded," Robert B. Reich, the Labor Secretary, said at a briefing to explain the proposal, developed by a task force he appointed soon after taking office early this year.


Critic's Notebook; A No-Apologies Woman for the 90's: Harlow
JEAN HARLOW represented everything that straitlaced 1930's America was supposed to despise.
She played platinum-haired prostitutes, gold diggers and other trashy types with no apologies.
In "Red-Headed Woman," she strategically places a picture of her rich, married boss under her garter and says, "It'll get me more there than it will hanging on the wall." In "Red Dust," she decides to take a bath in a rain barrel, the better to get Clark Gable's attention.
And in "Hold Your Man," she fights a rival for Gable's affections by belting the other woman with a left to the jaw, twice.
Yet in her seven-year career, Harlow was wildly popular with both men and women, who found more to envy than to scorn.
The Harlow retrospective that begins today at the Film Forum is a vastly entertaining reminder of a brief and fascinating career, one that ended when Harlow died of kidney failure in 1937, at 26.
And the series suggests something more.
Harlow's garishly dyed hair, pencil-thin eyebrows and heavy eye makeup mark her as a sex symbol left over from the day before yesterday.
Yet in film after film she sails into the present carrying along her most prized and timeless possessions: a clear conscience and a sense of humor.
Harlow was an exaggerated symbol of what middle-class America wouldn't dare embrace in real life: sex without guilt.
In the AIDS-aware 90's, the allure of that persona and the wit with which she brought it off hit with the fresh force they must have had five decades ago.


Thousand Trails Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Review/Theater; Theirs Is A Marriage Made on Broadway
It's not quite a half-century yet, but who's counting?
Eli Wallach and Anne Jackson -- stage partners for 48 years, husband and wife for 46 -- have had a full life in the theater.
They met while performing in a Tennessee Williams one-act play ("This Property Is Condemned") and more than four decades later are still together on and Off Broadway.
After a detour to Hollywood, they always came back to New York, or signed up for a new hitch on the legitimate theater's dwindling road.
There's no long-running sitcom in either of their Who's Whos.
"In Persons" is the Wallachs' casual stroll down memory lane.
At the tiny Kaufman Theater, which one imagines to be smaller than their living room in real life, they reminisce, perform excerpts from favorite past productions, make mild personal confessions (Miss Jackson tends to lose her eyeglasses) and celebrate their marriage.
Sample dialogue:


Marriott Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 10


Echlin Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


TV Weekend; Along the Battle Lines Of 'Politically Correct'
Herewith a piece of politically neutral advice for documentary makers who want their work taken seriously: Shun re-enactments.
The program at issue is "Campus Culture Wars: Five Stories About P.C." Paid for by conservative foundations, it offers a view from the right of the contentious issues of political correctness at American universities.


Many Koch Aides Return, as Advisers to Giuliani
Four years ago, Rudolph W. Giuliani campaigned for mayor as a political outsider.
But this year, in a sign of how differently his candidacy is perceived by the political establishment, he has been receiving quiet help and tutoring from former aides to Mayor Edward I. Koch, who have crossed party lines to share policy prescriptions with the Republican-Liberal.
Only a few of the former city officials are actually on the campaign payroll, like William J. Grinker, the former head of the Human Resources Administration, and Richard Schwartz, a former Assistant Parks Commissioner.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League
SAN FRANCISCO GIANTS -- Renewed the contracts of Bob Lillis, Wendell Kim, Dick Pole, Bobby Bonds and Bob Brenly, coaches, for the 1994 season.
Basketball


Diner's Journal
Consultant Buys the Shop
If Terrance Brennan ever comes walking into your restaurant looking for a job, you may want to show him the door.
Less than three months after being hired by Guy Pascal as the consulting chef at Brasserie Pascal, 35 West 64th Street in Manhattan, Mr.
Brennan bought the restaurant.
"It was an amicable arrangement," Mr.
Brennan said.
He has closed the restaurant and is redecorating it with textured stucco walls and darker wood trim for a more rustic look in keeping with his concept, a contemporary Mediterranean restaurant.
It will be called Picholine (which is a kind of olive) and should open in about two weeks.
Mr.
Brennan, who has been the chef at Prix Fixe and Steak Frites, had been looking to open his own place since the spring.


USAir Plans 2,500 Layoffs By Mid-1994
The effort by many major airlines to shrink and restructure themselves to a profitable core continued yesterday with USAir's announcement that it would eliminate 2,500 jobs by mid-1994.
Underscoring the challenge facing USAir, the company also said it expects a pretax loss for the third quarter of roughly $180 million and a net loss for the year.
Most if not all major carriers except USAir are expected to report a profit for the third quarter.
USAir has not reported profits since the second quarter of 1989.


Sarajevo May Be Settling Into Stalemate
Sporadic artillery bursts from Serbian positions exploded around Sarajevo today, but there was no sign of a major assault despite warnings from Serbian nationalists that they would resume their bombardments when the Muslim-led Government rejected an international peace plan.
Reports from elsewhere in Bosnia indicated that Serbian forces had continued attacks near Tesanj and Maglaj, in north-central Bosnia, but that Serbian units in other areas mostly honored a cease-fire drawn up two weeks ago.


Art in Review
Roni Horn
Mary Boone Gallery  417 West Broadway (near Spring Street)  SoHo  Through Oct. 30
"When Dickinson Shut Her Eyes" is the title of Roni Horn's bare-bones sculpture installation, and the poems of Emily Dickinson are its subject.
The work consists of dozens of square aluminum rods, each of which is a yard or two long and carries a line of verse in inlayed black plastic letters.
Propped up against the gallery wall, the rods are gathered into clusters that make up complete poems.


Hillary Clinton Raises Tough Question of Life, Death and Medicine
Hillary Rodham Clinton said today that she hoped the nation would engage in a serious discussion about what is appropriate medical care in cases where very expensive treatments do nothing for the patient's quality of life.
The First Lady, completing her testimony before the Senate Finance Committee -- her fifth Congressional hearing in three days on the President's health care proposals -- was prodded by Senator John C. Danforth, Republican of Missouri.
He asked her whether the system would have "somebody at some level in a position to say no."


Kay Nolte Smith, 61; Wrote Mystery Novels
Kay Nolte Smith, the author of "The Watcher" and other mystery novels, died on Saturday at Monmouth Medical Center in Long Branch, N.J.
She was 61 and lived in Tinton Falls, N.J.
The cause was lung cancer, said her sister, Judith Nolte Heimer of Manhattan.


INSIDE
For Sale: U.S. Highways
The top highway official proposed that businesses operate parts of the interstate system, charging tolls to repair roads and bridges.
Page A12.
Nervous Health Insurers
Providers of health insurance, already in precarious financial shape, say the Clinton health plan would accelerate their demise.
Page A22.
Clean Needles and AIDS
A Federal report finds that giving clean needles to addicts helps prevent the spread of AIDS, and it encourages more such programs.
Page A21.
Closing the Texas Border
With hundreds of United States agents on the Texas-Mexico border, illegal immigrants are being prevented from entering the U.S.
Page A3.
New Term at the Court
The docket for the Supreme Court term that begins Monday is heavy with unfinished business, particularly in civil rights.
Law, page B9.


U.S. Blockade of Workers Enrages Mexican Town
For years, as thousands of undocumented workers floated openly across the Rio Grande each day from this sprawling border metropolis to jobs in El Paso, Tex., illegal immigration became a symbol of tolerance, even brotherhood, between the two cities.
That immigration agents stopped relatively few of the nannies and gardeners and busboys was taken as a sign that Ciudad Juarez and El Paso understood each other's needs.
Federal law, it seemed, was no match for the forces of economic interdependence.


Quake in India Levels Villages and Kills Thousands
The most devastating earthquake in India in more than 50 years rocked a remote sugar-cane-growing region of central India early this morning, killing thousands, Indian officials and Government news reports said.
Twelve thousand people were feared trapped in the rubble of their homes.
Estimates of the dead and injured varied widely.
Late this evening the Government-controlled Press Trust of India reported that more than 6,500 people had died, but the inaccessibility of many villages and the extent of destruction suggested that the figure was far from final.


Martin Marietta to Eliminate 11,000 Jobs
The Martin Marietta Corporation, which last year bought the General Electric Company's aerospace electronics division, said yesterday that it would close 12 production sites and eliminate 11,000 jobs nationwide this year to consolidate the two businesses.
The move, which had been expected for months, is the latest sign that the pain and layoffs of a shrinking weapons industry are far from finished.
The announcement came the same day large layoffs were announced in the airline and hazardous-waste disposal industries.  [ Page D3. ]


Review/Film Festival: Short Cuts; Altman's Tumultuous Panorama
THE night skies over Los Angeles, which is in a medfly siege of bibical proportions, are filled with helicopters flying in formation as they indiscriminately spray everything below: people, swimming pools, royal palms, trailer parks, stretch limos, possibly also medflies and their larvae.
The helicopters menace as they pretend to protect.
Their rotors chop the air and puncture the eardrums.
With bright red and green wing lights ablink, the machines have the cold precision of android policemen, waggishly festooned.
These images and sounds usher the audience into the world of Robert Altman's big, tumultuous, very fine new film, "Short Cuts," which opens the 31st New York Film Festival tonight at Lincoln Center.
The film will be shown at 7:30 at Alice Tully Hall and at 8 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall, and begins its commercial run on Sunday in Manhattan.


2 Parties, 1 Goal
With each passing year, fewer members of Congress are willing to work with their colleagues in the opposing party.
Those who do are met with increasing criticism and suspicion in their own party caucuses.
The culmination of this 20-year trend was passage of the budget without a single vote in Congress from the opposition party.
Party and partisanship have become more important than policy and partnership.
If this pattern is allowed to continue, no one has more to lose than President Clinton.
He was elected as a centrist, a "new kind of Democrat." But he cannot succeed as a centrist if the Administration continues to follow a "Democrats only" strategy.
Swings to the left, necessary for votes in the House, will only shrink the President's political base and damage his credibility.


Safety Over Nostalgia: New Bike-Helmet Law
THOSE of us who grew up in the 60's remember the dead-girl songs on the radio, the drag races, the close calls, the black-bordered "In Memoriam" pages in the back of our yearbooks, the football hero who never walked again.
Turn back a few more years, and we remember our first taste of dangerous speed, those heavy single-speed Columbias, bikes with as much chrome as our father's Chevys.
We had to pump hard to get them going, and then we stood on the pedals and jammed the brake even harder, to see who could leave the longest skid mark.
We crashed, we got up, we picked gravel out of our knees and knuckles.
We dreamed of GTO's.


C. Mackenzie Jr., 83; Led Discovery Museum
Cameron Mackenzie Jr., a retired writer and editor who helped to establish what is now the Discovery Museum in Bridgeport, Conn., died on Sunday at the Iowa Methodist Medical Center in Des Moines.
A former resident of Westport, he was 83 and lived in Brooklyn.
The cause was emphysema complicated by pneumonia, his family said.
He was in Iowa for the wedding reception of his son Angus.


Wolves' Rider Faces Driving Charges
ISAIAH (J. R.) RIDER, the Minnesota Timberwolves' top draft pick this year, appeared in court in Alameda, Calif., yesterday to face two counts of driving with a suspended license.
He was ordered to return to court on Oct. 14 to enter a plea.


In Shift, Massachusetts Governor Backs Gun Law
With voters growing increasingly fearful of gunfire on the streets, Gov.
William F. Weld of Massachusetts reversed course this week and proposed some of the most stringent gun control laws in the country.
Mr.
Weld, a Republican who will run for re-election next year, called for a statewide ban on assault weapons -- a proposal he opposed during his 1990 campaign -- as well as a waiting period for buying handguns and a prohibition on handgun ownership by anyone under 21.
His proposed legislation would also limit the number of handguns an individual could buy and would impose tough penalties for illegal gun sales and gun-related crimes.


Corrections
An obituary on Sept. 11 about Richard L. Berman, who died on Sept. 5, misstated when he became president of Moseley Associates, publishing consultants.
It was in March 1990, not last March.





Brighton Journal; Left, Right, Left, Right, but Labor's Not in Step
Jane, a middle-aged delegate from the Midlands, recalls Labor Party conferences of the mid-1980's with nostalgia.
Those were the days.
The party had a red flag.
The speeches were fire and brimstone.
And the enemy was clear: the banks and boardrooms of the Tories and their lackeys in Parliament.
The internecine battles as the party veered leftward were fierce.
"Ah, a real blood bath it was," said Jane, who asked that her last name be withheld in deference to her union's commandment to steer clear of the press.
"We had real Socialists then -- militants. Not like these here today. I call 'em plastic Tories." She gave out a dismissive laugh.


Don't Get Mad, When You Can Get Smart
To the Editor:
Reading "Getting Rid of Anger" (letter, Sept. 11) by Bill Stott made me very angry.
Following his suggestions, I screamed, punched pillows and did my stomping dance.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The Clinton Administration proposed legislation to strengthen the Government's system of pension insurance by requiring companies with underfinanced funds to make larger contributions.
"The financial future of many American workers and retirees may be at risk because their pensions are underfunded," Robert B. Reich, the Labor Secretary, said.  [ Page D1. ]
Personal income rose strongly in August, and a measure of joblessness edged down last week -- two indications that the economy is doing better than during the first half of the year.
But new-home sales dropped sharply.  [ D2. ]


Theory vs. Practice; Clinton's Stated Foreign Policy Turns Into More Modest 'Self-Containment'
The contrast between the theory and practice of the Clinton Administration's foreign policy has never been more starkly apparent than in recent days.
In a series of four speeches this month, Secretary of State Warren Christopher; the national security adviser, Anthony Lake; the delegate to the United Nations, Madeleine K. Albright, and President Clinton himself laid out their "vision" of America's post-cold-war foreign policy.
At its core was the idea that the old policies of containment of Communism should be replaced by a new policy of enlargement of the family of free-market democracies.


CHRONICLE
Protest then, protest now . . .
KATE PIERSON, a vocalist with the B-52's, the campy rock group, and seven other members of People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, an animal-rights organization, were arrested yesterday in the offices of Vogue magazine, where they were marching with bullhorns and pasting antifur slogans on the walls.
They were taken to the Midtown South police precinct and charged with criminal mischief and criminal trespass, which can carry a penalty of a year in prison and a fine.


At the Bar; The waters roil in Virginia Beach, home of Pat Robertson's distinctive law school.
In the sea to shining sea of largely indistinguishable American law schools, Regent University School of Law, established seven years ago in Virginia Beach, Va., by the televangelist Pat Robertson, stands alone.
Its curriculum, according to school officials, "presupposes that God impressed upon His creation an objective order that man is bound to obey." All classes begin with as much as 10 minutes of prayer.
Every three years, faculty members must acknowledge by contract that they have a "personal relationship" to Jesus Christ; every year, they must subscribe to a seven-point "statement of faith" and are expected to leave if they cannot comfortably do so.


Cintas Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Art in Review
Frisell's Improvisations
Bill Frisell, Village Vanguard, 178 Seventh Avenue South, at 11th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 255-4037.
In Bill Frisell's improvising and compositions, there's a sense of the great expanse of American culture.
He'll use country ideas, or rock-and-roll, or he'll swing phrases.
He'll play Thelonious Monk or Charles Ives or Madonna.
And the musicians he's working with for this date, Kermit Driscoll on bass and Joey Baron on drums, give him all the room he needs to let his guitar spread sound throughout the room, a great wash of Americana.
Shows tonight and tomorrow night are at 9:30, 11:30 and 1; there is no third set on Sunday.
There is a $15 admission charge and an $8 minimum on Friday and Saturday; on Sunday, admission is a $12 admission charge and the minimum is $8.
PETER WATROUS Hampton at the Blue Note
Lionel Hampton, Blue Note, 131 West Third Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 475-8592.
Lionel Hampton has been an important figure for most of jazz history, and his group for this date, including Sweets Edison and Clark Terry on trumpets, Al Grey on trombone and James Moody on saxophone, is about as good a group as he's ever had.
There's more wit, and more improvisation, on one bandstand than most cities hear in a year.
The cover is $45, and the minimum is $5.
Shows are tonight through Sunday at 9 and 11:30 P.M.
P.
W.


Sun Television &amp; Appliances Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Ty Cobb Batted Here (and Struck Out)
His eyesight has faded a bit over 102 years, and when you ask Chet Hoff a question these days, you have to speak up.
But when he answers there is thunder in his voice, and when he grasps your hand after a ceremony in a hospital garden in upper Manhattan, the full, surprising force of his arthritic grip makes it easier to appreciate an unlikely historic fact:
It was on this very ground 82 years ago this month that this lively little man with snow-white hair took the mound for the Yankees against the Detroit Tigers and fanned Ty Cobb with three pitches, the last a roundhouse curve that caught Cobb looking as it cut across the center of the plate.


Reviews/ Film; An Idyll Shattered By Rape and Murder
"Malice" could turn out to be the new season's pop mystery-suspense melodrama you won't want to miss.
The film is deviously entertaining from its start through its finish, when most such movies go as irretrievably to pieces as Margo's face at the end of "Lost Horizon." "Malice" stays the course.
If it were a car, it could be called a mean machine.
Though light of weight, it hugs the road around every hairpin curve in its cruel and twisty narrative.
Cruel?


Morrison Restaurants (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 4


Davstar Industries reports earnings for Year to June 30


TV Weekend; A Perpetual Outsider and a New Host
Russell Baker makes his entrance as the new host of "Masterpiece Theater" on Sunday evening at 9 with a 90-minute BBC drama called "Selected Exits." The New York Times columnist clearly has no intention of shucking his piquant sense of humor.
"Selected Exits" is adapted by Alan Plater from a memoir by Gwyn Thomas, a crusty Welsh writer and raconteur who died in 1981 at 67.
Established as a writer of novels, short stories and plays, Mr.
Thomas became a television celebrity in the 1960's on the BBC talk show "The Brains Trust." That's when this dramatization begins, with Anthony Hopkins grumblingly playing the wittily provocative Thomas.
"All writers are liars," he declares, explaining that the lie is a compulsory social tactic.
Then, with Hopkins assuming the role of narrator, the story goes back to Thomas's adolescence in South Wales.


Orbit International Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Year to June 30


Reviews/ Film; In a Scary Future, Babies Who Decline to Be Born
Could the world be so terrible that in the near future unborn babies refuse en masse to leave their mothers' wombs?
That is the bizarre supposition of Marion Hansel's deadly earnest film, "Between Heaven and Earth," which opens today at the 57th Street Playhouse.
An uneasy hybrid of science fiction and medical information, the movie follows the mood swings of Maria (Carmen Maura), a television journalist in her 40's who becomes pregnant after a one-night encounter with a man in a stalled elevator.


QVC Is Seen as Ready To Prove Bid Financing
QVC Network Inc., the home shopping service, may present Paramount Communications as early as today with proof of QVC's ability to pay a $9.8 billion bid for Paramount, two executives close to QVC said yesterday.
An executive close to the talks said Chemical Bank had agreed to assemble a syndicate of banks that would lend QVC $3 billion.


How Death Penalty Has a Deterrent Effect
To the Editor:
"In Texas, the Death Penalty Still Fails to Deter" (letter, Sept. 19) by David Leven requires an answer because it is wrongheaded in several respects and repeats errors that appear quite often.


For a 60's Radical, Temper Justice With Mercy; Our Vietnam Blunder
To the Editor:
You are to be commended for "Now Shake Hands With Vietnam" (editorial, Sept. 17).
This gesture is long overdue, especially now that we have an evaluation from our former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Adm.
William Crowe Jr., telling us that Vietnam was "a war in which neither America's survival nor its future was at stake." In my vocabulary that is close to admitting Washington was wrong to get involved in Indochina, especially with our absymal ignorance of the territory.


Magazine Honors Ramirez
Although outfielder Manny Ramirez has struggled with major league pitching since joining the Indians last month, he accomplished plenty in the minors this year.
Enough, in fact, to be named minor league player of the year yesterday by Baseball America magazine.
Ramirez, a 21-year-old Dominican immigrant who has become a hero in the Washington Heights section of upper Manhattan, won the Class AA Eastern League batting title while with Canton-Akron, where he hit .340 with 17 home runs with 79 runs batted in before his promotion to Class AAA Charlotte in mid-July.
In only 144 at-bats at Charlotte, he hit .317 with 14 homers and 36 r.b.i.


Quick &amp; Reilly Group reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27


Art in Review
Judith Joy Ross
James Danziger Gallery  130 Prince Street (near Wooster Street)  SoHo  Through Oct. 23
Like a post-office display of mug shots, Judith Joy Ross's portraits of visitors to the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington ring the walls of a small room in this gallery's new space.
The portraits, taken in 1983 and '84, have a shallow focus and purplish color that give their subjects a dreamy, intense air.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.38
3.10
3.58
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.91
2.58
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.03
3.04
2.73
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.95
4.94
5.75
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.02
5.99
7.31
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.04
7.08
8.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.47
5.45
6.36
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


CHRONICLE
Twenty-five years ago, JOHN WALL, an assistant United States attorney in Boston, prosecuted Dr.
BENJAMIN SPOCK, the Rev.
WILLIAM SLOANE COFFIN and three other defendants on charges that they conspired to counsel, aid and abet young men evading the draft during the Vietnam War.
Tomorrow evening, Mr.
Wall, now in private practice in Boston, will break bread with them at the annual Bill of Rights dinner of the Massachusetts Civil Liberties Union.
The organization will award the five -- Dr.
Spock, Mr.
Coffin, MITCHELL GOODMAN, MICHAEL FERBER and MARCUS RASKIN -- the Roger Baldwin Award, named for the founder of the national A.C.L.U.


Great American Management &amp; Investment Inc. (NSC) reports earnings for Year to July 31


A Consumer Picks Canadian Health Care
To the Editor:
In the debate over health care and the relative merits of the Canadian and American systems, the voice of the consumer is rarely heard.


Taylor Gives Coaches His Support
Lawrence Taylor talked today about The Program.
Not the movie, but the seemingly new and improved New York Giants.
He gave Coach Dan Reeves and his staff another stamp of approval.
Unlike last season, he doesn't foresee any player mutinies.
Unlike last year, when things started going bad and players began bad-mouthing the coaches at every turn, Taylor thinks that a sudden string of losses wouldn't trigger a rush of complaints.
Knock on wood.


All This Beautiful View Needs Is Someone to Enjoy It


American Relief Worker Killed in Bosnia


For a 60's Radical, Temper Justice With Mercy
To the Editor:
I was moved by your Sept. 16 and 17 front-page articles on the voluntary surrender to the police by Katherine Ann Power after 23 years underground as an anti-war radical wanted for bank robbery.
Your sympathetic study of how a middle-class college girl got caught up in the 1960's guerrilla youth struggle against an unending Vietnam War evoked an era.


COMPANY BRIEFS
QUANTUM CHEMICAL CORP., New York, said its shareholders had approved a $3.3 billion buyout by Hanson P.L.C.


Abroad at Home; The Price of Surrender
By rejecting terms for the dismemberment of their country, members of the Bosnian Parliament have given the West a last chance to understand the consequences of its policy there: a chance to draw back from folly and danger.
What is the policy?
For months now, however clothed, it has been to accept the ethnic partition of Bosnia.
Western publics as well as the Bosnians have been told in effect that partition is inevitable.


A User-Friendly Experiment in Justice; Community Court Aims at Saving Time and Money in Dealing With Minor Offenses
Justice has never looked so fabulous.
The new Midtown Community Court, a much-debated experiment in decentralizing the court system, welcomes visitors with a 35-inch television monitor that displays vital information about cases and an electronic suggestion box with pictograms.


Helene Curtis Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Dinkins on Giuliani: Accentuating the Negative
ON THE SCREEN
Color photograph of facade of the United States Justice Department with an inset of Rudolph W. Giuliani, followed by a series of unflattering black and white photos of Mr.
Giuliani.
As a male narrator's voice is heard over ominous music, blocks of text scroll on the screen repeating his words.
At the end, a final question freezes on the screen, with a big picture of Mr.
Giuliani and a small picture of Mayor David N. Dinkins, noting his campaign paid for the ad.
PRODUCER
Doak Shrum Harris Carrier Devine of Washington. THE SCRIPT
Mr.
Giuliani was the Associate Attorney General, the No. 3 post in Justice, in the early Regan Administration, and the department was widely criticized on the issues the ad cites.
In 1983, he testified before the House Judiciary Committee against a ban on armor-piercing bullets, arguing that it was impossible to cover all kinds capable of penetrating a bullet-proof vest "without being overinclusive," and proposed instead mandatory five-year sentences for the use of such bullets in the commission of Federal crimes.
In 1981, he called proposed gun-control laws that would impose waiting periods for handgun purchases "sensible and moderate" but more recently has said gun control laws are not especially effective.
Roughly 10 percent of the laywers Mr.
Giuliani hired as United States Attorney in Manhattan were black or Hispanic, comparable to the hiring in the city's Law Department at the time but roughly one-third the average level of hiring there since Mr.
Dinkins took office.
Many defense lawyers accused Mr.
Giuliani of excessive zeal in his years as United States Attorney, Federal judges several times cited him or his office for "overzealousness" and some of his most celebrated prosecutions ended in acquittals or reversals on appeal.
SCORECARD
This ad, unusually pointed for a low-key politician like Mr.
Dinkins, is part of his campaign's continuing effort to paint Mr.
Giuliani as a hard-hearted Reaganaut, unyielding and out of step with the liberal swing voters who are likely to help decide the election.
It spans issues that have long been liberal touchstones.
Virtually all the stands it cites predated the 1989 mayoral campaign, and were issues four years ago, but the Mayor's camp argues that Mr.
Giuliani's record is little known or understood by most New Yorkers and must be attacked.
The intent of the ad is to make the whole of Mr.
Giuliani's sometimes shifting stands greater than the sum of its parts, though voters may find some of his past positions only marginally relevant to the next Mayor's job.
TODD S. PURDUM


Corrections
A report in the Currents column in The Home Section yesterday, about three new furniture stores in SoHo, omitted the address of one of them, GVG Editions, and the price of a rug on sale there.
GVG is at 97 Wooster Street, near Spring Street, and the rug, shown in the photograph, costs $3,200.
The report also misspelled the name of the artist who painted the rug.
He is Michael Stromar.


Standoff Ends With Arrests And Freedom For Hostages
Two robbers, lying in wait outside a tiny bank branch in Park Slope, Brooklyn, accosted three bank workers as they arrived for work yesterday and held them hostage in a nerve-racking standoff with the police that lasted all day, law-enforcement officials said.
The impasse was resolved just before 8 P.M., when a security guard -- the last of the three hostages -- was released unharmed.
Police officers and F.B.I. agents finally relaxed, slapping one another's backs and shaking hands in congratulation.


COMPANY NEWS: Skirmish of Screen Savers; Toaster-Blasting Penguin And Parody Go to Court
Opus the Penguin, of "Outland" and "Bloom County" fame, is in trouble again.
This time for shooting at flying toasters.
The cartoonist Berke Breathed has moved his iconoclastic comic strip characters into the competitive world of computer screen savers.
The Opus 'N Bill program, distributed by Delrina Inc. of Toronto, parodies a number of sacred cows, including President Clinton; the chairman of Microsoft, Bill Gates, and even Socks, the Presidential cat.


Mademoiselle Names a New Editor in Chief
Elizabeth Crow, who resigned last month as president, chief executive and editorial director of Gruner &amp; Jahr USA Publishing, was named editor in chief of Mademoiselle yesterday.
She will replace Gabe Doppelt, who resigned Wednesday after differences with officials at Conde Nast Publications, the parent company, about how the magazine should evolve.
Ms.
Doppelt, a former editor at Vogue, was brought in a year ago today to enliven Mademoiselle and make it more relevant for hip women in their 20's.


It's Official: Becker Out of Davis Cup
BORIS BECKER confirmed yesterday that he won't play in Germany's Davis Cup final against Australia in December.
"I'll keep my fingers crossed for our team," he said.
Becker said last January that he didn't want to play in the event this year, but there had been speculation he might change his mind. (AP)


Hillhaven Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


On My Mind; New York to Clinton
President Clinton came to New York, carried out his political assignment and departed happy and smiling, leaving lots of the people who happen to live here angrier, surlier, more paranoid, more disgusted with politicians than ever.
In this city, that is not easy to do, in just one night's work.
Mr.
Clinton accomplished all this by talking about race and politics and telling only part of the story, the platitude part.
New Yorkers know the rest, know he knows, and he should avoid treating them as idiots.


Empire Blue Cross Shuns Rate Increase
Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield, New York State's largest health insurer, said yesterday that because of better-than-expected financial results, it would not impose a previously approved rate increase that was scheduled to go into effect at the beginning of next year.
The state Superintendent of Insurance, Salvatore R. Curiale, had cautioned Empire last month that he would sue if Empire tried to collect the increase, which was the last phase of a 25 percent series of increases granted last year.


Battle for The Post: Worker vs. Worker
After not publishing for three days, The New York Post came back to life as the paper's production unions broke ranks with the striking Newspaper Guild and returned to work.
The return of the Post signaled yet another victory on the labor front for Rupert Murdoch, who managed to isolate the Guild from The Post's other unions.
The production workers said they could not afford to side with the striking news, advertising and circulation workers because it could cost their jobs.


Whitman Says Florio Policies Led to Crime
Christine Todd Whitman's campaign for governor took on a sharper edge today as she attacked Gov.
Jim Florio for failing to stem the tide of violent crime in New Jersey.
At a news conference called to announce her own proposals for reforming New Jersey's criminal-justice system, Mrs.
Whitman said that not only had Mr.
Florio failed to halt violent crime, he had actually contributed to it.
Trying to link crime to the issue of economic growth, Mrs.
Whitman said Mr.
Florio's economic policies had cost New Jersey residents thousands of jobs.
The loss of jobs, she said, has, in turn, fostered the spread of crime.


Timothy Gordon; Actor, 71
Timothy Gordon, the founder of the S.R.O.
Hotel Touring Players and an actor who took theater to shelters for the homeless in New York City, died on Monday at Concord Hospital in Concord, N.H.
He was 71 years old and lived in Pembroke, N.H.
The cause was pneumonia, said his sister, Teresa Heywood of Salem, N.H.
Mr.
Gordon worked for many years as an actor in television soap operas and on theatrical tours.
He created the S.R.O. group in 1979, he said, to take to "people who have no magic, and actors have magic at their fingertips."





Hillary Clinton Raises Tough Question of Life, Death and Medicine
Hillary Rodham Clinton said today that she hoped the nation would engage in a serious discussion about what is appropriate medical care in cases where very expensive treatments do nothing for the patient's quality of life.
The First Lady, completing her testimony before the Senate Finance Committee -- her fifth Congressional hearing in three days on the President's health care proposals -- was prodded by Senator John C. Danforth, Republican of Missouri.
He asked her whether the system would have "somebody at some level in a position to say no."


Seduction and the Impossible Dream
The film version of "M. Butterfly" introduces a critically important new element into David Henry Hwang's play: the camera.
The artifice that was possible on stage, in Mr.
Hwang's daring, multi-faceted meditation on the love affair between a French diplomat and the Chinese transvestite he mistakenly believed was a woman, is simply out of the question on screen.
For some film makers that might constitute an insurmountable problem, but this "M. Butterfly" is the work of David Cronenberg ("Dead Ringers," "Scanners," "Naked Lunch").
Mr.
Cronenberg's idea of a dramatically viable situation is a man's metamorphosing into a giant fly ("The Fly").


Powell Retires With Presidential Medal of Freedom
Gen.
Colin L. Powell, who defined American post-cold-war military doctrine, retired yesterday at Fort Myer, Va.
His wife, Alma, watched as President Clinton gave him the award, his second.
Page A12. (Agence France-Presse)


Cuban Officials Don't Foresee a Thaw With the U.S. Anytime Soon
Despite recent agreements with Washington on immigration and narcotics matters, senior Cuban officials say they do not foresee any imminent advance in relations with the United States, which have been marked by open hostility for 34 years.
Instead, the Cuban officials say, they hope that by cooperating in areas of mutual interest, the Clinton Administration will eventually strike a more positive attitude toward Cuba as it gains a stronger political foothold for itself.


Jets Are Content to Leave The Bulldozing to Baxter
Boomer Esiason knows that if the Jets are going to beat the defensive-minded Philadelphia Eagles (3-0) on Sunday, they will almost certainly need to pick up short yardage in critical situations.
"Sometimes, that's the most difficult yardage to overcome," the Jets quarterback said today.
"Especially against a team like Philadelphia, which has so much talent on defense."


Lillian Vernon Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Colin Powell, Who Led U.S. Military Into a New Era, Resigns
Gen.
Colin L. Powell, who defined the United States' post-cold-war military doctrine, retired today as popular with America's armed forces as with the average American who never served in harm's way.
That appeal, which has drawn speculation that the final chapter in General Powell's soldier-statesman career may yet be written in the White House, derives from his commitment to the armed services as well as to his stature as the first black to serve as the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.


Dow Drops 11.18 Points to Close at 3,555.12
The stock market turned in a mixed session yesterday, after suffering a little when a series of relatively good economic reports caused bonds to slide and bond-market performance affected stocks.
Technology stocks continued a retreat begun this week after a strong run-up, but beyond that there were few clear indications of what investors think about the economy or about the markets.


Murdoch Gets The Post Out Despite Strike
Three days after a strike stopped its presses, Rupert Murdoch's New York Post roared back to life last night, with a new issue of the paper on New York streets and a new victory against newspaper unions on Mr.
Murdoch's resume.
With the cooperation of the leaders of The Post's production unions, whose members had spontaneously supported the striking employees of the New York Newspaper Guild on Monday, Mr.
Murdoch managed to isolate the striking union and demonstrate his dominance over the others.
Through the day, the production union leaders walked many of their members through the picket lines as the strikers yelled picket-line epithets like "scab" and "traitor."


Reed Wants Schintzius to Remain a Net
If Nets General Manager Willis Reed has his way, reserve center Dwayne Schintzius will not be headed to the Milwaukee Bucks in the next two weeks.
"You can't say it's a done deal, but you can say Willis Reed will recommend to our owners that we match the offer, probably at a meeting tomorrow," Reed said yesterday after suddenly being forced to put the Schintzius contract on the front burner when the Bucks submitted a three-year, $4.8 million offer sheet to the free agent late Wednesday.


Derailment in Bronx Snarls Morning Commute for Metro-North Passengers


Tasting and Toasting Connecticut Wines
IN Robert Frost's poem "Mending Wall," we're told that good fences, the historic boundaries of New Englanders' farmland and the expression of their personal reserve, make good neighbors.
In Connecticut vineyards, where the autumn foliage will soon go red and gold, the piled-up stones also symbolize the grit and patience that go into making good white wines, the state's strong suit.
Wines from Connecticut?
Absolutely.
And the best are as polished as the fieldstone walls at most of the five top wineries are crude.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a New Jersey trial in a 1992 strangling misstated the Italian word for "now," which the defendant reportedly said at the time of the slaying.
It is "adesso," not "odessa."


Harold Zarowitz, 70, An Expert on Diabetes
Dr.
Harold Zarowitz, a pioneer in the treatment of diabetes in the New York area, died on Tuesday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
Dr.
Zarowitz, a tive and resident of Brooklyn, was 70.
The cause of death was complications from diabetes, said his son, Ronald.
He said his father had been insulin-dependent from age 18.


Manufacturers Quit a Project For Pay Toilets
A plan to put 30 public toilets with advertising kiosks in New York City parks was hobbled yesterday when two leading operators withdrew their names from the search.
The operators, J. C. Decaux U.S.A. and Gannett Outdoor New York, both said that the city's limit of two ad kiosks for every toilet would not generate enough revenue for a private concessionaire to install and maintain the facilities.


Hillary Clinton Raises Tough Question of Life, Death and Medicine
Hillary Rodham Clinton said today that she hoped the nation would engage in a serious discussion about what is appropriate medical care in cases where very expensive treatments do nothing for the patient's quality of life.
The First Lady, completing her testimony before the Senate Finance Committee -- her fifth Congressional hearing in three days on the President's health care proposals -- was prodded by Senator John C. Danforth, Republican of Missouri.
He asked her whether the system would have "somebody at some level in a position to say no."


Guards Force Louvre to Close
Angered by plans for a new night shift, guards blocked the entrance to the Louvre today, leaving hundreds of people outside the glass pyramid that leads into the museum.
With an average of 13,000 people a day visiting the museum at this time of year, a spokesman, Christophe Monin, estimated that the protest cost the Louvre about $50,700.


U.N. Force to Rely on Haitians to Keep Order
Despite growing violence, the 1,300-member United Nations mission that is being sent to Haiti will rely on the Haitian military and police to maintain order.
Those groups have been held largely responsible for the politically motivated killings in the first place.
Clinton Administration officials and other Western diplomats say the troops and police officers who will make up the United Nations force will be lightly armed and will have no mandate to stop Haitian soldiers and paramilitary elements from committing atrocities.


Kosar Said to Sign for $27 Million
Cleveland quarterback BERNIE KOSAR, who has been benched part way through his last two outings, has received a $27 million, seven-year vote of confidence from the Browns' owner, ART MODELL, The Akron Beacon Journal reported yesterday.
The newspaper said Kosar agreed to a new contract worth an average of $3.85 million through 1999.
Under his previous contract, he was to receive $2.2 million this year, $2.25 million in 1994 and $2.5 million in 1995.


Rogue Cops
New Yorkers who live in safe, middle-class neighborhoods often don't understand how law-abiding citizens can fear and hate the police.
New Yorkers from violent, drug-infested neighborhoods understand quite well.
Renegade cops like Michael Dowd, Bernard Cawley and their fellow criminals in blue have worked mightily at teaching them.
In Brooklyn, Mr.
Dowd sold drugs and protected drug dealers, charging a princely fee of $8,000 a week.
In the Bronx, Mr.
Cawley made sport of bludgeoning people with lead-lined gloves.
His robber band of officers stole from dealers and sold the drugs and guns to other traffickers.


Arrow International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Steelers Make Haselrig Ineligible
Pittsburgh has placed Pro Bowl guard CARLTON HASELRIG on the National Football League's list of players with non-football injuries.
The move means he will be out indefinitely.
The team would not comment yesterday.


Rifkin Pleads Not Guilty In Deaths of Two Women
Joel Rifkin, the former landscaper from East Meadow, L.I., who told the police he had killed at least 18 women, pleaded not guilty today to killing two women whose bodies were found not far from the criminal courts building here.
Mr.
Rifkin, 34, head atilt and wearing a cowboy shirt, stood impassively during his arraignment before Judge John J. J. Jones Jr. of Suffolk County Court, who ordered him held without bail.


French Clothier Opening in New York
Another combatant has entered the suit war raging in midtown Manhattan.
Faconnable, the French men's apparel company, today opens its first store in the United States, on Fifth Avenue at 54th Street at a location formerly occupied by Gucci.
The store, a joint venture with Nordstrom's Inc., is just a few blocks from the new Barneys New York store on Madison Avenue and 61st Street, which opened recently and raised the stakes in the competition to clothe well-heeled professional men.


Gov. Weicker Exits in Good Form
Lowell Weicker is known for his risky positions and unpopular causes.
His decision not to stand for re-election as Governor of Connecticut will leave the state poorer -- and politics less lively.
As a three-term U.S.
Senator Mr.
Weicker made his mark early, as the prickly Republican on the special committee that investigated the Watergate break-in.
When he won the governorship as a political independent three years ago, he moved early and forcefully against public resistance to a state income tax.


Executive Leaves Rotando Agency
One of the top three executives at Rotando Lerch &amp; Iafeliece in Stamford, Conn., has left the agency, prompting its renaming as Rotando Partners.
John A. Lerch, 42, who joined Rotando in August 1991 as vice chairman and chief creative officer, left "to seek other opportunities," the agency announced yesterday in a news release.
In a telephone interview, Lynn Rotando, 50, chairman, president and chief executive, described Mr.
Lerch's departure as a "mutual decision."


RESULTS PLUS
FOOTBALL  Redmen Edge Marist  Anthony Russo, who gained 146 yards in 29 carries, scored on a 1-yard run with 2 minutes 38 minutes left in the game as St.
John's overtook Marist, 31-30, last night at Redmen's Stadium in Jamaica, Queens.
Sean Sharkey, St.
John's quarterback, threw four touchdown passes, three of them to Tom MacPherson.
Dan Phalen scored twice for Marist, first on a 27-yard reverse and then on a 10-yard pass from Brian McCourt.
The Redmen (3-1) had lost to Marist (2-2) in their previous three meetings.
U.C.L.A.
Romps: J. J. Stokes, held in check in the previous three games, caught five passes for 164 yards and three touchdowns and U.C.L.A. held Marshall Faulk to just 53 yards in a 52-13 victory over San Diego State last night in San Diego.
The Bruins (2-2) improved to 16-0-1 against San Diego State (3-2).
Faulk, the two-time national rushing leader and 1992 Heisman runner-up, was held to his second-lowest rushing total in three seasons, excluding two games cut short by injury. (AP) TENNIS  Eltingh Upsets Courier  Jacco Eltingh of the Netherlands pulled off a major surprise yesterday, upsetting Jim Courier, 6-4, 6-3, in the second round of the Malaysia Salem Open tennis championships in Kuala Lumpur.
The 23-year-old Eltingh, unseeded and ranked 75th in the world is known more for his doubles play, but he used an attacking style to eliminate the second-ranked player, a baseliner who has won four Grand Slam tournaments. (AP)


Senate Gives the Supercollider Another Chance at Survival
The Senate rejected efforts to cut off money for the Superconducting Supercollider today, giving the Texas-based proton smasher a breath of air, at least temporarily.
The high-energy physics project has been at the center of annual battles between Congressional deficit hawks and lawmakers who say the country should not sacrifice scientific research to cut the deficit.
The House voted to kill the project, 280 to 150, three months ago, and the Senate vote today, 57 to 42, may only slow its demise.


Weicker Rejects Re-election Bid In Connecticut
Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr., the one-time liberal Republican who built a career out of going his own way, announced today that he would not seek re-election to a second term.
Mr.
Weicker, who is 62 and has more than 15 months left in office, said he wanted more time with his family, less intrusion by the demands of campaigning, and, perhaps, a job in private industry.
He avoided the word "retirement" and vowed a vigorous final year in office.


Hard Lessons on Competitive Bids
If the recent scandals in the municipal market force more states and local governments to rely increasingly on competitive bidding in the sales of their tax-exempt bonds, it appears that Merrill Lynch &amp; Company may already have an edge on its Wall Street competitors.
This advantage is evident in the rankings of underwriters for the first three quarters of the year.
Merrill's lead in its competitive bidding victories was enough to beat Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company to the top slot, although Goldman was No. 1 in negotiated bids.


Wolverine World Wide reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 11


Box-Office Fraud Inquiry Is Stopped
The Manhattan District Attorney's Office announced yesterday that it was dropping its investigation into allegations of fraud at the box office of the Lunt-Fontanne Theater.
The investigation was started in March 1992, during the run of "Catskills on Broadway."
In a letter made public yesterday, the District Attorney's Office said that despite evidence that $200,000 had been stolen, "we were not able to develop legally sufficient evidence to prove beyond a reasonable doubt who committed the crime."


Hollywood Takes Bidding War in Stride (for Now)
Sherry Lansing, chairwoman of the motion picture group of Paramount Pictures, walked past a prominent producer the other morning on the studio lot.
The producer stopped and asked Ms.
Lansing the question that she has heard repeatedly in recent days.
"How's all this affecting you?" he asked.


Maxwell Laboratories Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Sports of The Times; A Baseball Czar Is Pure Mythology
IN "Baseball Without Me," an essay that appeared in last Sunday's New York Times, Fay Vincent made a case for the need for a baseball commissioner, a position that has not been filled since he was deposed in a bloodless coup by the owners one year ago.
The fact is, the commissioner of baseball had become like the Queen of England, but without a handbag.
And except for the pomp and ceremony, he hasn't been missed.


ESPN's Hip Kid Brother
ESPN2, the ostensibly hip, irreverent new companion to ESPN, starts tonight at 7:30 with the loosely structured, three-hour SportsNight news, update, interview, humor and commentary show.
SportsNight stars ESPN2's marquee personality, Keith Olbermann, who shifted from ESPN; Suzy Kolber, and either Mitch Albom or Bill Patrick.
It will be followed at 10:30 P.M. by Talk2, a one-hour talk show; Jim Rome will be the host.
ESPN2 hopes the brand name established by ESPN will help it snare an audience of viewers 18 to 34 years of age.
To lure that audience, ESPN2 is relying on college basketball, National Hockey League games, motor sports, roller hockey, volleyball, extreme sports, cutting-edge graphics and contemporary music.


From Hearings, Portraits of Disgrace
When the Mollen Commission hearings on police corruption are long over, its policy recommendations a matter of record, New York police lore will still be haunted by the young faces of the disgraced officers and the way their numbing, ugly admissions spilled out, one after the next.
Today, after a day's recess, more tales of brutality and carousing and drug use and indifference to basic police work are scheduled to resume.
Over three days of testimony so far, the former officers have lined up to offer their mantras on corruption.


Market Place; Some Baby Bells may be angling for a role in a Paramount deal.
WHILE Viacom and QVC Network race to line up money in their battle to buy Paramount Communications, all eyes are now turning toward the Baby Bells as potential partners.
Investment bankers and industry executives familiar with the battle say that several of the huge phone companies -- Southwestern Bell in particular, but also Bell Atlantic and BellSouth -- have all shown intense interest in the Paramount deal.


Reviews/ Film; Not-So-Tough Sledding From 4 Unlikely Olympians
The usual high-concept film is one that can be described in a sentence or two.
But "Cool Runnings" boils down to just three words: Jamaican bobsled team.
Since nothing about that phrase says "stroke of genius," there's reason to wonder what kind of film can have been spun out of it.
The answer: a cute, buoyant sports fantasy, jolted along by a reggae soundtrack and playfully acted by an appealing cast.
This new Disney comedy is slick, funny and warmhearted, very much in the old-fashioned Disney mode.
Though this film's vision of Jamaica is about as authentically Caribbean as Sebastian the crab, it is picturesque and bright.
In sunny Jamaica, a champion sprinter named Derice Bannock (Leon) joins forces with the comical Sanka Coffie (Doug E. Doug) and two other friends to form an unlikely Olympic team.
Derice, the bald-headed Yul Brenner (Malik Yoba) and Junior Bevil (Rawle D. Lewis) have all crossed paths, quite literally, in the Olympic trials for Jamaican runners.
And they have lost their chance to qualify as runners.


Clinton Says He's Met Pledge to Cut Staff by 25%
President Clinton said today that he had met his campaign pledge to reduce the White House staff by 25 percent, but Republican critics in Congress immediately said he had met his goal by using gimmicks.
White House officials said 1,005 employees were working at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue -- or 389 fewer than in November 1992, when Mr.
Clinton was elected.


Welfare Fingerprinting Becomes Law in Suffolk
Despite possible state opposition, Suffolk County Executive Robert J. Gaffney signed into law today a measure that will require fingerprinting for welfare recipients.
The law, the first of its kind in New York State, directs county welfare officials to seek bids immediately for a computer system that can store and compare fingerprint images to guard against recipients who try to collect benefits under more than one name.


U.N. Chief Warning U.S. Against Pullout Of Force in Somalia
Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali has warned the United States that a withdrawal of American troops from Somalia would destroy the United Nations peacekeeping operation there.
In a blunt letter delivered Monday to Secretary of State Warren Christopher, Mr.
Boutros-Ghali also said a Security Council resolution obliged him to continue to try to bring to justice a Somalia faction leader, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, despite the new American strategy to move away from the goal of capturing him and to focus instead on creating a political process that would allow an American withdrawal.


18 Inspectors Arrested on Bribe Charges
New York City investigators arrested 18 current and former plumbing inspectors yesterday on charges that they extorted dozens of payoffs from plumbing contractors in return for expedited inspections and quicker city approvals at construction sites.
Eleven inspectors were arrested yesterday when they reported to the Buildings Department for what they had been told would be a computer training session.
Colleagues looked on in disbelief as the inspectors were taken away about 9:30 A.M.
One plumbing inspector who was not arrested said the city was partly responsible for the problem.
"They create it," the inspector said.
"They put you in a position that basically is a no-win situation. They don't give you any increase in salary. Plumbers are making $55,000 a year and the city plumbing inspectors only get $28,000." Payoffs at 88 Work Sites
The inspectors, responsible for insuring that pipes, sprinklers and gas lines are safe in buildings being constructed or under renovation, were accused of taking dozens of payoffs and bribes from contractors since 1988, ranging from $50 to $1,000.
Prosecutors said they had evidence of payoffs at 88 work sites, including Police Headquarters, the World Trade Center, a condominium development on Staten Island and a row of three-family houses in Queens.
For the bribes, prosecutors said, the inspectors speeded approvals for plumbing work, arranging special appointments for inspections and taking pains to make sure the paper work was done quickly.
Because plumbing contractors are generally not paid until their work passes inspection, the contractors were willing to make illegal payments just to speed up the city bureaucracy, prosecutors said.
"These city inspectors were demanding payoffs to insure that their official duties were performed expeditiously," said the Manhattan District Attorney, Robert M. Morgenthau.
"Their power to extort payoffs lay in the fact that their signatures made the difference between getting paid or not getting paid."
The city's Investigation Commissioner, Susan E. Shepard, portrayed the bribes as part of endemic corruption in the plumbing industry.
She said plumbing contractors had come to expect that they would have to pay cash bribes to get city inspections done on time and without hassles.
Since the plumbing inspectors are required to be licensed plumbers, most come from the companies they regulate, creating a cozy breeding ground for corruption, she said. 'A Real Fraternity'
"There is a real fraternity here," she said.
"A fraternity that practices corruption almost as an art form. Corruption so deeply ingrained it has become common practice. No guns pointed. No strong-arm enforcement. People pay. The contractor gets his sign-off. The job continues. Everyone smiles."
About half of the city's 38 plumbing investigators were arrested in the sweep yesterday, crippling the department's ability to perform inspections.
In addition to 11 inspectors arrested at the department's headquarters, one was arrested at his office and five others were still being sought.
Six retired inspectors were arrested at their homes.
It was not the first time that corruption has cropped up in a building inspection program.
In 1991, a similar investigation resulted in the arrest of 14 construction inspectors in the Buildings Department on Federal charges of extorting more than $150,000 over a three-year period from contractors.
In 1992, city investigators arrested 30 taxi inspectors at the city's cab inspection center in Queens on charges that they accepted bribes to pass unsafe taxis.
The inspectors arrested yesterday were charged with multiple counts of grand larceny, extortion, receiving bribes and receiving unlawful gratuities.
The most serious charge, grand larceny, carries a maximum penalty of 15 years in prison.
Ms.
Shepard said the 18-month inquiry uncovered no evidence that the inspectors overlooked or approved work that would create hazards.
Among those indicted were the chief plumbing inspectors for Queens and Brooklyn and the acting chief inspector in Manhattan, Ms.
Shepard said.
The chiefs were paid between $300 and $500 per inspection and in a single instance, $1,000, for a fast approval, augmenting their income by as much as $25,000 a year, she said.
The assistant inspectors and line inspectors were collecting about $5,000 a year in illegal payments, she said.
Mayor David N. Dinkins said he had submitted two bills to the City Council that would replace city-paid inspectors with private inspectors supervised by a board of city officials.
He also said the Buildings Department had taken some steps to discourage corruption: computerizing inspection schedules to make sure the sites are visited within three days after a request and rotating inspectors from borough to borough to break down personal relationships with plumbing contractors.


President Moves to Loosen Grip Of White House on Regulations
President Clinton today gave Federal agencies greater authority to write regulations on pollution, safety, business practices and the like without White House intervention, saying his order would "eliminate improper influence, secrecy and delay."
The move is meant to reverse the pattern under Presidents George Bush, Ronald Reagan and Jimmy Carter, who had ordered their staffs to scrutinize and frequently to overrule the agencies, often with an eye to making regulations more palatable to business.


Schnellenberger Renews Declaration of Independence
Howard Schnellenberger has never been one to pass up a challenge.
He took over the University of Miami's floundering football program in 1979 at a time when the school was considering scrapping football.
Five years later he led the Hurricanes to a national championship.
In 1985, Schnellenberger accepted the head coaching job at the University of Louisville and declared that the program "was on a collision course with the national championship."


New Jersey Steel Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


For a 60's Radical, Temper Justice With Mercy; Some Paralegal!
To the Editor:
Your coverage of the surrender of Katherine Ann Power resurrected the name of Bernadine Dohrn, whom you identify as now acting as a legal assistant, after her unsuccessful application for admission to the bar.
Some paralegal!


Yanks' Peaks and Valleys of '93
lthough it might not seem like a successful season now because the Yankees are still absorbing the sting of being bounced from the pennant race, they actually played stellar baseball in 1993.
A team that was not supposed to match the Blue Jays matched them until September and is likely to finish second.
That will depend on how the Yankees fare in their final three games, against Detroit starting tonight at the Stadium.
Here are some of the reasons why the team soared and then struggled:
THE PITCHER: JIMMY KEY Crafty.
Consistent.
Commanding.
From his first spring training start in Vero Beach, Fla., to his last start in Baltimore Wednesday, Key was a consummate professional.
With a career-best 18 victories, he might have been favored for the Cy Young Award if relievers had not mishandled six games in which he had left with a lead.
"I don't know what we would have done without him," Manager Buck Showalter said.
Probably lost a lot more often.


Black Cleric Says Giuliani Is Attracting 'Fascist' Ilk
As Mayor David N. Dinkins stood at his side, a prominent black minister charged yesterday that the Mayor has been falsely branded a "murderer" for the death of a rabbinical student in Crown Heights and that these "fascist" elements have gravitated toward his rival, Rudolph W. Giuliani.
"Elements that can best be described as fascist seem to have grown up and flowered around Mr. Giuliani," said the Rev.
William A. Jones, senior pastor at Bethany Baptist Church in Bedford-Stuyvesant.
He was acting as spokesman for the Baptist Pastors Churches Union, which represents 64 churches in Brooklyn and Queens.


Reviews/ Film; The Opportunist School Of Hotel Management
"For Love or Money" begins by having some fun with the notion of Michael J. Fox as Mr.
Big, riding around Manhattan in a long white limousine and indulging in a big-ticket shopping spree.
This is Mr.
Fox as no one particularly wants to see him: cold, aloof and corrupted by power.
He is much more at home when he is revealed to be Doug Ireland, the sneaky, quick-witted concierge at a grand New York hotel, working hard to parlay each guest's needs into a golden opportunity of his own.
"Don't confuse yourself with all these small denominations," he tells an out-of-towner (Michael Tucker) who tries to give him a $5 tip in gratitude for a big favor.
"You wait until I feel like the best friend you ever had. Then you give me a tip so big it feels like passing a kidney stone." Doug Ireland, a dyed-in-the-wool cynic who describes himself as "a genie in a suit," should probably do something to change his life, but the viewer will wind up hoping that he doesn't.
Doug's Machiavellian hotel-management tricks are much more gratifying than his inevitable decision to clean up his act.


Suspect Says He Was Unaware of Strangling Plot
He marched to the witness stand with the confident stride of a soldier.
Then, in calm, self-assured tones, James P. Wanger told a packed courtroom about his religious faith, his plans to enter the Marines and his complete ignorance of a plot to kill his old friend Robert A. Solimine Jr.
But by the end of the day, the 19-year-old Clifton, N.J., man accused of garroting Mr.
Solimine on Feb. 16, 1992, was continually repeating the prosecutor's questions before haltingly answering.
And Mr.
Wanger seemed unable to say definitively where he was around the time the authorities say Mr.
Solimine was strangled.


Insurers Fear They'd Be the Big Losers in a World of Managed Health Care
Since the President gave his health care speech last week, employees have lived with fluttery stomachs in the offices of the Bartmon Shapiro insurance agency, a thriving business high above Central Park South whose windows offer panoramic views of the park and the midtown Manhattan skyline.
Under President Clinton's health care plan, the profession of health insurance agent could virtually cease to exist.
"People are very, very nervous," said Joel Shapiro, whose 17-year-old company employs 10 people.
"But we are going to have to adapt. We are going to have to change."


The Spoken Word
MICROBREWERY TALK, Nacho Mama's Burritos, 2867 Broadway at 111th Street.
Pete Slosberg, brewer of Pete's Brewing Company, the brewer's of Pete's Wicked Ale, discusses microbrewed beers in the United States, with a tasting of 29 microbrewed beers.
Saturday at 10:30 P.M.
Free admission, but a charge for the beer.
Information: (212) 666-3052.
"WRITER'S HARVEST: THE NATIONAL READING," Universalist Church, Central Park West and 76th Street.
Russell Baker, Fred Busch, Gloria Naylor and Grace Paley read from their work; first of Share Our Strength's national readings to raise money to fight hunger.
Tonight at 8 P.M.
Admission: $10.
Information about this and the national events: (202) 393-2925.
OPERA LECTURE, Kaplan Penthouse, Rose Building, 70 Lincoln Center Plaza, West 65th Street and Amsterdam Avenue.
Bridget Paolucci discusses Puccini's "Tosca." Sponsored by the Metropolitan Opera Guild.
Saturday at 11:45 A.M.
Admission: $8.
Information: (212) 769-7028.
"PLACE AND CYBERSPACE IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY," New Museum of Contemporary Art, 583 Broadway, at Prince Street, SoHo.
Saskia Sassen, co-curator of the "Trade Routes" exhibition, lectures.
Tomorrow at 2 P.M.
Admission: $3.50; $2.50 for students and the elderly; children under 12 free.
Information: (212) 219-1355.
"HAPPY HOUR," Biblio's, 317 Church Street, TriBeCa.
David Manning and Angela Lukacin read from their work.
Tonight, 6 to 8 P.M.
Information: (212) 334-6990.
READING, the Poetry Project, Second Avenue and 10th Street, East Village.
Paul Williams, author of "Rock and Roll: The 100 Best Singles," and Cindy Lee Berryhill read from their work.
Tonight at 10:30 P.M.
Admission: $6.
Information: (212) 674-0910.
MOLLY IVINS, 92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue.
The political humorist reads from her new collection, "Nothing but Good Times Ahead." Sunday at 8:15 P.M. $15.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


Art in Review
Hannelore Baron
Barbara Mathes Gallery  41 East 57th Street, Manhattan  Through Oct. 16
In the last few years, there have been several shows of the art of Hannelore Baron (1926-1987), including one at the Guggenheim Museum, and the latest may be the best of them.
The story of Baron's escape from Nazi Germany as a child is by now familiar, as are the small collages and constructions she produced over the course of several decades in America, work made for herself and without regard for the marketplace or public display.


Art in Review
Maureen Gallace
Nicole Klagsbrun Gallery  51 Greene Street (near Broome Street)  SoHo  Through Oct. 16
Maureen Gallace's charming little paintings mine the unlikely overlap between Fairfield Porter (or early Edward Hopper) and Allan McCollum.
Their red barns and white houses nestle comfortably and comfortingly in fields of green against trees of darker green, but they are strangely geometric, devoid of doors or windows or any signs of life.
They are also rendered a bit awkwardly, almost naively: the colored planes of the buildings never quite form convincing volumes; the greenery has a filled-in generality.
Above all, as in Mr.
McCollum's work, the motifs repeat with only minor adjustments in painting after painting.


Acton Corp.
Shares of the Acton Corporation surged earlier this week after the insurance company said last Friday that it had agreed to sell its cable television assets.
The stock had languished around $5 since the spring, but jumped to $15.875 by Wednesday's close.
It settling back yesterday, however, easing 21 percent in value.


Corrections
An article on Monday about women who seek asylum in the United States misstated the year of the military coup against President Jean-Bertrand Aristide of Haiti in some copies.
It was in 1991, not 1992.


C.I.A. Releases Files on Korea and Cold War
A document released by the Central Intelligence Agency today as it began to unseal its archives from the cold war era shows that American intelligence agencies failed to recognize that the Korean War was imminent six days before it began.
Despite a buildup of North Korean troops along the 38th parallel, a formal estimate dated June 19, 1950, and approved by the then Director of Central Intelligence, Gen.
Walter Bedell Smith, said an invasion of South Korea by North Korea had been put off in favor of a campaign of propaganda and subversion.


People
*
Lori Burgess was named to the vacant position of advertising director at Seventeen magazine, New York.
She was previously associate publisher at YM magazine, New York.


For Children
Apple Picking
Baiting Hollow Orchard  Fresh Pond Avenue, off Route 25  Baiting Hollow, L.I.
(516) 929-6439  The Milk Pail Orchard  Mecox Road, at Horse Mill Lane
Water Mill, L.I.
(516) 537-2565  Recommended for all ages
Before we went picking, my son and I had agreed that we could live happily without apples.
But that was before an afternoon of orchard-hopping and tasting apples that oozed autumn; before our indifference turned to ardor.
My son ate six different kinds, exulting over them as if they were liquid gold. (Though he's refused apples since.)


Books of The Times; Los Angeles Middle Agers Fighting the Old Ennui
Black Swans
By Eve Babitz
211 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $22.
To get an idea of how Eve Babitz writes, think of Joan Didion crossed with Cynthia Heimel.
To get an idea of what the heroines of her stories are like, think of Nathanael West's Miss Lonelyhearts crossed with the Cosmo girl.


Insurers Fear They'd Be the Big Losers in a World of Managed Health Care
Since the President gave his health care speech last week, employees have lived with fluttery stomachs in the offices of the Bartmon Shapiro insurance agency, a thriving business high above Central Park South whose windows offer panoramic views of the park and the midtown Manhattan skyline.
Under President Clinton's health care plan, the profession of health insurance agent could virtually cease to exist.
"People are very, very nervous," said Joel Shapiro, whose 17-year-old company employs 10 people.
"But we are going to have to adapt. We are going to have to change."


Inside Art
The Getty and the Graces
Once the J. Paul Getty Museum sets its sights on an important work of art, it doesn't give up.
It's been five years since the museum in Malibu, Calif., first tried to buy Antonio Canova's "Three Graces," a nearly five-and-a-half-foot-tall marble statue of Venus's handmaidens commissioned by John Russell, the sixth Duke of Bedford, in 1814.
And it's still trying to clinch the deal.
What has held up the sale is the British Government's refusal to grant an export license.
The Getty first entered into negotiations to buy the sculpture in 1989 and was turned down in 1990 because of a stipulation that works of art considered part of Britain's national heritage could leave the country only if no public or private parties in the country wanted to buy the works. (Earlier, only public institutions had to turn down a work of art for an export license to be granted.)


PRIVATIZING URGED TO IMPROVE ROADS
The Federal Government's top highway official proposed today that private businesses operate portions of the 42,500-mile Interstate System, charging tolls and providing money to repair decaying highways and bridges.
"We believe we have got to get the private sector involved in financing highway improvements that are necessary," said the official, Rodney E. Slater, administrator of the Federal Highway Administration, in his first meeting with reporters since President Clinton appointed him in June.


A Search for Direction at Apple
Perhaps the clearest indicator of the change and uncertainty at Apple Computer Inc. lately is the way Bill Fernandez, the software engineer who became the company's first employee in 1976, spends his time these days.
He reads the Help Wanted ads in the newspaper.
Mr.
Fernandez is among the 2,500 people Apple has laid off since July, when the company reported a $188.3 million third-quarter loss and announced a reorganization intended to reverse its plummeting value in the stock market.


First Cash Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to July 31


NO OUTSIDE REVIEW IN THE BROWN CASE
Attorney General Janet Reno said today that she would not appoint an independent prosecutor to investigate accusations by a Vietnamese businessman that Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown agreed to be paid $700,000 in exchange for his help in lifting a trade embargo against Vietnam.
Ms.
Reno said that the case might have warranted the appointment of an independent prosecutor under the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 but that the law, which established a procedure for judicially appointed prosecutors, expired in December 1992 and had not been reinstated by Congress.


State Unveils Its Plan For Yanks in Manhattan
New York State unveiled its plan yesterday to keep the Yankees from jumping to New Jersey, proposing a $319 million, 50,000-seat stadium and a $211 million, 7,000-space parking garage that would be built on the Long Island Rail Road storage yards south of the Jacob Javits Convention Center.
Short of keeping the team in the Bronx at Yankee Stadium, the state believes that a sleek new waterfront ball park west of midtown is the last, best way to keep the Yankees from moving to the New Jersey Meadowlands.
Privately, state officials are convinced that the Yankees will leave the Bronx.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  INDIA QUAKE KILLS THOUSANDS  The most devastating earthquake in India in over 50 years rocked a remote central region, killing thousands.
Twelve thousand people were feared trapped amid rubble.
A1  The Indian subcontinent and the Asian landmass collided.
A10


Micron Technology Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 2


Executive Changes
DEAN FOODS CO., Franklin Park, Ill., a dairy and specialty foods processor and distributor, named Thomas L. Rose, president and chief operating officer, succeeding William D. Fischer, who will retire at the end of next month.
ENVIRONMENTAL ELEMENTS CORP., Baltimore, an air pollution control systems supplier, named Edward H. Verdery executive vice president and chief operating officer.


On Stage, and Off
Mr. Martin's Play
Steve Martin, the comedian and film actor, is to make his debut as a playwright this month when his comedy-fantasy, "Picasso at the Lapin Agile," opens a limited run at the Steppenwolf Theater Company in Chicago.
As the inaugural production of Steppenwolf's new studio theater space, upstairs from its main theater, the play is set in 1904 at a Parisian cafe, the Lapin Agile, where Pablo Picasso and Albert Einstein engage each other and several passers-by in discussions about art, relativity and the like.
"I started writing it two years ago when I was shooting a movie in Boston," Mr.
Martin said from Chicago, where the play is now in rehearsal for an Oct. 23 opening.
"I don't know why."


USA Classic Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


5,307 Bid Adieu Triumphantly
On April 5, the Mets won the first game of 1993 at Shea Stadium.
Last night, the Mets won the final game of 1993 at Shea.
If only there were some way to forget the extended bit of unpleasantness in between.
Eric Hillman absorbed 10 hits to gain his second triumph of the season and the Mets beat the St.
Louis Cardinals, 3-2.


No Headline
"If anybody looks on this individual as a lame duck on a pond, you better think twice because you're going to find something coming out of Jurassic Park at you." -- LOWELL P. WEICKER JR., announcing he won't seek a second term as Governor of Connecticut.  [ A1:1. ]


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The Partnership for a Drug-Free America accentuates the positive in a new campaign.
THE Supreme Court, it is said, follows the election returns.
So, too, it seems, does the Partnership for a Drug-Free America.
The partnership, a seven-year-old volunteer coalition of advertising agencies and media companies, is about to introduce a series of television commercials, aimed at inner-city youth, that takes a strikingly different tack than was popular during the Reagan-Bush era.
Gone are the negative strategies typified by the slogan "Just say no" -- hard-sell castigations of drug use, infused with menace and melodrama, that perfectly complemented Presidential rhetoric of a "war on drugs."


The Limp Blimp Bashing Castro
Will Congress finally ground the blimp in the Florida Keys that relays TV programs to Cuba, where they get the most dismal ratings?
The balloon is operable only in fair weather, its signal is easily jammed by the Castro regime and its broadcasts are beamed only from 3:30 A.M. to 6 A.M. to avoid violating global agreements.
Yet since 1990 the U.S. has spent $67 million -- $60,000 a day -- to transmit Spanish-language news and entertainment shows, because neither Congress nor successive Presidents wanted to wrestle with an aggressive anti-Castro exile faction.


V.M.I.'s Unacceptable Remedy
For years the Virginia Military Institute claimed the right to offer its uniquely stressful, oppressive martial education program to men only.
Then last year the Federal Court of Appeals in Richmond, ruling in a suit by the Justice Department, held that whatever the program's virtues, the state institution must offer them to women as well.
Constitutionally speaking, that was the easy part, and the Supreme Court summarily denied V.M.I.'s petition for review.
The Court of Appeals, in a separate pronouncement that the high court also did not review, said Virginia could integrate, establish parallel programs for both sexes or abandon state funding of V.M.I.


U.S. WARNS BEIJING AS PROBLEM GROWS
In an effort to salvage the deteriorating relationship between the United States and China, Secretary of State Warren Christopher warned the Foreign Minister of China that his country risks losing favorable trade status with the United States if it does not make quick progress on human rights and arms issues, senior Administration officials said today.
Mr.
Christopher raised a number of worrisome developments in Chinese behavior since the Administration conditionally extended most favored nation status to China for a one-year period, which ends in May.


Chiefs' Carter Involved in a Shootout
Kansas City cornerback DALE CARTER was arrested and released following a shootout outside a nightclub early Thursday, authorities said.
Carter and two passengers were in a truck about 1:30 A.M. local time when they were fired upon.
One of the men in the truck returned fire.
No one was injured.


A New Ferry Out of L.I. May Yet Find A Developer
An advisory committee of officials from New York and Connecticut has tentatively backed a developer to operate a high-speed ferry between Shoreham, L.I., and New Haven.
But some committee members and one of the principals of the company, the Long Island Sound Shuttle Limited Partnership of East Haven, are afraid that a list of requirements outlined by the committee could kill the project or lead to significant delays.


Excerpts From Report on the Waco Raid
Following are excerpts from the Treasury Department's report on the raid by agents of the the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms on David Koresh's compound near Waco, Tex.
Among the principals cited in the report were Phillip J. Chojnacki, special agent in charge of the bureau's Houston office, and Charles D. Sarabyn, assistant special agent in Houston.
Although the raid on the Branch Davidian Compound had originally been set for March 1, 1993, no one had even started to draft the mandatory documentation of the raid plan by Feb. 23, 1993, when  [ Acting Special Agent in Charge ]  Dartell Dyer (Kansas City) arrived in Waco and was assigned to be the support coordinator for the operation.
Dyer's past military service led him to assume that there was a detailed written raid plan, but, when he asked the raid planners for a copy he was advised that none existed.
Thereafter, Dyer and agent William Krone took it upon themselves to produce one, even though they started with little knowledge about the work of the tactical planners.


Giving Addicts Clean Needles Cuts Spread of AIDS, U.S. Study Finds
The Federal Government's first comprehensive study of whether giving clean needles to addicts can help prevent the spread of AIDS has concluded that it does and that the Government should finance a significant expansion of such programs.
The Federal panel reviewed programs in the United States, Canada and Europe, in which drug abusers can turn in a used needle and get a fresh, sterile one.
The chief object of these programs is to end the drug abuser's need to share syringes that may have become contaminated with blood carrying the AIDS virus.


Nicaragua Boomlet: Martinez for President
A new political party in Nicaragua is waging a petition drive to place the name of Montreal Expos pitcher DENNIS MARTINEZ on the 1996 presidential ballot, and Martinez has hinted that he may be interested.
Saying that he was "chosen by providence to change the path of history," the new party, the Third Democratic Way, is trying to collect the 50,000 signatures needed to place Martinez's name on the ballot.
News of the drive appeared on the front pages of Nicaraguan newspapers yesterday.


Corrections
The Advertising column in Business Day on Sept. 17, about a promotional campaign by Barneys New York for its new midtown store, misstated the number of the company's stores in New York City.
It is three -- including a small outlet in the World Trade Center -- not two.


Florence Small Gaynor, 72, Dies; First Black Female Hospital Chief
Florence Small Gaynor, the first black woman to head a major teaching hospital in the United States, died on Sept. 16 at Christiana Medical Center in Newark, Del.
She was 72.
She died unexpectedly after a sudden brain hemorrhage, said her son, Wardell.


G.M.'s Canada Contract Sends Shares Falling
Shares of the General Motors Corporation slid today in heavy trading as investors reacted to news of a tentative labor contract reached Wednesday night by G.M. and the Canadian Automobile Workers.
The stock closed down $2.125 a share at $41.75.
It was the most actively traded stock on the New York Stock Exchange, with 7.8 million shares changing hands.


Hillenbrand Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


An Obstinate Short Slips Away Into a Draw
The strategy Gary Kasparov used against Nigel Short in Game 11 of their world championship match yesterday in London was to pit an advantage in mobility and space against one of material.
But Short defended obstinately and brought the game to a draw by exchanging off everything that might do him harm.
The score is now 8 to 3 in Kasparov's favor, and he is inching steadily toward the 12 1/2 points that will give him the $1.43 million winner's share of the $2.55 million prize in the 24-game series.


Review/Art; A New Painter's Way With Image and Text
There are probably too many paintings in Christian Schumann's first solo show at the Postmasters Gallery in SoHo.
There is so much going on in any one of them that initially it's hard to look at more than a few square inches at a time.
But Mr.
Schumann's teeming images, grafted together with singular precision, are one of the brighter spots in the season's first round of exhibitions, and cause for optimism about the state of painting.
Mr.
Schumann is very young; at 23 he has lived in New York for only about two years. (He was born in Rhode Island, reared in Texas and educated at the San Francisco Art Institute.) He's also very talented, possessed of a graphic ability and a sense of color and composition that is, in its own sometimes oppressive way, unerring and authentic.


Dan Rather Scolds TV News As Pandering to Get Ratings
In an unusual condemnation of television news by one of its stars, Dan Rather, the CBS anchor, told a group of news directors that "we all should be ashamed of what we have and have not done, measured against what we could do."
Mr.
Rather made his remarks Wednesday to the Radio and Television News Directors Association at a meeting in Miami.
The remarks were widely circulated yesterday among the three major networks' news divisions in New York.


Go Video Inc. reports earnings for Year to July 31


McCann-Erickson Shifts Executives
McCann-Erickson Worldwide announced a series of executive changes yesterday after hiring James R. Heekin earlier this week for the new position of president of McCann North America in New York.


Art in Review
Ed van der Elsken
Howard Greenberg Gallery  120 Wooster Street (near Prince Street)  SoHo  Through Oct. 16
The Dutch photographer Ed van der Elsken, who died in 1990, specialized in gritty pictures of the underworld of the Netherlands, Paris, Tokyo and elsewhere.
This show, the first presentation of his work in the United States since 1955, includes a selection of pictures from throughout his career.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Carlton Communications P.L.C., London, is offering in the United States six million shares of exchangeable capital securities priced at $25 a share to yield 8 percent through underwriters led by Merrill Lynch.
The securities, which are exchangeable by the company into cumulative dollar-denominated 9 percent preference chares, are noncallable for five years.
The issue is rated A-3 by Moody's and A- by S.&amp; P. *
Merrill Lynch &amp; Co., New York, is offering $150 million of 15-year 6 1/4 percent notes due 2008 and priced at 98.937 to yield 6.361 percent through Merrill Lynch.
The noncallable notes are rated A-1 by Moody's, AA- by Duff &amp; Phelps, and A+ by S.&amp; P.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Science Times on Tuesday about research showing that protecting the habitat of one group of species may not protect others misstated, in one reference, the size of the tracts studied.
They were about 39 square miles, not 6.


Finalists for Book Awards
"The Shipping News," by E. Annie Proulx, and "United States: Essays 1952-1992," by Gore Vidal, are among the 15 books of fiction, nonfiction and poetry chosen as finalists for the 1993 National Book Awards, the award's administrators announced yesterday.
The three winners of the prizes, to be announced on Nov. 17, will each receive $10,000.
The awards, administered by the National Book Foundation, are given for books written by American citizens and published in the United States between Dec. 1, 1992, and Nov. 30, 1993.
The Foundation said that this year, 149 publishers submitted a record 609 books for consideration.


Art in Review
Louise Fishman
Robert Miller Gallery  41 East 57th Street, Manhattan  Through Oct. 16
One becomes accustomed to Louise Fishman's latest abstractions in the way one acclimates to seeing objects in the dark.
Her large canvas called "Mars" is at first a forbidding wall of black and gray wrapped in a grid whose painted lines are like straps of black leather.
Then the darkness yields up patches of red and flecks of white like light dimly glinting on the edges of the straps.
This yielding up is a beautiful, slow process, and it means that "Mars" intensifies in the variety and impact of its effects.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL REPORT
Pride Bowl
This event has meaning for John Culver and Keith Smith, key players for Montclair State and both from Newark.
The Pride Bowl, now in its 15th year, benefits after-school programs within the city of Newark and has reached out to hundreds of youths including Culver, the fullback, and Davis, a cornerback, for the Red Hawks.
In this year's Pride Bowl, Montclair State will be the host to Fairleigh Dickinson-Madison at Sprague Field with the kickoff scheduled for 7 P.M.
A record crowd of 7,000 is anticipated.
The Red Hawks are off to an impressive start with two victories over upstate New York powers, Cortland and Ithaca, while the Jersey Devils are undefeated after three games, somewhat to the astonishment of longtime Coach Bill Klika.


Supreme Court Faces a Docket Heavy With Unfinished Rights Cases
The Supreme Court's docket for the term that begins on Monday is sparse in numbers but heavy with the unfinished business of past years, particularly in the area of civil rights.
The newest Justice, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, who made her mark as a pioneer for women's rights in arguing landmark sex discrimination cases before the Court, has arrived to find an unusually wide array of discrimination cases already accepted for argument.
Most raise questions that the Court itself has left unanswered in earlier rulings.


Report on Initial Raid on Cult Finds Officials Erred and Lied
Law-enforcement officials botched virtually every aspect of their plan to capture David Koresh, the leader of the heavily armed cult near Waco, Tex., then misled investigators and Congress about their mistakes, according to the Clinton Administration's first official assessment of the affair.
In a brutally detailed report of mistakes and mendacity in the top ranks of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, the Treasury Department offered a wealth of new information today about one of the deadliest law-enforcement operations in modern times.
It is a devastating critique of an obscure Treasury agency already teetering on the verge of extinction under an Administration proposal to hand its duties to the Internal Revenue Service and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.


Edwin Crawford, 68; Ran Counties Group
Edwin L. Crawford, executive director of the New York State Association of Counties since 1977, died on Monday at Our Lady of Lourdes Hospital in Binghamton, N.Y.
He was 68 and had lived in Binghamton and in Brewster, Mass.
The cause of his death was prostate cancer, his family said.
Mr.
Crawford was a leader in efforts to modernize county governments through the United States.
A longtime resident of Broome County, he led a drive for an elected county executive there, and held the post himself for eight years, elected initially in 1968.


For a 60's Radical, Temper Justice With Mercy; Too Much Tolerance
To the Editor:
In "The Prodigal Daughter," your Sept. 18 editorial on the surrender of Katherine Ann Power, you reach the appalling conclusion that the behavior of Ms.
Power and others like her could perhaps be considered "logical" in the context of the 1960's.


Settlement for $371 Million By Prudential Unit Expected
Prudential Securities has agreed to pay about $371 million to settle Federal and state charges of securities law violations stemming from its sales of money-losing limited partnerships during the 1980's, people with knowledge of the talks said yesterday.
Under terms of the deal with regulators, reached after almost a year of negotiations, Prudential would pay about $345 million to settle Federal charges, and about $26 million for state charges.


CML Group reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Price Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


5 Key Nations Urge Prudence In Setting Peacekeeping Goal
The five permanent Security Council members said today that the demands being made on the United Nations exceeded its capabilities and that proposed new peacekeeping operations must be reviewed very carefully.
The statement, issued after a meeting here tonight with Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali, showed that Britain, France, Russia and China all now back the cautious approach President Clinton spelled out toward the explosive growth of peacekeeping operations in his address Monday to the General Assembly.
What the Ministers Want
The foreign ministers of the five members, whose governments have a veto over Council decisions, said a gap existed between the "demands on the United Nations and its capabilities." They affirmed that "new commitments" should be made only after "fundamental questions" are resolved regarding the objectives of a proposed force, the resources available, the risks to personnel and the expected duration of the operation.


OFFICIALS EXPECT HARD FLU SEASON
Warning that a severe flu season is at hand, Federal public health officials said yesterday that they were urging older Americans and others at risk to get flu shots right away.
"This year's flu, the Beijing strain, is expected to hit very hard," the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Donna E. Shalala, said at a news conference in Washington.
She said 10,000 to 45,000 Americans die from influenza every year, mostly older people who could have been saved by flu shots.


Review/Art; Channels to the Sacred, From Africa to the West
"Face of the Gods: Art and Altars of Africa and the African Americas," at the Museum for African Art in SoHo, is a show of both great ambition and ambitions fulfilled.
Visually and emotionally stirring, it not only documents a wide assortment of crucial connections between African and African-American religious art.
It also imaginatively explores the sensitive issue of how non-Western sacred art can be displayed in a secular Western context.
Organized by the art historian Robert Farris Thompson, the exhibition includes more than a dozen assemblages, some of astonishing complexity, that are used as vehicles for spiritual communication or worship in African and African-derived New World religions.
They range from a 19th-century wooden figure pierced by metal instruments, from the old Kongo region of Central Africa, to a full-scale tree festooned with plastic bottles, a sight familiar in black neighborhoods in the South of the United States, to a closetlike African-Cuban altar to the spirit Sarabanda, created and sanctified for the exhibition by the priest and ritual artist Felipe Garcia Villamil, who lives in the Bronx.


Restaurants
"Have some bread," says Emily Rapp.
"It's just out of the oven." You have just settled into one of the cozy seats at Etats-Unis, and in her hand is a bowl containing warm, slightly crusty bread so delicious that your slice vanishes before everyone at the table has been served.
Then she hands you a menu.
This is handwritten each day and comes wrapped up in one of the quirkiest, most personal wine lists in the city.
The little package also has a separate listing of "interesting wines for tonight's menu," with the notes of an inspired taster.
If you show any enthusiasm for wine, Ms.
Rapp will reappear with extra information.
"My brother was interested in your wine choices," she said one night, "and would like to suggest that you try the Hugel Pinot Noir."


Heads Lean to Lewis, But Hearts Are Bruno's
The bookshop window along St.
James Street has a new display this week: dueling copies of Lennox Lewis's and Frank Bruno's autobiographies.
The Lewis book, just out in hardback, sells for $:15, or $22.68; the Bruno book, just out in paperback, sells for $:4.99, or $7.54.
"We are selling more Lewis actually," Glen James, a middle-aged woman with kindly eyes, said from behind the cash register.
"But my heart is with Frank."


YELTSIN AND FOES SIGN PACT TO EASE PARLIAMENT SIEGE
Representatives of Russia's warring President and Parliament agreed early today to a phased lifting of the armed confrontation at the headquarters of the legislature, the Interfax news agency reported.
Interfax said both sides, meeting also with Mayor Yuri Luzhkov of Moscow, signed an agreement at 2:40 A.M. under which electricity, heat and some telephones would be immediately restored to the headquarters, known as the White House, and arms held by the defenders of the building would be put in storage.


INSIDE
Higher Taxes at the Pump
In a measure aimed at reducing the budget deficit, motorists began paying more in Federal gasoline taxes.
Page 7.
More Mixed Economic Signs
The Government's economic forecasting index posted a broad gain in August, but manufacturing appeared less robust in September.
Page 45.
Tension Renewed in Moscow
The standoff at Russia's Parliament building returned to high tension as defiant lawmakers disavowed a deal to disarm defenders inside.
Page 4.
Takeover at Housing Project
Nearly 250 Hispanic residents of the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn took over a newly constructed public housing project.
Page 25.


Indicators Post Broad Gain of 1%
In another sign of a possible quickening of the economic recovery, the Government said today that its main forecasting index posted a broad 1 percent advance in August, its biggest rise of the year.
The manufacturing sector appears less robust, however, with two other reports showing relatively little improvement.


Reviews/Film Festival; A Question of Incest, Posed Quietly
Aline Issermann's "Shades of Doubt" ("L'Ombre du Doute"), a French film about a wrenching family crisis, is set forth with remarkable restraint.
The subject is incest, but the story's potential for tawdriness is never exploited.
Instead, Ms.
Issermann presents a discreet, methodical account of how 12-year-old Alexandrine (Sandrine Blancke) comes to bring and then recant charges against her father, Jean (Alain Bashung).
If the director's approach is at all representative, then the cultural differences between French and American approaches to this subject are fascinating.
The American impulse toward tabloid sensationalism is nowhere evident; nor is the urge to air all the family's dirty laundry in the interests of catharsis.
If anything, the LeBlancs feel profoundly embarrassed by their problem and wish it would simply go away.
In a climate of sexual sophistication and naturalness, the charge of incest is perhaps even more devastating than it would be in dysfunction-conscious America.


Music Notes
Orchestral Negotiations
The Philadelphia Orchestra's recent last-minute settlement saved its season as well as Carnegie Hall's opening night.
But other orchestras have been less lucky.
The Kennedy Center Opera House Orchestra, on strike since Sept. 1, has made no progress in its talks with the center but has had moral support from the Philadelphia Orchestra, the Baltimore Symphony and the National Symphony, which have refused to cross picket lines to play there.
The Boston Ballet and the San Francisco Ballet, for which the orchestra would normally have played, have postponed their October appearances at the Kennedy Center.
The next negotiation session is on Monday.


President of Peru Says He Is Confident of Defeating Guerrilla Group
In a display of confidence that his Government is finally winning the long struggle against the Shining Path guerrillas, President Alberto Fujimori of Peru said today that he had rejected a peace offer from the movement's imprisoned leader.
In an address to the General Assembly largely devoted to his Government's efforts to defeat Shining Path, Mr.
Fujimori said its leader, Abimael Guzman Reynoso, who was captured and sentenced to life imprisonment last year, had written to him from prison offering to negotiate a "peace agreement."


Harold C. Hinton, 66, Asian History Expert
Harold C. Hinton, an expert on Asian history and a former professor of political science and international affairs at George Washington University, died on Sept. 24 at the Estes Park Medical Center in Estes Park, Colo.
He was 66.
His wife, Carolyn, said he died of a heart attack.


Lufthansa And United Deal Is Set
Culminating a lengthy courtship, United Airlines and Lufthansa will announce on Monday that they are joining forces as marketing partners.
The latest in a long line of airlines to pair off, the two carriers will end months of guessing about which of America's two largest carriers -- United or American Airlines -- Lufthansa would pick.


Russia Delaying U.N.'s Vote On Troops in Ex-Yugoslavia
Russia delayed Security Council action today against President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia by objecting to efforts intended to encourage him to press separatist Serbs in Croatia to resolve their conflict with the Government in Zagreb.
Because of Mosow's objections, the Council was unable for the second day in a row to agree on renewing the mandate for the 22,000 United Nations peacekeepers in the former Yugoslavia for another six months.
Instead, the Council renewed the mandate for four days, until Tuesday, to allow more time for negotiations.
This action came after the Council extended the peacekeeping mission for 24 hours on Thursday.


CHRONICLE
An Indonesian lawyer fighting for the rights of 250 indigenous tribes in Irian Jaya, the Indonesian controlled western half of New Guinea, has been chosen to receive the 10th annual Robert F. Kennedy Human Rights Award, it was announced in Washington yesterday.
The lawyer, BAMBANG WIDJOJANTO, will come to Washington on Nov. 18 to receive the award, which carries a $30,000 stipend.
"Part of the reason that he was chosen for this award is that this is the United Nations Year of Indigenous People," KERRY KENNEDY CUOMO, executive director of the Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Center for Human Rights, said yesterday.
"He has brought together a group of tribes in Irian Jaya and become the voice of reason objecting to the Government, challenging it on development practices and human rights violations."


Review/Film Festival; What Bob Does for A Few Bob
Ken Loach, the English film maker, first came on the international scene in the early 1970's with such films as "Poor Cow" and "Kes." With "Riff-Raff" (1991) and now "Raining Stones," which will be shown at the New York Film Festival at 9 tonight, it's abundantly evident that he's on a new roll.
Like "Riff-Raff," a bitterly comic response to the policies of Britain's Tory governments, "Raining Stones" focuses on working-class folk who have somehow failed to benefit from trickle-down economic theories.
The setting is a medium-sized city in the north of England where Bob (Bruce Jones), a youngish, balding man who's no better than he should be, is trying to make ends meet in a depressed job market.


Observer; In Russet Mantle Clad
Baseball as we have known it ends as the baseball season ends tomorrow, and I'm sorry, Willy, but I can't cry.
I was ready to tell baseball "So long, Sweetheart" a year ago.
That's when they played the World Series just before dawn.
I know Hamlet prowled battlements at that hour to talk with his father's ghost, but I doubt he would have done it to watch a baseball game.


Romanians Don't See King as Figurehead
To the Editor:
You report that Romania has sued King Michael in New York and Switzerland for the return of works by El Greco, Rembrandt, Bruegel and other old masters (news article, Sept. 14).
You state that Michael "from 1940 to 1947, was, except for a few months before the Communist takeover in 1945, only a figurehead."
The facts do not support this view.
From 1941 to 1944, King Michael collaborated with his mother, Queen Elena, in diplomatic and political efforts to save Jewish lives.
Israel's Yad Vashem Holocaust center has named Queen Elena a righteous among the nations.
A ceremony to honor her memory and commemorate those efforts is scheduled by the Israel Embassy in Switzerland Nov. 4, with Michael present.


Retirement Portfolios: The Experts Hold Fast
Shirking off market jitters and October fears, five mutual fund experts are holding fast to the hypothetical retirement portfolios that they created three months ago for The New York Times.
The experts emphasized that the portfolios are intended to grow for 20 years.
Only one of the five recommended a change in his portfolio -- and that a slight shift in weighting.


As Mormon Church Grows, So Does Dissent From Feminists and Scholars
The Mormon Church, whose early leaders feared the wrath of outsiders, has lately viewed its gravest threat as coming from within: intellectuals and feminists in the temples.
In what dissidents have described as a purge, church leaders took severe disciplinary action in September against six Mormon scholars and feminists.
The transgressions fit into two categories: academic research that raises questions about official church history, and the call for opening the priesthood to women, which is granted to males over the age of 12.


Turndowns Turned Down
Turndown horseshoes, which became popular this year as a means of giving race horses extra traction, will no longer be allowed in New York State starting with Wednesday's races at Belmont Park.
Racing officials said yesterday that the ban was being ordered to protect jockeys and horses from injuries and the track from the added impact.


Celtics Add Some Backcourt Depth
Trying to rebuild their backcourt after the death of Reggie Lewis, the Boston Celtics have signed former National Basketball Association guards TRAVIS MAYS, RODNEY MONROE and LAMONT STROTHERS.
Boston announced the signing of the three yesterday along with that of 7-foot-1-inch MATT WENSTROM, the third-string center on North Carolina's N.C.A.A. championship team last season. (AP)


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Trevino After a Payday  Lee Trevino and Jim Dent matched bogey-free 65's and shared the first-round lead yesterday in the richest event on the Senior PGA Tour, the $1.5 million Vantage Championship in Clemmons, N.C.
"I'm clicking on all cylinders right now; I'm awfully relaxed out there," Trevino said after scoring nine 3's for a seven-under-par effort in a tournament that offers $225,000 to the winner.
But he will have to contend with Dent, a runner-up in this event the last two years.
Dent tied Trevino with birdies on three of the last four holes and a 31 on the back nine.
Jim Albus was third with a 67, and Isao Aoki of Japan was next at 68. (AP)


Corrections
A sports article yesterday about Chet Hoff, the 102-year-old former Yankee pitcher, misstated his earned run average over his career.
It is 2.49.


CHRONICLE
BOYD GAINES, who plays the leading man in "She Loves Me," became so exuberant during Wednesday evening's preview performance that he danced right off the stage and into the audience during the first act.
"I have a quick change of clothing in the dark on stage, and I start the song 'Three Letters' while in the dark with scenery moving all around me," Mr.
Gaines said from his dressing room at the Brooks Atkinson theater yesterday.
"I had a marker on the floor but couldn't see it, and when the lights went on I was completely blinded by the spots. As I walked back, I went right off the stage and luckily, landed in the aisle. I was stunned but went right back on the stage, and a lot of people thought it was part of the show. Thank goodness, I didn't fall on anyone."


Don't Rush a Bad Crime Bill
There is a dangerous section in the new crime bill being promoted by Senator Joseph Biden and the Clinton Administration.
Its title calls it a "reform," but it would lock in court rulings that have watered down the laws under which state court prisoners get their cases reviewed by Federal courts.
This section of the bill has to do with the body of law built around the concept of habeas corpus -- literally "you (might) have the body."
When a prisoner secures a writ of habeas corpus from a Federal court, the state authorities must show that the prisoner received a fair trial and that they are therefore authorized to "have the body" in prison.
This body of law has ancient roots.
It was intended to curb the power of monarchs to keep citizens under arrest and in custody.
Yet Mr.
Biden sees no necessity for debate over the habeas corpus section of the crime bill.


Bridge
Beginners are advised to avoid trump suits with fewer than eight cards in the combined hands, but the experts are alert for exceptions.
The right time to play in a 4-3 fit is not easy to spot.
The practice is long associated with Alphonse Moyse Jr. who recommended it on every possible opportunity.
Delicate bidding maneuvers are often called for, and were forthcoming on the diagramed deal.
It was played in a money team game which used to be, but is no longer, played at the Young Men's Philanthropic League, 4 East 80th Street.
North and South were Fred Chang and Ira Rubin, and their problem was to find a suitable 4-3 fit at the six-level.
Since no fit had been discovered, the raise to four no-trump was natural and so was five spades.
South relied on his partner to bid six of any suit in which he held K-x-x, and the partnership duly reached six hearts, the best spot -- decidedly better than six no-trump.


A Series Will Celebrate The Viola's Versatility
"Voila Viola," a three-part series celebrating the versatility of the violin's big brother, will begin at 2 P.M. tomorrow at Merkin Concert Hall, 129 West 67th Street, Manhattan.
The first part will feature works for viola and voice, with Wendy Hoffman, a mezzo-soprano, and Robert White, a tenor.
Part two, at 4:30, features Peter Schickele (of P. D. Q. Bach fame).
The final event, at 8 P.M., includes works by Mozart, Bach and Mr.
Schickele.


A Pioneer of Mutual Funds Takes a Look at Today
Walter L. Morgan, a young Philadelphia accountant, had just founded one of the first American mutual funds when stocks rose to dizzying heights in the summer of 1929.
His portfolio was heavily invested in common stocks, including such speculative favorites as Curtis Publishing at about $125 a share and U.S.
Steel at more than $250.
Applying the then-novel idea that adding bonds to stocks for "balance" would create a fund that could better withstand bear markets, he and his fledgling Wellington Fund survived the ensuing stock crash and Depression.


On Trying Alternative Medicine for Migraine; Not a Major Risk
To the Editor:
Re "Mystery of Migraine Begins to Yield Genetic Clues" (Science Times, Sept. 14): Attention to migraine research is encouraging.
But clarification is needed on two issues, the theory of spreading depression and migraine, and the alleged effect of sumatriptan on the coronary arteries.
The theory of spreading depression as the source of migraine is predicated on data from one study, which has been impossible to duplicate.
On analysis by other investigators, spreading depression is probably due to false readings of scattered radiation (Olsen et al., Archives of Neurology, 1987, pages 156-61).
Research has been expended, and a plethora of articles have been published based on the questionable findings of the initial study.
The vascular theory originated by Harold G. Wolff of Cornell University is the most widely accepted for the origin of migraine.


Bonds Swings the Pressure Back Toward the Braves
How does Barry Bonds like October now?
On the first day of his reputed least favorite month, Bonds crushed the first two fat pitches the Los Angeles Dodgers offered him tonight.
One landed over the wall in dead center, one landed over the wall in right field, and the only fingers pointed at him this evening were out of envy.
Bonds is well known for his October swoons, but that was in Pittsburgh.
Tonight, with the National League West title on a pendulum, Bonds tied this game with his three-run homer and shattered it with his second one.
He drove in a career-high seven runs, his San Francisco Giants held on to win, 8-7, before 51,860, and the Giants and Braves go back to the drawing board again Saturday.


New York Rivals Differ Strikingly On Dealing With City's Poorest
In the four years since they last ran for mayor, David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani have refined their positions on what should be done for the city's impoverished multitudes and now present voters with distinctly different approaches to homelessness and welfare reform.
But even as they have become more sophisticated about the issues, the already staggering scale of the city's social ills has worsened, fueled by a deep, prolonged recession, rising numbers of people with AIDS, a virulent drug crisis, a persistent low-income housing shortage and the spread of tuberculosis.


Japanese Starting to Link Pay To Performance, Not Tenure
In Japanese festivals, dozens of people together hoist a heavy portable shrine, known as a mikoshi, and chant as they carry it through the streets.
Since it is impossible to tell who is actually doing the lifting, it is only natural that some shrine carriers shirk off, shifting more weight onto others.
Japanese companies, too, have what is called "mikoshi management." People work as a group and the achievers often carry the laggards along.
Salary depends much more on how long one has worked for the company than on how much one contributes to it.


In India Quake Zone, a Land of Funeral Pyres
Two days after the largest earthquake to hit India in 50 years savaged these placid rolling farmlands, flames from dozens of funeral pyres glinted in the dawn, dotting fields of newly cut sugarcane like fireflies.
Here and there a solitary figure was faintly visible squatting by the crackling fires.
As villagers struggled to come to terms with the loss of their world, estimates of the death toll from Thursday's devastating quake oscillated wildly.
Local officials suggested that as many as 30,000 people may have died during those few moments of terror, while the national authorities hewed to the figure of 10,000.


Victory Is Sour for Lawyer Fighting Nassau Parking Tickets
Ira J. Raab won't have to pay the $15 parking ticket he received last March when he pulled into a crowded lot and parked in a spot reserved for the police, a judge has ruled.
But the decision was nonetheless a defeat for Mr.
Raab, a former New York City Parking Violations Bureau judge, who thought he had found a way to challenge the validity of every parking ticket Nassau County has issued for years.


Yeltsin Opposes Expansion Of NATO in Eastern Europe
President Boris N. Yeltsin, apparently under pressure from his armed forces, has sent a letter to President Clinton opposing any expansion of NATO to include East European nations like Poland or the Czech Republic, Western diplomats said today.
Sent after President Yeltsin dissolved Parliament on Sept. 21 and embarked on a collision course with members opposed to his reforms, the letter amounts to sharp retreat from the position the Russian leader outlined during a visit to Warsaw in August.
At the time he expressed understanding of Poland's desire to join NATO and said it did not threaten Russian interests.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY TWO APPROACHES TO HOMELESSNESS  In the four years since they last campaigned to be mayor, David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani have refined their positions on what should be done for the city's impoverished multitudes and now present voters with distinctly different approaches to homelessness and welfare reform.
Page 1.


Peter Moore, 61, Dies; Photographer of Dance
Peter Moore, a photographer known for his pictures of dance and performance art, died on Tuesday.
He was 61.
The cause was a heart attack, his wife, Barbara, said.


Toronto Journal; Russians Are Coming, but for Money
Thanks to relatively loose entry policies, tens of thousands of Russians have settled in Canada in recent years.
Many are Jews who sought refuge from oppression in the former Soviet Union.
But now Toronto is feeling a new wave of Russian immigration: the wheeler-dealers.
They are among the new economic immigrants and are young, aggressive, ambitious capitalists using Toronto as a base for deals with the mother country.


Reizl Bozyk, an Enduring Star Of the Yiddish Stage, Dies at 79
Reizl Bozyk, an actress who received top billing in the Yiddish theater for more than 60 years, died on Thursday at St.
Vincent's Hospital Medical Center.
She was 79 and lived on the Lower East Side.
Mrs.
Bozyk was an enduring star of the Yiddish stage here and earlier in Poland and Argentina, appearing in hundreds of productions, often as a comedian and later as the familar mother or mother-in-law character who often stole the show.


Lewis Stumbles Early, but Bruno Crumbles Later
He certainly looked like a heavyweight champion, as he stood there in the frosty early-morning air with his long arms thrust high and his Agassi-sized entourage milling around him.
But no matter how good a left hook Lennox Lewis threw in the seventh round to send countryman Frank Bruno reeling into yet another championship-bout funk, his performance at Cardiff Arms Park should not be enough to trouble the hearts and minds of his real heavyweight competition.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a brief report in the Company News column of Business Day yesterday, about the acquisition of the Dexter Shoe Company by Berkshire Hathaway Inc., misstated the price of Berkshire Hathaway stock.
It closed at $16,675 a share, up $75.


Rose Bowl? Northwestern? Laugh Track Is on Pause
The convincing continues.
Several extremely un-Northwestern things have happened in only Gary Barnett's second season as the football coach of the Wildcats, more than a year after his challenge -- "EXPECT VICTORY" -- attracted skeptical wisecracks as it confronted decades of disappointment.
First, an impressive defeat at Notre Dame was looked upon as a loss.
The powerful emotions of a come-from-behind victory over Boston College -- a team that defeated the Wildcats 49-0 a season ago -- were eventually replaced by a realization of the flaws that had created the deficit.
Then last week, as a businesslike victory over Wake Forest was greeted with cheers, the goal posts remained in place at Dyche Stadium.


Yeltsin's No Jefferson. More Like Pinochet.
President Boris Yeltsin's move to dissolve the Russian Parliament came as quite a surprise, considering that he narrowly escaped impeachment last March when he tried the same thing.
But even more surprising is the insensitivity of so many Western leaders and experts who have rushed to justify his actions.
The universal excuse is that Mr.
Yeltsin is "the democratically elected President of Russia." Does election thereby give him the right, any more than President Clinton, say, to rule by decree and dispense with the democratically elected legislature?


Mutual Funds
*
How funds did in the third quarter *
How to cushion against a market decline Today in YOUR MONEY, pages 37-43.


The Real Costs of Mideast Peace
After a rousing sermon, the astute preacher passes the plate.
So, after the historic Rabin-Arafat handshake, the Clinton Administration yesterday raised more than $2 billion in pledges of international aid for Palestinians, including an unexpected $100 million offer from Saudi Arabia.
That's a splendid start.
But open borders and freer trade are what will truly make the West Bank bloom.
On that score, Israel's Arab neighbors still seem unwilling to take the smallest risk for peace.


Nigeria's New Leader Sounds Like the Old
To the Editor:
"Nigeria's Leader Deplores 'Stigma,' " (news article, Sept. 19) reports an interview with Ernest Shonekan, who succeeded Gen.
Ibrahim Babangida, at the general's approval, after the former military ruler annulled last June's election.
The claim by Mr.
Shonekan that he is not "somebody's puppet" is debatable, but his remarks to your correspondent betray a lack of commitment to democracy that bears a striking resemblance to that of his military predecessors.


Officers Describe Police Watchdog Agency as Ineffectual
As hearings into corruption in the New York City Police Department resumed yesterday, two former narcotics officers described the department's internal watchdog agency as disorganized, incompetent and so ineffectual that honest police officers feared reporting their crooked colleagues.
In steady voices that at times cracked with emotion, Sgt.
James Dowd and Lieut.
James Wood told a vivid tale of how they came forward last year with evidence that two colleagues were selling heroin, only to despair as, they said, the department's internal investigators bungled the inquiry and finally turned the investigation toward them.


Armed Standoff Continues as Russian Parliament Disavows a Pact
An early-morning agreement to disarm the irregular defenders of the besieged Russian Parliament collapsed after a few hours today when hard-core legislators disowned their negotiators and threw out the pact.
The agreement, reached at 2:40 A.M., was the first break in the tense standoff, promising at least to lift the threat of a lethal clash between heavily armed defenders inside the Parliament building, called the White House, and a huge ring of security forces outside.


A Man Dies in a Brooklyn Fire While Trying to Rescue His Daughter


Japan Hails Clinton's Approval of Tokyo's Plutonium Project
After fearing for months that its multibillion-dollar civilian plutonium project could be scuttled, the Japanese Government is expressing relief that the Clinton Administration's new nonproliferation policy contains an exception that will allow Japan and Western Europe to keep producing near-weapons grade material for a new generation of nuclear power plants.
The Administration's declaration, which had been the focus of intense Japanese interest and lobbying, was contained in a policy statement released after President Clinton's speech at the United Nations on Monday.
While calling for an end of plutonium production for weapons, it stipulates that while "the United States does not encourage the civil use of plutonium," it will "maintain its existing commitments" permitting Japan and several European nations to turn nuclear waste into plutonium fuel.


CHRONICLE
TAMMY FAYE BAKKER is getting married today to her companion, ROE MESSNER, The Charlotte Observer reported Thursday.
Mrs.
Bakker will wed Mr.
Messner, an old family friend, in Palm Springs, Calif., where she now makes her home.


Asbestos Crisis Is Exposing Broader Neglect in Schools
The plumbing is so decrepit in one New York City school that the toilets will not flush and the bathrooms stink.
A leaking roof in another sends rainwater seeping through classroom walls.
And because the lunchroom is sealed off in a third school, children sit on the ground in the schoolyard to eat cold lunches.
Parents of public-school children recounted those and other dismal stories at a City Hall rally yesterday, one of several recent outpourings of anger by parents who, aroused by the asbestos crisis, have begun to express broader concerns over the crumbling state of the city's school buildings.


U.S. Aides Call for Pressing U.N. on Somalia Settlement
Mapping out details of the new strategy on Somalia, Administration officials agreed today to press the United Nations to move faster to reach a political settlement and deploy troops of other nations, but set no deadline for the withdrawal of American forces, Administration officials said.
The recommendations of a high-level group of Somalia specialists, from the Pentagon, State Department, National Security Council and American mission to the United Nations, now go to senior Administration policy makers, who will probably use the positions to try to influence top United Nations officials.


Sports of The Times; Pushes Come To Shoves . . . Again
SO Bill Walsh is troubled by fighting.
In the wake of four major brawls last week, the Stanford coach added his voice to hundreds of others by decrying fighting in college football.


There's No Disguising It This Time As Israel and Jordan Meet in U.S.
After 45 years of meeting secretly, disguised by wigs, Arab headdresses, floppy hats and dark sunglasses, Israeli and Jordanian leaders finally came in from the cold today and shook hands at the White House to confirm to the world that they are indeed normalizing their diplomatic and economic relations.
Israel's Foreign Minister, Shimon Peres, and Crown Prince Hassan -- the younger brother of King Hussein of Jordan -- met jointly with President Clinton in the Oval Office this afternoon.
Then, escorted by Mr.
Clinton, each addressed a small group of reporters gathered on the South Lawn, explaining plans to set up committees to promote economic cooperation between their two countries.


Traffic Alert
TODAY  FIFTH AVENUE MILE RUN Fifth Avenue will be closed between 62d and 82d Streets from 10 A.M. to noon.
KOREAN PARADE Broadway will be closed between 34th and 41st Streets beginning at noon.
GRACIE SQUARE ART SHOWEast End Avenue will be closed between 84th and 87th Streets from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. tomorrow and Sunday.
WASHINGTON SQUARE STREET FESTVAL Washington Square North will be closed between Fifth Avenue and Washington Square East from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Pearl Street will be closed between Park Row and Centre Street from 6 A.M. to 7 P.M. for new building construction today and tomorrow.
TOMORROW  BROADWAY FESTIVAL Broadway will be closed between and Houston and Eighth Streets from 8 A.M. to 7 P.M.
EAST 33d STREET FAIR East 33d Street will be closed between Fifth and Lexington Avenues from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
NEW YORK FAIRMadison Avenue will be closed between 23d and 42d Streets from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
PULASKI DAY PARADE Fifth Avenue will be closed between 26th and 52d Street beginning at noon.


Review/Film; Custom-Making Freaks With the Use of Chemicals
In "Freaked," a rambunctiously slobbering entrant in the "Toxic Avenger" school of gross-out movie comedy, Alex Winter plays Ricky Coogin, a greedy television star who is chemically transformed into a freak-show attraction for a South American carnival.
Ricky's altered appearance is his comeuppance for agreeing to be the $5 million spokesman for the nefarious E.E.S. (Everything Except Shoes) Corporation, which markets a toxic fertilizer called Zygrot-24 in the third world.
When Alex and two companions stumble upon a mysterious sideshow on a South American hillside, its mad-scientist proprieter (Randy Quaid) imprisons them and hooks them to a computerized monster-making machine.
After swabbing them with Zygrot-24, a noxious green slime that spews throughout the movie, he presses "enter" on the junk-heap contraption and turns them into custom-made freaks.


Bosnian Serbs Patrol Area Under Fire


Company Briefs
FKI P.L.C., West Yorkshire, England, conditionally agreed to acquire the Truth division of SPX Corp., a manufacturer of hardware for windows, doors and skylights, for $102.5 million cash.
KRANCO REALTY TRUST, Conshohocken, Pa., acquired three shopping centers totaling 226,000 square feet for $18 million in Devon, Whitehall and Bensalem, Pa.
ROBERTS PHARMACEUTICAL CORP., Eatontown, N.J., will acquire the United States and Canadian rights to a line of prescription and nonprescription pharmaceutical products from the Bristol-Myers Squibb Co.
SOUTHERN UNION CO., Austin, Tex., purchased Rio Grande Valley Gas Co. from Valero Energy Corp. for about $31 million.
The acquisition includes 1,552 miles of distribution lines in southern Texas.


Blanchard Kicks Away Jets' Doubts
The good news about the place-kicking of the Jets this season is that there is no bad news.
Cary Blanchard, the second-year pro out of Oklahoma State, is leading the team in scoring for the second straight year, with 23 points.
He has been 11 for 11 on extra points and 4 for 5 on field goals.
He's doing his job, and that's no big deal for a kicker.
It's quite a contrast from last season, when the Jets lost their first four games until Blanchard arrived after being waived by New Orleans and replaced Jason Staurovsky.
In his debut, Blanchard kicked 3 field goals and 2 extra points in a 30-21 Jets victory over New England.


Oils Lead Stocks Rally, With Dow Rising 25.99
Following a weak performance in its previous session, the stock market bounced back yesterday, rallying ahead of a firm bond market that was reacting to a batch of economic reports that confirmed the economy was still on a slow-growth path.
The smaller-than-expected September rise in the index of the National Association of Purchasing Managers, helped lift bond prices, which generally rally on weak economic reports that, traders think, may influence the Fed to keep interest rates low.


City Councilman Accused in Report
A veteran New York City Councilman repeatedly violated ethics rules in the City Charter by lobbying city officials in the mid-1980's on behalf of private garbage haulers with whom he had business dealings, a report by the Department of Investigation has concluded.
The investigation of the Councilman, Michael DeMarco, Democrat of the Bronx, found "substantial evidence" that the 23-year Council veteran violated conflict-of-interest rules in at least five separate instances by representing several private haulers before the Department of Consumer Affairs, which regulates the garbage industry.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-6  IN THE OPEN, ISRAEL AND JORDAN
After 45 years of secret meetings, Israeli and Jordanian leaders shook hands at the White House, confirming that they are normalizing their diplomatic and economic ties.  1
More than 40 nations pledged $2 billion to help the Palestinians.  2  IN INDIA, A DISASTER'S AFTERMATH
As funeral pyres burned for victims of the largest earthquake to hit India in 50 years, the death toll -- estimated at 10,000 to 30,000 -- is unknown since many are buried in rubble.  1  JAPAN IS SHIFTING TO MERIT PAY
Japanese companies are abandoning a seniority-based pay system and introducing merit pay, under which those who perform better are paid more and promoted faster.  1
Buckingham Palace workers should lose perks, a consultant says.  6  IN MOSCOW, HIGH TENSION AGAIN
The standoff at Russia's besieged Parliament building returned to high tension after defiant lawmakers disavowed an agreement on disarming defenders inside.  4
Boris Yeltsin says he opposes NATO membership for East Europe.  4
Toronto Journal: Russian in Canada creates a boon for business.  4  U.N.
ACTION ON SERBIA DELAYED
Russia delayed Security Council action against the President of Serbia by objecting to efforts intended to encourage him to press separatist Serbs in Croatia to resolve their conflict with the Government.  3  U.S.
TO PRESS U.N.
ON SOMALIA
Administration officials plan to press the United Nations to move faster on a political accord in Somalia and deploy troops from other nations but set no deadline for withdrawing American forces.  3  PERUVIAN HOLDS FIRM ON REBELS
Showing confidence in subduing Shining Path guerrillas, Peru's President told the General Assembly that he had rejected an offer for peace talks by their imprisoned leader.  5  U.S.
SEEKS TO EASE CHINA TENSIONS
The White House has scheduled high-level meetings with Chinese officials in an effort to ease tensions between Washington and Beijing.  5  U.S.
POLICY AIDS JAPAN ENERGY
Tokyo is relieved that Washington's new nonproliferation policy allows Japan and Western Europe to keep producing near-weapons-grade material for nuclear power plants.  6  National 6-9  NAVY LEADER FACES DISMISSAL
The Navy Secretary asked that the Navy's top officer, Adm.
Frank Kelso, be removed for failing to show proper leadership at a convention of naval aviators where scores of women were assaulted.  1  REPORT SPARES TOP F.B.I.
OFFICIALS
A Justice Department report on the fire that killed most members of a cult near Waco, Tex., will criticize agents who were at the scene, but generally exonerate officials in Washington, officials said.  1  EVIDENCE IN BROWN CASE
Federal investigators examining a claim that Commerce Secretary Ronald Brown sought $700,000 to help end a trade embargo against Vietnam uncovered evidence that the Vietnamese were preparing to establish a bank account.  7  TURMOIL IN MORMON CHURCH
Early Mormon leaders feared the wrath of outsiders.
Lately they have viewed their gravest threat as coming from within: intellectuals and feminists in the temples.  7  MORE TAX AT THE PUMP
The public made its first contributions to reducing the budget deficit as motorists paid a new gasoline tax at the pump.  7  CONVICTION IN RACIAL CASE
A man with ties to white supremacists was convicted of making illegal weapons, and his wife was convicted of conspiracy, in the first trial growing out of a sweep in July of Los Angeles hate groups.  9  GINSBURG JOINS SUPREME COURT
Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg took her seat on the Supreme Court, the first time two women have sat on the nation's highest court.  9  The index of leading economic indicators rose in August.  45  Chrysler and its unions reached a tentative labor agreement.  45  Beliefs: Medical ethicists look back on their role in the health plan.  9  Metro Digest 25  SOCIAL PROBLEMS AWAIT MAYOR
In the four years since they last ran for mayor, David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani have developed distinctly different approaches to homelessness and welfare reform.
Reizl Bozyk, star of Yiddish theater.
Gustavo E. Brillembourg, lawyer.
Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials  The real costs of Mideast peace.
Don't rush a bad crime bill.
A legislative infant, needing care.
Lighting up the lawyers.
Letters  Russell Baker: In russet mantle clad.
Robert V. Daniels: Yeltsin's no Jefferson.
More like Pinochet.
Gordon C. Haber: The great Alaska wolf kill.
Melissa Mathison: Where is Gendun Rinchen?
Bridge 14 Chronicle 24  Crossword 15


Filling a Hole Left by Mother Nature


On Trying Alternative Medicine for Migraine
To the Editor:
I was very impressed with "Mystery of Migraine Begins to Yield Genetic Clues" (Science Times, Sept. 14).
For the 25 years I have practiced medicine, I have done a lot of study of this topic because I suffer from migraine myself.
Whenever the cause of a disease is not clearly defined, more and more expensive medicines are poured into the market to give symptomatic relief.
Under these circumstances, it would be prudent to look at other time proven alternative medicines, such as homeopathy.
Homeopathy believes in providing relief from a condition by giving very small doses of drugs that in large doses would produce symptoms like that condition.
What homeopathy believes to be the cause of the condition remains unestablished, as far as Western medicine is concerned.


Bonds Swings the Pressure Back Toward the Braves
Atlanta Braves Manager Bobby Cox didn't want the last weekend of the season to be this way, of course -- sitting and watching games from the West Coast, hoping for help from forces out of his control.
"I'd rather have a lead -- I was looking for a five- or six-game advantage, but you can't do anything about it, so here we are," Cox said bravely today, before sending his team out in search of a victory over the Colorado Rockies.


No Headline
"I lost my mother, my father, my brother, five people. It happened very early. It was very dark and we were all sleeping." -- LALOO AMBADAS of Killari, India.  [ 5:3. ]


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.25
3.99
3.15
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.90
2.90
2.61
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.01
3.03
2.77
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.91
4.95
5.77
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.99
6.02
7.32
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.01
7.04
8.40
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.45
5.47
6.37
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Classical Music in Review
Guy Klucevsek  Accordionist Dance Theater Workshop 219 West 19th Street Chelsea
Guy Klucevsek has taken the accordion deep into unaccustomed experimental spaces, commissioning pieces from various downtown composers.
He is also a composer himself, a Minimalist with gentler pop leanings.
On Monday night at the Dance Theater Workshop, he led the New York premieres of two recent works: "The Palatine Light" (1985), a song cycle on an 18th-century maritime theme, and "Fallen Shadows" (1993), a musical and theatrical meditation on aging opera singers.
The instrumentalists in each piece were Phillip Bush, pianist; Mary Rowell, violinist and violist, and Mr.
Klucevsek; the soprano soloist was the remarkably versatile Dora Ohrenstein.


Searching for a Haven With Safety and Reward
THE last time the stock market dropped as much as 10 percent, Saddam Hussein's tanks were storming across Kuwait.
Saddam ultimately retreated, and since that 1990 invasion, stocks have surged without pause.
Only one other time since 1915 has the Dow gone three years without a 10 percent fall, according to Philip Smyth of Birinyi Associates -- and that streak ended in 1987.
The rally in the mid-80's was much sharper than the current one, so a decline now probably wouldn't be as terrifying.
Still, many mutual fund investors are looking for havens.
Most of the available shelters appear flimsy.
Stocks are pricey by almost any measure, but the most obvious alternatives are either risky, unrewarding or unfamiliar.


A Legislative Infant, Needing Care
Two years ago Congress established a modest but imaginative program to underwrite the overseas study of critical non-Western languages like Arabic, Chinese and Japanese.
It would plug a huge hole in America's education system.
Some Congressmen voted for the bill in the belief that America's intelligence failures over the years had been caused partly by the shortage of people qualified in non-traditional languages and area studies.
Others, looking to the future, hoped the program would sharpen America's skills in a competitive global economy.


C. Lamar Elmore, 48, German Wine Expert
Dr.
C.
Lamar Elmore, a former professor of German language and literature, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 48.
His death followed a long illness, said his companion of 15 years, Allan S. Hecht.


Review/Opera; Older Productions Stir Memories, Memories
Before the Metropolitan Opera gets down to the season's real agenda with an interesting run of new productions, it is putting some old ones back on the stage.
On Thursday evening, it was the turn of Beethoven's "Fidelio," in Otto Schenk's production from 1970.
Boris Aronson's sets and costumes for this prison opera were purposefully sparse and gray to begin with, in telling contrast to the luminous music, and have grown only dingier over the years.
But they evoke wonderful memories, not so much of whole evenings as of individual efforts: Jon Vickers's riveting Florestan, manic yet noble; moments of vocal and dramatic splendor from Leonie Rysanek and Hildegard Behrens in the title role; an account of the "Leonore" Overture No. 3 so compellingly paced by Klaus Tennstedt as almost to justify its awkward use as entr'acte.


Corrections
A picture yesterday with an article about the impact of the Clinton health plan on drug companies, showing a man standing in a doorway, was published in error.
It showed Joseph Vitale, deputy director of Gov.
Jim Florio's Council for a Drug-Free Workplace, not G. Kirk Raab, chief executive of Genentech Inc.


43 Nations Promise Palestinians $2 Billion in Aid
Delegates from 43 nations today promised about $2 billion in aid over the next five years for the West Bank and Gaza Strip, as Saudi Arabia put aside its anger at the Palestinians for supporting Iraq in the Persian Gulf war and pitched in $100 million.
Recognizing that peace is firmer when buttressed by prosperity, the nations promised $600 million in aid for this year alone, and American officials said they were confident that the contributions would ultimately far exceed their $2 billion goal.


Corrections
Because of a production error, part of an article headlined "Star Ready for Off Broadway" appeared on some copies of the Law page yesterday.
It was a duplicate of material that had appeared on Wednesday, on page C13; the space it occupied yesterday was intended for an advertisement.


Hotel Business Is Waking Up
After 11 consecutive years of losses totaling more than $33 billion, the United States hotel industry is heading for its first profit since 1981.
Occupancy rates are rising almost everywhere, with many hotel chains reporting their best year for a long time.
"Our forecasts indicate that the lodging industry will show a profit of a half-million to $1 billion this year," said Bjorn Hanson, the industry analyst for the accounting firm of Coopers &amp; Lybrand.


A New Member for a New Term


A Sizzling Third-Quarter Performance, at Home and Abroad
Investors may be living dangerously, but what a living.
As skepticism mounted in the third quarter about whether the rallies in the stock and bond markets could continue, mutual funds posted especially strong returns.
They were aided by a surge in stocks of small companies and continuing declines in interest rates, both domestically and abroad.
Funds that invest in stocks of American companies turned in their best performance of the year.
The average domestic stock fund had a total return of 5 percent in the latest quarter, more than twice the return in the second quarter.
Foreign stock funds did even better, returning 8.8 percent.


REPORT ON SIEGE IN TEXAS IS SAID TO BLAME AGENTS
A Justice Department report on the fire that consumed a cult compound near Waco, Tex., and killed most of the group's members criticizes mid- and lower-level Federal agents there who recommended that negotiations be abandoned in favor of a tear-gas assault, according to law-enforcement and Administration officials who have read the report.
But the report is said to clear senior officials from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and Attorney General Janet Reno of making any significant mistakes, even though Ms.
Reno, acting on the advice of the senior bureau officials, ordered the assault on April 19 in which armored vehicles punched holes in the compound and filled it with tear gas.


New Issues Were at Record Pace in Third Quarter
Corporations issued new stocks and bonds at a record pace in the third quarter, producing more than $2.2 billion in fees for securities firms that are in the midst of their third consecutive year of record profits.
After three years of rising stock prices and falling interest rates, the financial markets are as hospitable as many corporate treasurers have ever seen.
Increasingly, American investors' strong demand is attracting foreign borrowers.
Italy, for example, sold about 30 percent of its $5.5 billion global bond offering to Americans earlier this month, and YPF Sociedad, the Argentine oil company, had a $3 billion stock offering in late July that was bought largely by investors in America and Europe.


Lighting Up the Lawyers
Clients who lodge a complaint against a New York lawyer often feel as if they're "sending a letter to the Bermuda Triangle," observes the state's Chief Administrative Judge, Leo Milonas.
Judge Milonas is among the bar leaders now calling on the State Legislature to allow public access to disciplinary proceedings against lawyers.
In 28 states, disciplinary proceedings are open to the public once a grievance committee files formal charges.
Three other states -- Oregon, Florida and West Virginia -- open proceedings to the public even earlier.


Watch for Distributions As Year Winds Down
NOVICE mutual fund investors can slide into tax traps, particularly in the fourth quarter.
But with a modicum of knowledge about how funds work, they can play the tax laws to their own advantage.
Funds distribute three kinds of income to shareholders: capital gains the fund has received selling securities in its portfolio, dividends paid by securities it holds and interest earned on bonds or similar holdings.
An investor who sells fund shares at a profit also earns capital gains directly.


Classical Music in Review
Maria Bachmann  Violinist Weill Recital Hall
In the six years since Maria Bachmann made her New York debut, she and her regular recital partner, Jon Klibonoff, have offered several pleasingly challenging programs.
Some have been laden with contemporary works, which Ms.
Bachmann plays with facility and expressivity; others have offered standard repertory in refreshingly individualistic readings.
The surprising yet consistently persuasive interpretive turns Ms.
Bachmann and Mr.
Klibonoff took in a Beethoven "Kreutzer" Sonata four seasons ago made a lasting impression.
And their performance on Wednesday evening reminded a listener that making new works sound familiar and familiar works seem new is a talent to be prized.


Stalking New Markets Where Many Fear to Tread
While some managers of international funds hang on the German central bank's every move and on the latest trade figures from Japan, J. Mark Mobius tracks a Turkish steelmaker, the telephone company that serves Rio de Janeiro and the Nigerian stock exchange.
Emerging markets are his game.
And he's one of the hottest portfolio managers in an area where growth potential is enormous, yet economic and political turmoil is commonplace.


Business Digest
The Economy
The index of leading indicators advanced 1 percent for August, its biggest rise of the year.
The gain by the main forecasting index was a hint of economic speedup.  [ Page 45. ]


An Area Of Mutual Discipline
Salvatore Centino of Piscataway, N.J., was not particularly concerned about how much he would pay in sales commissions when he chose to buy a contractual mutual fund 10 years ago.
He was -- and remains -- sold on the performance.
"All I know is that I have put in $6,000 over the last 10 years, and it's now worth $12,353," he said.
"That's not bad!"
Sold exclusively through brokers, contractual funds require someone to make a long-term commitment -- usually 15 years -- to invest a certain sum each month, say $100.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
Scouting the Top Teams  Following are the scouting reports for this weekend's top games in the Public Schools Athletic League and Catholic High Schools Football League as well as for New Jersey, Connecticut, Westchester County and Rockland County.
The teams' records are in parentheses.
P.S.A.L.
Sheepshead Bay (2-0) at Lafayette (1-2) Key Players: Both teams feature a ball-control offense and rely on hard-hitting defensive units.
"Brooklyn football is like the Midwest," said Sheepshead Bay Coach Dick Reilly.
"It's bang-bang football." Lafayette's linemen may have trouble moving defensive end Elvis Abellard (19 tackles) and Company off the ball, as the Frenchies are significantly smaller than the Skippers up front.
Lafayette will probably have to throw the ball to create running lanes.
Sheepshead Bay features a more balanced attack, as Michael Reilly, the coach's son, is a smart quarterback with an accurate arm to complement the fine running combination of Kwesi Daniels and Joe Coffey.
Daniels received Sheepshead Bay's game ball last week after rushing for 145 yards on 18 carries and 1 touchdown in the 15-14 victory over Curtis.
Daniels also registered 15 tackles and 2 sacks as a linebacker.
Comment: Lafayette has won the last two meetings against Sheepshead Bay in the closing seconds.
Lafayette defeated the Skippers, 13-6, last year and by 19-17 in 1991.
"Those are the ones that put the white back into your beard," said Reilly, Sheepshead Bay's coach.
Lehman (1-1) at South Shore (0-2) Key Players: What South Shore quarterback Adrian Nazario lacks in size (5 foot 5 inches, and 150 pounds), he makes up in heart.
"He's a tough kid," said Coach Stan Feldman.
"He gets knocked down and he pops right back up. He's our leader." Nonetheless, the Vikings' offense still depends on the running of Tracey McDonald, Carlos Cromwell and Dwayne Bennett.
Lehman needs Robert Talley to rebound from last week's 30-7 loss to Canarsie, in which he was limited to 27 yards rushing on 10 carries.
Comment: South Shore has yet to score a point this season, losing by 26-0 in its opener against Curtis and by 20-0 to Lincoln.
"I'm really proud of the boys," said Feldman.
"They haven't given up, and they've been gung-ho in practice."  C.H.S.F.L.
Spellman (2-1) at St.
John the Baptist (3-0) Key Players: St.
John the Baptist's offense is ranked No. 1 in the A Division, averaging 271.3 yards a game.
Eric Martin (31 of 55 for 533 yards, 5 touchdowns, 1 interception), who is the division's leading passer, has three sure-handed targets in tight end Robert Kelly (11 receptions for 219 yards, 2 touchdowns), wide receiver Dennis McGuire (6 for 100 yards, 1 touchdown) and running back Mike Grippo (11 for 163 yards, 2 touchdowns).
Martin's counterpart, David Rodriguez, is a pretty good signal caller himself, passing for 2 touchdowns and rushing for 2 others.
Rodriguez's favorite receiver is Michael Baptiste (4 catches for 71 yards, 1 touchdown).
Comment: Jay Byrne Gamble, the St.
John the Baptist coach, is back after a 10-year hiatus.
He has returned to the school where he had three consecutive Metro Bowl titles after serving part of the time as an assistant coach at Hofstra University.
His presence, along with a new staff of assistants, has helped turn around a program that had a 12-35-1 record over the past three years.
St.
Anthony (3-0) vs.
Nazareth (2-0)  at Canarsie Key Players: St.
Anthony has averaged a league-best 369 yards on the ground a game, while the Kingsmen defense has allowed a league-low of 89 yards rushing.
The Friars' offense, which averages over 30 points a game, revolves around the backfield of Tony Williams (38 carries for 615 yards, 6 touchdowns), who is the league's leading gainer, and Dan Shea (22 carries for 268 yards, 6 touchdowns).
Nazareth boasts a good inside (Julien Dale) and outside (Gordon Tunison) running attack.
Dale, a 6-foot, 220-pound fullback, has carried 28 times for 182 yards and 3 touchdowns.
Tinson is a 5-5, 140-pound tailback who has rushed 17 times for 218 yards and 3 touchdowns.
Comment: St.
Anthony's backfield is quick and has been aided by playing all of its games on Astroturf, an advantage that St.
Anthony's runners will enjoy once again this afternoon.
Long Island  Longwood (1-0) at Brentwood (0-1) Key Players: Longwood's backfield of Jason Schuster (4.6 for 40 yards), John Lange (4.7 speed) and quarterback Eric Brown (4.5 speed) is lightning quick.
The threesome combined last week for over 400 yards rushing in a 35-7 victory over Ward Melville.
Felipe Sabino will do most of Brentwood's running behind Carl Matzen (6-2, 286-pound tackle) and John Alvarado (6-2, 250-pound guard), both of whom anchor the right side.
Comment: Longwood is ranked No. 2 in Suffolk County and 21st in New York State by the Sports Writers Association.
Last year, Longwood lost to Connetquot, 28-7, in the county's final.
"I think that experience is going to help us," said Schuster.
"We experienced what it's like, and hopefully we're going to learn from it." New Jersey  Elizabeth (1-0) at Linden (1-0) Key Players: Elizabeth is once again loaded with Division 1 talent: tailback Kaream Bowser, Sharod Williams (wr-db), Hector Sepuleeda (dt-og) and linebacker Frank Chmiel are all being heavily recruited by colleges.
This talented bunch is directed by sophomore Al Hawkins, who is a "scary quarterback who could throw the long ball off his heels," said Linden Coach James McDonald.
Linden's two blue-chip prospects are two-way ends Mike Pringley (6-4, 218) and Dave Biles (6-4, 275).
Comment: Last year, Elizabeth had eight Division 1 players but only managed a 5-4 record.
"We had a bunch of superstars that were only interested in themselves," said Coach Jerry Moore.
He added that this year's team works better together.
"I like the chemistry of this group. They work hard and are very aggressive. And when we hit you, you stay hit. They are playing Elizabeth's style of football."  Fieldston (1-1) at Dwight-Englewood (0-2) Key Players: "To let Gus Ornstein set up is to set yourself up to get beat," Englewood Coach Dave Hansburg said of Fieldston's quarterback.
Ornstein (16 of 35 for 219, 1 touchdown, 1 interception), who is being recruited by Michigan, Notre Dame and Miami as a quarterback and first baseman, has the ability to pick apart opposing defenses if given the time.
Sam Gilbert (4 catches, 122 yards, 1 td) is Fieldston's deep threat.
Fieldston will have to contain the Bulldogs backfield of Josh Walsky, Rick Komotar and Steve Milo.
Comment: The outcome will be determined on the line of scrimmage, where Fieldston's over-matched line will be called upon to hold back the rush of tackles Luis Locuroto and Matt Seiff.
Connecticut  Bassick (1-1) at Darien (1-1) Key Players: Johnny Barnes (23 carries for 154 yards, 3 touchdowns) is the best of Bassick's speedy backs capable of springing at any time.
James Hanford (172 yards rushing and 3 touchdowns) and Vince Childress (181 yards, 2 touchdowns) share the running duties for Darien.
Jeff Eaton's (13 for 32 for 221 yards, 2 touchdowns) ability to complete the short passes gives the Blue Wave's offense a more diversified attack than Bassick's.
Chris Robbins (9 catches for 193 yards, 1 touchdown) is Eaton's primary target.
Comment: Darien Coach Mike Sangster says he plans to drop a few plays from the teams' playbook after losing by 21-20 to Greenwich last week, snapping the teams' 16-game unbeaten string.
"I just think that we made too many mistakes last week and that we need to go back to the basics," he said.
Westchester and Rockland  North Rockland (3-0) at Roosevelt (3-0) Key Players: While both teams are comparable in size, North Rockland's linemen hold the advantage over the Indians' less experienced big men.
Tom Morreira (tackle, 6-2, 270), Conrad Bartosik (guard, 6-0, 200), Ed Teitz (center, 6-2, 260), Tom Johnson (guard, 6-0, 200) and Rajah Winn (tackle, 5-9, 260) will need to gain maturity in a hurry and find a way to open holes for Roosevelt's star runner, Franklin McBride.
He has rushed for 4 scores and over 100 yards in each of the teams' games.
McBride's counterpart is Marcus Larkins, a 5-8, 170-pound runner who has rushed for 344 yards and 5 touchdowns.
Raiders quarterback Jeff Becker (12 of 25 for 281 yards, 5 touchdowns) is a quality drop-back passer who sees the whole field and delivers the ball with accuracy.
Comment: "This could be the biggest game ever played in Westchester and Rockland County," said Roosevelt Coach Tony Dematteo.
The teams have never met during the regular season.
The game will be carried live on Channel 3 on TCI Cable.


Synchronized Swimmer May Yet Win Gold
SYLVIE FRECHETTE, the synchronized swimmer from Canada who was denied a 1992 Olympic gold medal because of a judge's mistake, has gained the backing of swimming's world governing body in getting one now.
Canadian Olympic officials said yesterday they were informed by the world organization FINA that it would recommend to the International Olympic Committee that Frechette be awarded a duplicate gold medal for the solo synchronized swimming competition at the Barcelona Games.


Chrysler Settles on a Tentative Labor Pact
The United Automobile Workers union and the Chrysler Corporation reached a tentative agreement on a three-year labor contract shortly before dawn today.
The pact, which mimics an agreement reached by the Ford Motor Company last week, sets up the union's final round of bargaining, scheduled with the General Motors Corporation next week.


Gas Tax Hits, and Drivers Aren't Happy
With resignation and skepticism, the public began making its first contributions to reducing the Federal budget deficit today when around the country motorists woke up to President Clinton's new gasoline tax and slightly higher prices at the pump.
There was chaos at some service stations Thursday night before the 4.3-cents-a-gallon increase went into effect, with some people idling in lines to save a dime or two.
There were reports of truck drivers protesting the tax and disrupting traffic by driving the speed limit in tandem on highways in the Midwest.


Yankees Clinch Second But .300 Eludes Boggs
Wade Boggs had a gorgeous chance in the eighth inning.
A single would have scored Bernie Williams from third base with the go-ahead run, would have increased Boggs's average to .301 and probably would have finished his season.
With a .300 average and two games left, Boggs probably would not have lifted a bat again.
But he botched the chance.
In a scrappy at-bat against Detroit's Bob MacDonald, Boggs fouled off four two-strike pitches before he struck out, left two runners stranded and also left his baseball calendar open for at least one more day.
A .300 average eluded him.


Well, They All Do Wear Numbers
Last year, when former Red Sox Manager JOE MORGAN compared some baseball players unfavorably to race horses in a radio commercial for Suffolk Downs, the Red Sox took offense.
This year, the team is doing more than just grumble.
Its law firm sent a letter to the track's chairman, saying "any unauthorized use of the name and trademarks" of the Red Sox or the making of "any false or disparaging statements" about them in a new radio spot to be aired on Sunday "will not be tolerated."


American Express Gets Big U.S. Card Account
American Express strengthened its corporate card business yesterday, announcing that it had been awarded the worldwide charge card contract of the General Services Administration, the agency that buys equipment and services for the Government.
The contract, covering 900,000 employees who charge some $2.5 billion annually on travel and entertainment, is the largest commercial travel card account in the world.
It is a one-year contract, effective Nov. 30, and contains four one-year extension options.


Sale of Post To Murdoch Is Completed
Rupert Murdoch formally bought The New York Post yesterday and, ignoring the lone striking union, planned to force its members to apply for their jobs.
With the striking New York Newspaper Guild clearly defeated and appearing near surrender after Mr.
Murdoch and The Post's production unions joined together on Thursday, the guild's only remaining choices appeared to be among various forms of damage control.


There Are Cheaper and Better Ways to Win the War on Drugs
To the Editor:
The National Security Council has concluded what every cop in America has known for years: the Pentagon's programs to fight drug smuggling don't work (news article, Sept. 17).
This year, the Pentagon will spend $1.1 billion to stop the supply of drugs into this country.
A lot of this money goes to radar planes and Navy cruisers to detect drug traffickers along the southern United States border.
The Coast Guard and Customs Service spend $1 billion more.
And we've spent $1.5 billion to date fighting drug production in the Andes.


Not Vietcong's Fault
To the Editor:
The brief Associated Press article on the retirement of the aircraft carrier Forrestal (Sept. 12) repeatedly refers to a "Vietcong firebombing" in 1967.
This is in error.
At 10:51 A.M. on July 29, 1967, the Forrestal was in the fifth day of its first (and last) period off the coast of North Vietnam.
Fire broke out at the aft end of the flight deck as the ship was preparing to launch the second strike of the day.
Fed by fuel and exploding ordinance, the fire spread forward, almost as far as the island structure, eventually causing the death of 134 crewman.


In Suburbs, Voters' Minds Wander; Candidates Say New York City Still Gets Residents' Attention
When Michael G. Cherkasky and Jeanine Pirro compete for votes on Westchester County's train platforms, they share a challenge peculiar to suburban politicians: trying to seize the attention of many people whose political hearts and minds are in New York City, where they cannot vote.
These commuters live, vote and pay most of their taxes in Westchester, but many if not most seem far more beguiled by the mayoral race between David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani than by any Westchester race, including the one between Mr.
Cherkasky and Mrs.
Pirro for district attorney.


Collagen-Bard Treatment Of Incontinence Is Approved
The Collagen Corporation and C. R. Bard Inc. said today that the Food and Drug Administration had approved the marketing of their treatment of stress urinary incontinence.
Collagen, based in Palo Alto, Calif., will manufacture the Contigen Bard Collagen Implant, which is an injectable protein.
The product will be marketed by Bard, a medical supplies company based in Murray Hill, N.J.


Brooklyn Man Dies Trying to Save Daughter From Fire
A father who raced back into his burning Brooklyn home to rescue his 12-year-old daughter died early yesterday, hours after flames from what was apparently an electrical fire swept through the house, leaving every wall charred or blackened by smoke, fire officials said.
Neighbors said that in the chaotic first moments of the predawn blaze, the girl, Jennifer Lundgren, had gone back into the house to save her dog.


Giuliani's Affirmative-Action Plan Steps Up Policy Fight
By saying he would eliminate New York City's affirmative action program for minority contractors, Rudolph W. Giuliani has waged his most direct assault on Mayor David N. Dinkins's economic development policies and targeted a program that has won wide support among black, female and Hispanic voters.
Mr.
Giuliani, who is campaigning on a platform of cutting city spending and taxes, has also underscored a personal philosophy that precludes the use of economic incentives to promote social advancement at the expense of government efficiency and free-market competition.


To Russians, Ballet Appeals At Least as Much as Politics
The Seventh Moscow International Ballet Competition, which ends Saturday night with a gala concert, has been memorable for filling the red velvet and gilt stalls at the Bolshoi Theater for two weeks straight, despite swarms of grim militiamen blocking off city streets in the battle for Parliament.
The competition, dedicated to the choreography of Marius Petipa, may also be remembered as much for the prizes that were not awarded as for those that were.
Top winners in the competition were Yelena Knyazkova, a Russian who won the women's gold medal in the couples category, and Morihiro Ivata from Japan and Bernard Gourteau de Bouteille from France, who shared the gold in the men's soloist category.
No gold medals were awarded to men in the couples competition or to women in the soloist category, and no grand prix was awarded; it rarely is in Moscow.


Review/Film Festival; In China, The Personal Is Political
In China it can't be easy being a film maker, someone who wants to explore onscreen the contradictory events that have shaped not only the Communist revolution but also his own life.
It's a delicate, complicated task.
The film maker is dependent on Government departments created by the same system whose legacies he's examining.
The production and release of any film of this kind thus become something of a triumph.
Such a film is "The Blue Kite," which will be shown at the New York Film Festival this afternoon at 2:30.
Co-produced by the Chinese Government and private Hong Kong movie interests, it's the work of Tian Zhuangzhuang, whose "Horse Thief" was seen at the Film Forum in 1988.


Reviews/Film Festival; A Movie Where All the Motion Is Metaphorical
The sole visual content of Derek Jarman's film "Blue" is the color blue projected uninterruptedly and without variation for the movie's entire 76 minutes.
Against this field of color so evocative of sky, ocean, blindness, heaven and eternity unfolds a soundtrack of music, poetry and scalding excerpts from a diary by the English film maker who has been living with AIDS for several years.
"Blue," which the New York Film Festival is presenting at Alice Tully Hall tomorrow evening at 9:30, is by turns heartbreaking, enraged, boring, pretentious and riveting.
The narration, delivered with a stately equanimity by John Quentin, Nigel Terry and Tilda Swinton, is interwoven with music and sound effects to suggest a stream of consciousness that is continually changing levels.
There are moments when the film maker's spirit seems on the verge of taking leave of his body and drifting into the ether.
At other times the writing is so incendiary that he seems ready to jump out of his sickbed and burn down the hospital.


Classical Music in Review
Symphony for United Nations  Carnegie Hall
The Symphony for United Nations Benefit Concert for Bosnian Refugees on Wednesday night surrounded Marvin Hamlisch's "Anatomy of Peace" with works by Beethoven -- both, in the main, not very peaceful at all.
It was an interesting contrast in strategies: Beethoven shaking listeners by the shoulder and compelling attention, Mr.
Hamlisch wooing them with comfortable familiarities.


Latin America. Eastern Europe. Smaller Investors Expand Reach
Americans' hot romance with foreign stock funds shows no sign of cooling off.
"The American investor has always had an interest in foreign funds, but it's been heightened," said John R. Horseman, investment manager of Global Asset Management's International Fund, in a telephone interview from his London office.
"As we go into 1994, increasingly, that investor is looking around and putting bigger shares of money outside" the United States.


Critics Dismiss State Proposal For a Stadium in Manhattan
Opposition to a proposal to build a new stadium for the Yankees on the West Side of Manhattan sprouted yesterday like mushrooms on Miracle-Gro, with community advocates predicting an almost endless series of lawsuits that would delay the project for years, perhaps decades.
Neighborhood leaders and community advocates, including veterans of the successful battle against Westway, dismissed the state plan as a diversion and little more than grasping at straws.
They said it would hurt the area by adding to rush-hour commuting delays, worsening pollution and cutting off access to the riverfront.


G. Brillembourg, 35, Tax Lawyer, Writer And Alpine Climber
Gustavo E. Brillembourg, a tax lawyer at the New York firm of Davis Polk &amp; Wardwell, died on Tuesday night after he fell 120 feet from a mountain ledge he was climbing in the Yosemite Valley in California.
He was 35 and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Brillembourg took part in a number of large corporate mergers and acquisitions in the 1980's, including the formation of the drug company SmithKline Beecham.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic Avery Fisher Hall
Listeners unaccustomed to Bruckner's music are startled if not vaguely repelled by its generosity.
So much of the repertory they have learned to value celebrates concision and momentum.
The message of Bruckner's Fourth Symphony, which Kurt Masur and the New York Philharmonic played on Thursday night, says something different: that nothing will be hurried and that there will always be more time.


Thomas F. Jones, 71, Waterfront Investigator
Thomas F. Jones, former chief investigator of the Waterfront Commission of New York Harbor, died on Tuesday at Lakeland Regional Medical Center in Lakeland, Fla.
He was 71.
The cause of death was heart failure, said a daughter, Kathleen Ogle.


NAVY OFFICIAL ASKS OUSTER OF ADMIRAL IN TAILHOOK CASE
Navy Secretary John H. Dalton has asked for the removal of the Navy's top officer, Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, for failing to show proper leadership at a convention of naval aviators in 1991 where scores of women were assaulted, Pentagon officials said tonight.
In a sweeping indictment of senior Navy leadership, Mr.
Dalton has also notified Defense Secretary Les Aspin that he will seek disciplinary action against 12 other admirals and Marine generals who attended the 1991 Tailhook Association convention, damaging if not effectively ending their naval careers.


Lawyer Pounces on Gaps In Murder Suspect's Story
For a second day, James P. Wanger was bombarded today with tough questions about inconsistencies and gaps in his accounts of where he was and what he did on the day Robert A. Solimine Jr. was strangled.
And once again, the 19-year-old Clifton man, who is charged with garroting Mr.
Solimine on Feb. 16, 1992, tried his best to counter the testimony of three youths who said he had killed his former friend.


In Her Majesty's Service, but Without Free Soap
For the small army of courtiers and chauffeurs, stable hands and servants who attend Britain's royal family, the edict delivered this week by Buckingham Palace's management consultants was blunt and unsparing: Off with their perks!
It is all part of a plan "to rationalize and streamline" palace pay and administrative costs and bring its tradition-bound operations in line with modern business procedures.
Those include a plan announced last month to tie staff pay increases to performance instead of seniority.
Traveling Clothes
The staff that serves Queen Elizabeth II will now receive small annual cash stipends in lieu of an elaborate and ancient system of royal perquisites, which have ranged from free shoe repairs and bars of soap for household staff, to free suits for the senior courtiers who accompanied the Queen on overseas trips.


At This Care Center, Childhood Never Ends
THINGS were busy at the Day Care Center on the top floor of the Van Etten building of the Bronx Municipal Hospital.
In the intermediate class, the one for 3-year-olds, a little boy in brown overalls who said his name was Superman took a visitor by the hand and led him to a box with plastic animals.
"This is the biggest dinosaur," he said.
"Grrrrr," he said showing his own teeth.
Then he picked up a zebra and had it fight the purple dinosaur, making the creatures dance and bashing their heads together.
When the fight stopped he brought the animals close so that their faces touched and he made a kissing sound.


Man Found Guilty of Selling Arms To Groups of White Supremacists
A man with ties to white supremacists was convicted today of making illegal weapons and selling them to hate groups.
In the trial, the first growing out of a series of raids in July against local hate groups, his wife was also convicted of conspiracy.
The man, Christian Nadal, 35, and his wife Doris, 41, were among nine people arrested in the sweep that also uncovered a plot here to assassinate prominent blacks and blow up churches and synagogues.


A Keycorp-Society Merger Is Expected to Be Disclosed
Two large banking companies, Keycorp, based in Albany, and the Society Corporation, based in Cleveland, are expected to announce on Monday that they will merge, investment bankers said yesterday.
If completed, the transaction would create a bank that would nearly blanket the Northern United States from Maine to Alaska.
With $55 billion in assets, the combined bank would be the country's 10th largest and would have a stock market capitalization of nearly $8 billion.


Corrections
An article on Monday about a New York State mental-health bill referred incorrectly to the position of state legislators on Long Island who are concerned about the proposed closing of Kings Park Psychiatric Center.
They want assurances from the state that local planning officials will have a significant voice in determining the future use of the site, rather than wanting another state use, like a prison or a substance-abuse center.


Corrections
The obituary of James H. Doolittle on Wednesday, and in late editions on Tuesday, misstated his rank.
He was promoted by President Ronald Reagan in 1985 from lieutenant general to full general.
The obituary also described B-25 bombers incorrectly.
They were medium bombers, not attack bombers.
In some copies, because of an editing error, the obituary misspelled the name of an airfield in Nassau County, L.I.
It was Mitchel Field.


Reviews/Pop; A Turn Toward Country
"We all have stories, I suppose," Joe Henry sang on Wednesday night at Fez.
"But in mine she always goes." He did have a few other topics, but as he does on his current album, "Kindness of the World" (Mammoth), he kept returning to the image of a lover left behind.
Mr.
Henry is steeped in Bob Dylan; his tunes aim for a folky simplicity, and his voice catches in his nose and the back of his throat.
Over the course of five albums, he has gradually pared away self-consciously poetic imagery and overwrought self-pity.
Although he hasn't exactly cheered up, his songs have moved toward the terse, homespun approach of country.


No Favors From Reeves for Moore
If there's one thing about Giants Coach Dan Reeves, it is that he doesn't mince words.
Today, with a big game against Buffalo looming on Sunday, he was asked about guard Eric Moore, who will become eligible on Monday after serving a four-game suspension for violating the league's substance-abuse policy.
What will the Giants do when Moore comes back?


Basically Bach
Basically Bach, an all-day festival, begins today at 1 P.M. at St.
Peter's Church, Lexington Avenue at 54th Street.
The festival starts with five 45-minute organ recitals performed on the hour by Judith Hancock, Christopher Creaghan, Thomas Schmidt, Walter Hilse and McNeil Robinson, respectively.
At 7:30 P.M. the St.
Peter's Choir and Orchestra, conducted by Mr.
Schmidt, will perform the cantatas No. 140 ("Wachet auf, ruft uns die Stimme") and No. 4 ("Christ lag in Todesbanden").
Tickets are $20 for the entire series, $5 for each organ recital and $10 for the evening concert.
Information: (212) 935-2200.


Giuliani Says Dinkins Ally Made an Anti-Italian Slur
Rudolph W. Giuliani asserted yesterday that a prominent black minister's charge that he is supported by "fascist elements" seemed intended as an anti-Italian slur and may have been part of a coordinated effort by the Dinkins campaign to use supporters to inject race into the campaign.
Mr.
Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate, also said that Mayor David N. Dinkins appeared "to acquiesce" in the comments made by the Rev.
William A. Jones during an endorsement news conference on Thursday, and should have denounced Mr.
Jones forcefully.


Trombonists in a Variety Show of Traditions
The opening concert of Highlights in Jazz, at Pace University in lower Manhattan on Thursday night, was all amiability.
The show brought together the trombonists Al Grey, George Masso and Slide Hampton, and in various combinations with their rhythm section, the three produced a concert that never quite took off but didn't wither away either.
As with most of the concerts in the Highlights series, this one presented the idea that musicians from different generations and working in different styles can find a common ground, and it was fascinating to hear all the contrasts and clashes.


Beliefs
When Laurence O'Connnell was told one day last February that the White House was calling, he thought it was a practical joke.
If Dr.
O'Connell had been a medical economist, he might not have been surprised.
But instead he is a medical ethicist, president of the Park Ridge Center, a Chicago institute that studies the intersection of health care and religious beliefs.
And the call, he says now, "came out of the blue."


Romanians Don't See King as Figurehead; He Flew to England
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 14 article on King Michael describes him as being, except for a few months, "only a figurehead." Such is the nature of constitutional monarchy.
However, for the courageous 1944 action of the 23-year-old King Michael in overthrowing Ion Antonescu, the pro-Nazi dictator, he received the Legion of Merit from President Truman.
King Michael was forced to abdicate by the Communists at gunpoint in 1947.
For many Romanians he remains the one hope of a return to "freedom and democracy."


The Ad Campaign; Gulotta on the Attack
Nassau County Executive Thomas S. Gulotta has begun broadcasting a 30-second commercial and two 15-second commercials on five New York City-based television stations.
The spots charge that Mr.
Gulotta's Democratic opponent, Benjamin L. Zwirn, Supervisor of North Hempstead, has not kept his promises to cut taxes.
The campaign says it is spending $125,000 to run the ads for 10 days, not counting the purchase of time on cable.
A typical Long Island viewer is expected to see the commercials three times over the next week.
ON THE SCREEN All three commercials begin with a fairy-tale motif, with a rainbow over some hills.
Text appears at the bottom, and pages turn on screen as if it were a children's book.
Then, the commercial cuts to an unflaterring picture of Mr.
Zwirn set against a black background.


Demonstrators Seize Project In Brooklyn
About 250 Hispanic residents of the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn took over a nearly completed public housing project last night, moving in television sets, blankets and their children because they said they fear that Hasidic Jews in the neighborhood might get special treatment in gaining apartments when the project opens.
By early this morning, the protest was peaceful, and the police made no effort to evacuate the demonstrators from the 150 units at the project, at South 10th and Berry Streets.
The four buildings in the boxy brick project, developed by the New York City Housing Authority, are to be completed by November, although some units already have electricity and running water.


Microsoft To Display New Line
The Microsoft Corporation plans to introduce a new product line on Monday focusing on the home computing market.
The creation of the Microsoft Home brand will bring together a variety of the company's software applications into a single product line combining the categories of home business, games and multimedia.


Clinton and China's President Will Meet to Discuss Disputes
As part of a strategy to improve the increasingly troubled relationship between Washington and Beijing, the Clinton Administration has scheduled a number of high-level meetings with Chinese officials.
President Clinton will meet with President Jiang Zemin of China for the first time at a meeting of heads of member states of the Asian Pacific Economic Cooperation Organization, a forum devoted to economic cooperation, Secretary of State Warren Christopher said in New York on Thursday.
The meeting is planned for November in Seattle.


Philharmonic Seasons
To the Editor:
A Sept. 21 article on the opening of the music season erroneously refers to the New York Philharmonic's new season as its 151st.
Actually, coming 151 years after the orchestra's first season, that of 1842-43, this is its 152d.


4 Straight, But Aide For Mets Keeps Hair
It seemed somehow grotesquely apropos that on the Mets' most glorious night of 1993 -- their first four-game winning streak of the season -- there was some bad news.
Catcher Todd Hundley, in making a run-saving tag of Florida Marlins catcher Bob Natal at the plate in the third inning, suffered a nondisplaced fracture of a bone in his left wrist.
The wrist was put in a temporary sling, and Hundley will be examined in New York Tuesday.
He is expected to wear a cast for six weeks.


One More Lap for Mario Andretti
MARIO ANDRETTI will drive one more Indy-car season for the Newman-Haas Racing team and then retire, he announced yesterday.
Andretti, 53, said that he was grateful to his car owners, CARL HAAS and PAUL NEWMAN, for "giving me a job for another year."


Rangers and Devils Leery of Waiver Draft
With talent superior to the vast majority of teams in the National Hockey League, the Rangers and the Devils are susceptible to losing a player or two each in Sunday's waiver draft.
"It's the price you pay for being deep," Neil Smith, the general manager of the Rangers, said last night before the Rangers concluded their preseason with a 4-1 victory over the Devils at Madison Square Garden.
"I think we'll lose at least one."


Female Goalie to Get a Tryout
ERIN WHITTEN, the second woman to play professional hockey, will get a tryout next week with the Toledo Storm of the East Coast Hockey League.
The Toledo coach, CHRIS McSORLEY told The Glens Falls (N.Y.) Post-Star that he planned to start Whitten, a goaltender, in an exhibition game next Saturday.
"She's a great athlete, she's quick," McSorley said.
"She'll definitely contend for a job,"


Times-Affiliated Merger
The New York Times Company announced yesterday that it had completed its merger with Affiliated Publications Inc., parent of The Boston Globe, by issuing 36.4 million shares of Times class A stock in exchange for Affiliated shares.
Shareholders of each company approved the $1 billion merger at separate meetings Tuesday in New York and Boston.


Inquiry on Commerce Secretary Finds Vietnam Bank Account Plan
Federal investigators examining a Vietnamese businessman's assertion that Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown sought $700,000 to help end a trade embargo against Vietnam have uncovered evidence that the Vietnamese were preparing to establish a special bank account in Singapore, Administration officials said today.
The evidence, in the form of transfers of an undisclosed sum of money in East Asian banks, appears to corroborate portions of the account of Ly Thanh Binh, the businessman who told the Federal authorities that a former associate approached Mr.
Brown last fall to enlist his help to improve trade relations between the United States and Vietnam.


Commercial Property:/Asset Managers; Mixing Hands-On Knowledge With Strategic Savvy
A COUPLE of years ago James Maurer saw the writing on the wall.
Working for a local developer at a time when development work was close to zilch, he decided to make a career switch.
He presented himself to Mutual Benefit Life as a workout specialist, someone who could help whip the properties that were coming to them through foreclosures into financial and physical shape, and create a strategic plan for eventually leasing or disposing of them.


Printmaker Captures Victorian Charm
JOSEPH PENNELL died in 1926 at the age of 69.
Yet, like his English contemporary Arthur Conan Doyle, the graphic artist belongs among the robust Victorians.
He was a prodigious traveler, drawing his way through Europe and all over his own country.
And, in addition to producing more than 1,500 prints and a score of illustrated books, he was active as a juror of exhibitions and a lecturer.
As a native Philadelphian, Pennell was commemorated there in the year of his death by a bumper exhibition but except for a recent restrospective at the Library of Congress, he has received remarkably little attention.
These are among the facts ingeniously worked into the three long columns of blank verse that accompany the Pennell show now hanging in the Benton Museum at the University of Connecticut in Storrs.
Norman Kraeft is the poet and, with his wife, June, the show's guest curator.
Print fanciers will recall the displays that, during the 1970's and 80's, the Kraefts dispatched from their gallery in Bethlehem -- first to Washington, D.C., and then on to motels in farther flung places -- and, of course, their bimonthly newsletters.
Though the two remain devoted to prints, specifically the early 20th-century American variety, they have given up dealing and are devoting their energy to the production and appreciation of poetry.
Mr.
Kraeft is president of the Connecticut Poetry Society.


Novels for the Computer
To the Editor:
When I come upon the word "hyperfiction," my mind rebels.
A decade or two ago, I was deluded into making some attempt to understand deconstruction.
After reading two books and some articles and comments on the subject, and after many conversations with others who might have understood but didn't, I have come to a couple of conclusions about that hopeful doctrine.


CRIME
Originality is a tough concept to nail down in genre fiction.
Sometimes it means the kind of writing that breaks conventions -- by making a villain of a hero, as Agatha Christie did so subtly, or, like Thomas Harris, by taking readers so deep into a killer's mind that we share the madness.
But originality can also mean working the same old conventions in the same old ways while allowing the characters unconventional responses, which is what James Preston Girard does in his mesmerizing novel, THE LATE MAN (Atheneum, $20).
Surely we've read this plot before: a reporter and a police detective are both obsessed with a series of unsolved murders.
Capt.
L.
J.
Loomis of the Wichita Police Department attributes the crackup of his marriage to his failure to find the person who strangled five women, leaving broken flowers by their corpses.
Sam Haun, a newspaperman who has been traumatized by the accidental death of his unfaithful wife, is haunted by the killings in a way he can't explain.
"I'm not personally involved with wanting to catch him," Haun tells Loomis after the strangler strikes again.
"I'm just trying to understand."


Conversations/Charles W. Adams; The Rise and Fall of Civilization According to Tax Collection
THE Constitution and the ballot may protect Americans against overreaching tax collectors, but some of the ancients enjoyed even better security.
An extortions court created by the Romans enabled Cicero and others to prosecute overzealous tax men.
The code of laws (313 A.D.) under Constantine provided civil remedies for judges derelict in defending taxpayers against abuses.
The penalty: 30 pounds of gold assessed against the judge and payable to the taxpayer.


It's Russian Penguins and Mighty Ducks
The National Hockey League begins its regular season Tuesday night with a new alignment and 26 teams, up by two teams from last season, up by five from three years ago and up by 20 since 1967.
So, what else is up?


Daly Among Entries in England
JOHN DALY will make his debut in the Toyota World Match Play Championship, to be held at Virginia Water, England, Oct. 21-24.
Daly, the 1991 PGA champion, was among 12 golfers named to play in the tournament at the Wentworth course.


Mortality Tale
LIFE WORK By Donald Hall. 124 pp. Boston: Beacon Press. $15.


One Killed and 7 Injured in Bronx Shooting
A man was killed and seven people were wounded yesterday in a shooting at a busy intersection in the Hunts Points section of the Bronx when at least two gunmen drove by and opened fire as passers-by scurried for cover, the police said.
A bystander, Douglas Velasquez, 22, of 601 Prospect Avenue in the Bronx, was shot two times in the back and died near a newsstand on Southern Boulevard.


One Prodigy Itches to Become an Adult
Leila Josefowicz's Period of grace as a precocious novelty is almost at an end.
At 15, Ms.
Josefowicz is a step further down the road than Sarah Chang.
A student at the Curtis Institute of Music here, she wears two diamond studs in one ear and plays the 1708 "Ruby" Stradivarius, on long-term loan to her by the Stradivarius Society.
She has been a soloist with the Philadelphia Orchestra, the Los Angeles Philharmonic, the National Symphony and the Academy of St.
Martin-in-the-Fields; she did the Johnny Carson show and a Bob Hope special.
A teen-ager with the apple-cheeked freshness of a young Ann-Margret, Ms.
Josefowicz is itching to leave prodigyhood behind.
"You're playing serious music, and you want to be taken seriously," she said.
"When they get my age wrong on the program, I wish they'd make me older."


When the Baton Drops, Get Ready for World Premieres and Old Favorites
Here are some highlights of the 1993-94 music season: NEW JERSEY  SYMPHONY ORCHESTRA
Masterworks Series
(Concerts at the State Theater in New Brunswick, Count Basie Theater in Red Bank, War Memorial Theater in Trenton, SymphonyHall in Newark and John Harms Center in Englewood.)
Today, 3 P.M., Newark: Zdenek Macal, conductor.
Hanson's Symphony No. 2 (Op. 30) and Mahler's Symphony No. 1 in D.
Nov. 4, 8 P.M., New Brunswick: Maximiano Valdes, conductor; Garrick Ohlsson, pianist.
Sampson's "Simple Lives," Debussy's "Iberia" No. 2 from "Images," and Brahms's Piano Concerto No. 1 in D minor (Op. 15).
Repeated Nov. 5, 8:30 P.M., Red Bank; Nov. 6, 8 P.M., Trenton; Nov. 7, 3 P.M., Newark.
Nov. 18, 8 P.M., Englewood: James Paul, conductor; Shlomo Mintz, violin.
Tchaikovsky's Concerto in D for Violin and Orchestra (Op. 35) and Elgar's Symphony No. 1 in A flat (Op. 55).
Repeated Nov. 20, 8 P.M., Trenton; Nov. 21, 3 P.M., Newark.
Dec. 2, 8 P.M., Englewood: Mr.
Macal, conductor; Alexander Toradze, pianist.
Ott's "Water Garden" (New Jersey premiere), Rachmaninoff's Concerto No. 2 in C minor for Piano and Orchestra (Op. 18) and Schumann's Symphony No. 2 in C (Op. 61).
Repeated Dec. 3, 8:30 P.M., Red Bank; Dec. 4, 8 P.M., New Brunswick; Dec. 5, 3 P.M., Newark.
Jan. 13, 8 P.M., Englewood: Stanislaw Skrowaczewski, conductor; Robert McDuffie, violinist.
Beethoven's Overture to "Coriolan" (Op. 62), Prokofiev's Concerto No. 2 in G minor for Violin and Orchestra (Op 63) and Bruckner's Symphony No. 3 in D minor.
Repeated Jan. 14, 8 P.M., Trenton; Jan. 16, 3 P.M., Newark.
Feb. 3, 8 P.M., Englewood: Mr.
Macal conducting.
"Festival of Czech Music." Smetana's "Ma Vlast" (New Jersey premiere).
Repeated Feb. 4, 8:30 P.M., Red Bank; Feb. 5, 8 P.M., New Brunswick; Feb. 6, 3 P.M., Newark.
Feb. 10, 8 P.M., Trenton: Mr.
Macal, conductor; Westminster Symphonic Choir and Deborah Voigt, soprano; Claudine Carlson,mezzo-soprano; John Aler, tenor, and John Cheek, bass.
"Festival of Czech Music." Dvorak's "Stabat Mater." Repeated Feb. 11, 8 P.M., New Brunswick; Feb. 12, 8 P.M., Carnegie Hall, New York.
March 3, 8 P.M., New Brunswick: David Loebel, conductor; Pamela Frank, violinist.
Powell's Settings for Small Orchestra (New Jersey Symphony Orchestra commission, East Coast premiere), Mozart's Concerto No. 4 in D for Violin and Orchestra (K. 218) and Stravinsky's "Petrouchka" (1947).
Repeated March 4, 8:30 P.M., Red Bank; March 5, 8 P.M., Trenton; March 6, 3 P.M., Newark.
April 7, 8 P.M., Englewood: Mr.
Macal, conductor; Nadja Salerno-Sonnenberg, violinist.
Grieg's Suite No. 1 from "Peer Gynt" (Op. 46), Barber's Concerto for Violin and Orchestra (Op. 14) and Tchaikovsky's Symphony No.  4 in F minor.
Repeated April 8, 8 P.M., New Brunswick; April 9, 8 P.M., Trenton; April 10, 3 P.M., Newark.
April 28, 8 P.M., Englewood: Lawrence Leighton Smith, conductor; Nathaniel Rosen, cellist.
Daugherty's "Silent Night/Bizarro World" (New Jersey premiere), Haydn's Cello Concerto in D and Nielsen's Symphony No. 4 ("The Inextinguishable") (Op. 29).
Repeated April 29, 8:30 P.M., Red Bank; April 30, 8 P.M., New Brunswick; May 1, 3 P.M., Newark.
May 19, 8 P.M., Englewood: Mr.
Macal, conductor; Andre Watts, pianist.
Sierra's "Sasima" (New Jersey premiere), Brahms's Piano Concerto No. 2 in B flat (Op. 83) and R. Strauss's "Ein Heldenleben" (Op. 40).
Repeated May 20, 8 P.M., Trenton; May 21, 8 P.M., New Brunswick; May 22, 3 P.M., Newark.
Telephone numbers for information: (800) ALLEGRO or (201) 624-8203.
COLONIAL SYMPHONY
(Yehuda Gilad, music director and conductor. Martin Bookspan, concert previews. Concerts in Chatham High School auditorium, on Lafayette Avenue in Chatham. All concerts at 8:30 P.M.; previews at 7:30 P.M.)
Friday: Ray Mase, trumpet soloist.
Concerto for Strings (world premiere) by Randall Svane, Haydn's Trumpet Concerto in E flat and Beethoven's Symphony No. 8 in F (Op. 93).
Dec. 3: Myra Garcia-Fernandez, soprano soloist.
Corelli's Concerto Grosso No. 6 in F, J. S. Bach's Cantata No. 202 ("Wedding Cantata"), Zelenka's "Hypochondria" and J. S.  Bach's Brandenburg Concerto No. 3.
Feb. 11: Jane Bunnell, mezzo-soprano.
Prokofiev's Symphony No. 1 (Op. 25), Berlioz's "Les nuits d'ete" (Op. 7) and Mozart's Symphony No. 41 in C (K. 551).
April 8: Tamaki Kawakubo, violin soloist.
Ibert's Divertissement, Dvorak's Violin Concerto in A minor and Bizet's Symphony No. 1 in C.
May 6: Marcy Rosen, cello soloist.
Rossini's "La Scala di Seta" Overture, Donald Crockett's Cello Concerto (world premiere) and Mendelssohn's Symphony No. 3 in A minor (Op. 56).
Single tickets, $10 to $29; subscription packages available. (201) 377-1310.
BRIDGETON SYMPHONY
(All programs, at 8 P.M., conducted by Russell Meyer, music director. Bridgeton programs at Bridgeton High School; Stockton programs at Stockton State College Performing Arts Center in Pomona. "Pre-Concert Conversations With the Maestro" at 7 P.M.)
Saturday (Bridgeton): Matt Haimovitz, cello soloist.
Verdi's Overture to "La Forza del Destino," Webern's Six Pieces for Orchestra, Bloch's "Hebraic Rhapsody: Schelomo" for cello and Brahms's Symphony No. 4.
Nov. 13 (Bridgeton): Rutgers Glee Club and Robert Guarino, tenor soloist.
Gershwin's "Promenade," Bizet's "Carmen" Suite No. 1 and Liszt's "Faust Symphony." Repeated Nov. 20, Stockton.
March 5 (Bridgeton): Scott Yoo, violin soloist.
Ives's "Decoration Day," Lalo's "Symphonie Espagnole" and Tchaikovsky's Symphony No. 6 ("Pathetique").
Repeated March 12, Stockton.
May 14 (Bridgeton): Mark Westcott, piano soloist.
All-Beethoven program.
Overture to "King Stephen," Symphony No. 6 ("Pastoral") and Piano Concerto No. 4.
Repeated May 21, Stockton.
Subscriptions to Bridgeton series, $40 (children under 12, $20); (609) 451-1169.
Stockton subscriptions, $45 and $60 (children under 12, $23 and $30). (609) 652-9000.
UNITY CONCERTS
Maestro Series  (All concerts at Montclair High School auditorium, Park and Chestnut Streets, in Montclair).
Oct. 21, 8:30 P.M.: Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra; Kurt Masur, conductor.
Nov. 14, 3:30 P.M.: Orpheus Chamber Orchestra; Alicia de Larrocha, piano soloist.
Dec. 5, 3:30 P.M.: Awadagin Pratt, pianist (1992 Naumburg Competition winner).
Jan. 21,8:30 P.M.: Yo-Yo Ma, cellist, and Peter Serkin, pianist.
Feb. 6, 3:30 P.M.: Emanuel Ax, pianist.
March 6, 3:30 P.M.: Berlin Chamber Orchestra.
March 20, 3:30 P.M.: Shanghai Quartet with Ruth Laredo, pianist.
May 1, 3:30 P.M.: Pamela Frank, violinist, and Claude Frank, pianist.
Single tickets, $15 to $40; subscriptions, $105 to $200. (201) 744-6770.
FRIDAY EVENING CLUB
(All events at Morris Knolls High School auditorium, Franklin Avenue, in Denville.)
Classical Series
Oct. 30, 8 P.M.: Midori, violinist.
Jan. 23, 3 P.M.: Leonard Bernstein Celebration.
Feb. 11, 8 P.M.: James Galway, flutist, with Christopher O'Riley, pianist.
March 25, 8 P.M.: The Romeros Quartet (classical guitar quartet).
Jazz-Pop Series
Oct. 16, 8 P.M.: Judy Collins.
Nov. 13, 8 P.M.: Wynton Marsalis with his Septet.
Jan. 9, 3 P.M.: The Manhattan Rhythm Kings.
Feb. 26, 3 P.M.: Ladysmith Black Mambazo.
Special Events
Dec. 11, 8 P.M.: Vienna Choir Boys.
April 16, 8 P.M.: Marilyn Horne, mezzo-soprano.
May 7, 8 P.M.: Victor Borge.
Tickets, $10 to $50. Children's series, $5 to $10. (201) 538-6413.
NEW BRUNSWICK  CULTURAL CENTER
(Concerts at the State Theater, Livingston Avenue, in New Brunswick.)
Symphony Series
(Programs at 8 P.M.; preconcert lectures at 7 P.M.)
Oct. 21: St.
Paul Chamber Orchestra.
Hugh Wolff, conductor, and Yefim Bronfman, piano soloist.
Nov. 11: Bolshoi Symphony Orchestra.
Alexander Lazerev, conductor, and Alexander Rudin, cello soloist.
Feb. 10: Dresden Philharmonie.
Jorg-Peter Weigle, conductor; Philippe Entremont, pianist; Cho-Liang Lin, violinist, and Carter Brey, cellist.
March 17: Orchestre National de France.  Charles Dutoit, conductor.
April 14: Liege Philharmonic of Belgium.
Pierre Bartholmee, conductor; Ory Shihor, pianist.
April 28: Cincinnati Symphony Orchestra.  Jesus Lopez-Cobos, conductor.
Jazz Series  (Programs at 8 P.M.)
Oct. 12: George Shearing and Joe Williams.
Feb. 3: Diane Schuur and the Count Basie Orchestra.
March 12: Dave Brubeck Quartet.
April 29: Bobby McFerrin's Hard Choral.
Information: (908) 246-7469.
RIDGEWOOD CONCERT BAND
(Concerts at Benjamin Franklin Middle School auditorium, Glen and Van Dien Streets, in Ridgewood. Chris Wilhjelm, conductor.)
Today, 7 P.M.: Ridgewood Concert Band Sousa Spectacular.
Nov. 21, 3 P.M.: "Pictures at an Exhibition."
Feb. 13, 3 P.M.: President's Day Concert.
May 15, 3 P.M.: Masterworks for Winds and Chorus, with Pro-Arte Chorale.
June 12, 7 P.M.: "A Summer Rhapsody."
Tickets, $12, $10 for the elderly, $6 for students. (201) 423-1271.


Laura Tully and Robert Schneider
Laura Lee Tully, a daughter of Mary Jean Crenshaw Tully and C. Robert Tully, both of Armonk, N.Y., was married yesterday to Robert Stewart Schneider, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Edward M. Schneider of Highland Heights, Ohio.
The Very Rev.
James Parks Morton, Dean of the Episcopal Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, performed the ceremony at the Rainbow Pavilion at Rockefeller Center in New York.
Ms.
Tully, who is keeping her name, is a manager in the medical products group of Hewlett-Packard in Andover, Mass.
She graduated cum laude from Wesleyan University and received a master's degree in management from Yale University.


Deaths of Basque Suspects Stir Public Sympathy
The deaths of two Basque guerrilla suspects in police custody last weekend has stirred sympathy for Basque separatism just as public support for the E.T.A. separatist group appeared to be dwindling.
Until the deaths prompted charges of police brutality, E.T.A. -- the initials stand for "Basque Homeland and Freedom" in the region's language -- had been on the defensive after the capture of several leaders and its kidnapping of a Basque industrialist.


Wai Lam Wong, Douglas Ling
Dr.
Wai Lam Wong, a post-doctoral research fellow at the Albert Einstein School of Medicine in the Bronx, was married yesterday to Dr.
Douglas Shiu Fong Ling, a research instructor at the State University Health Science Center in Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Kirk Bingaman, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton, N.J.
The bride graduated from the University of California at Los Angeles.
The couple received their Ph.D. degrees, she in pharmacology and he in biomedical engineering, from a joint program of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey and Rutgers University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Sai Kai Wong of San Gabriel, Calif.
Her father is a restaurateur there.


Could the Sun Ever Set On the BBC?
DENNIS POTTER, THE WRITER of some of the British Broadcasting Corporation's most critically acclaimed programs, is an acerbic sort.
But reminiscing recently about growing up with the BBC, the 58-year-old Mr.
Potter seemed at times positively misty-eyed.
"I'll admit that I'm quite ready to be a churl in sharpened hobnails," Mr.
Potter, the writer of "Pennies From Heaven" and "The Singing Detective," told an audience at a television industry conference.
"But it would be graceless of me not to acknowledge with an open heart the significant part the BBC played in my life and the lives of the people I came from. Millions of our fellow citizens feel the same way, for there have been all too few British institutions of any size of which one could say with hand on heart that they truly work, that they are the best that is."


IN SHORT/FOOTBALL
I'M STILL SCRAMBLING By Randall Cunningham  and Steve Wartenberg. Doubleday, $20.


World Markets; A New Coffee Cartel Tries Its Hand
WORLD coffee producers could well have cheered last week: "King Coffee is dead -- long live King Coffee."
On Monday, the United States pulled out of the International Coffee Organization, driving a coffin nail into the 30-year-old consumer and producer forum.


A Night at the Opera
ABOVE 11:35 P.M.: From left, PLACIDO DOMINGO, JOSE CARRERAS and LUCIANO PAVAROTTI, the celebrated tenors, with the evening's conductor, JAMES LEVINE, at the post-performance dinner.
The evening raised over $3 million for the Metropolitan Opera.
RIGHT 10:40 P.M.: Philip Baloun, a floral designer, created a fantasy topiary garden for the festivities at the Metropolitan Opera House.
Cecile Zilkha was responsible for organizing the dinner party that followed the performance.
ABOVE 11:20 P.M.: LEE ANNENBERG snapped photographs of guests at her table.
JAVIER PEREZ DE CUELLAR was seated next to her.
ABOVE 6:15 P.M.: From left, BETSY BLOOMINGDALE talked to ASTRID and KIP FORBES at a champagne reception before the opera.
ABOVE 10:15 P.M.: OSCAR DE LA RENTA with MERCEDES BASS, who was wearing a white and black dress of his design, leaving their box.
They passed a display of Enrico Caruso's Pagliacci costume.
ABOVE 6:25 P.M.: LEWIS and RACHEL RUDIN arriving at the opera house for the opening of the season.
ABOVE 6:35 P.M.: CAROLYNE ROEHM wore a mermaid-style dress of black sequins in a lacy pattern over a flesh-colored base, and a floor-sweeping coat of black tissue taffeta.
RIGHT 10:20 P.M.: From left, ANNETTE DE LA RENTA, Senator JOHN WARNER and BARBARA WALTERS climb the Met's grand stairway. (Photographs by BILL CUNNINGHAM for The New York Times)


Olympic Deals Still Available
Package tours are still being offered for the 16-day Olympic Winter Games, which open in Lillehammer, Norway, next Feb. 12.
Many packages do not include tickets to events, which can be bought in the United States only from Cartan Tours.
In late September, Cartan said it had fewer than 3,000 tickets left for the games, which will be held in Lillehammer, Hamar and Gjovik.
A Cartan spokesman said tickets ranged from $20 to $165.


Reflections On a Floor
To the Editor:  I was the decorator for the New York Philharmonic's opening night party (Evening Hours, Sept. 26).


Paddling the Connecticut River: Cleaner but Still Threatened
PEOPLE who grew up along the Connecticut River recall a time in the 1960's when rats and seagulls seemed the only wildlife that could survive on its shores.
Some referred to the river as one of the nation's best landscaped sewers.
But on a canoe trip in Whalebone Cove recently, Juliana Barrett, an ecologist with the Nature Conservancy, pointed out ospreys and herons that now ply the river's rich fishing grounds.
Snapping turtles abound amid huge stands of wild rice and sedge.
Wildflowers also abound: purple pieweed, white arrow leaf, reddish orchid-like groundnut and red cardinal plant.
The water was crystal clear and the fragrance that of a healthy marsh.


Ecuadorean Immigrants Finding Obstacles in Their Path
"I HOPE to go home someday," said the neatly dressed young man.
"The problems of this country are too great for me to stay. There is too much discrimination here."
Francel Aguirre, a slightly built 27-year-old Ecuadorean, spoke quietly about his life as a member of the village of Ossining's largest group of new immigrants.
He was surrounded by the friendly faces of fellow members of his English-as-a-second-language class, in the Ossining School District Office on Croton Avenue.
The village of Ossining has one of the largest concentrations of Ecuadoreans in the county; there are also growing populations in Croton-on-Hudson and Peekskill.
The teachers of English as a second language had organized a lunchtime party to celebrate their students' progress and allow them to share native foods.
The 20 people included a man from Mexico City, a woman from Korea, a woman from Japan and a man from Bangladesh.
Mr.
Aguirre said: "The different races cannot live together here. They must always stay apart. Ecuadoreans are victims of so many things, and we can say nothing. We don't do anything bad. We just work hard, and they give us a hard time." Census Figures Analyzed
Outside the shelter of such institutions as the English-as-a-second-language classroom, Mr.
Aguirre and his fellow Ecuadoreans say they are often victims of crime and discrimination.
According to 1990 census figures, the white population in the village of Ossining grew at a rate of 2 percent between 1980 and 1990.
The population of nonwhites, as the census report puts it, grew by 44 percent, and the Hispanic population (which can be of any race) increased by 113 percent.
By 1990, there were 3,692 Hispanic people in the village, whose population at that time was 22,582.
Many village residents estimate that there are at least several thousand Ecuadoreans living and working in Ossining, legally or illegally, making them the largest group of recent immigrants in the village.
Of the village's 22,000 or so residents, 4,350 in 1990 were foreign born.
Ossining Union Free School District statistics show that, as of last March, Ecuadorean children represented the largest immigrant group, with 35 newly arrived students in a school population of 3,281.
The next largest groups were from Jamaica, Colombia, Peru, Portugal and Haiti.
Students who have lived in this country for longer than three years are not counted in the yearly school district new-immigrant census, so the actual number of immigrant students is much higher.
Officials at St.
Ann's School, one of two Roman Catholic schools in Ossining, also say that their largest group of new immigrants is from Ecuador, with 11 children out of a total of 285 in the last school year.
But many Ecuadorean men come to Ossining without their families, work at transitory jobs in landscaping and construction and are uncounted.
As large as the Ecuadorean population seems, it is hard to gauge without census designations more specific than "Mexican, Cuban, Puerto Rican and other Hispanic" and without children to be counted in the school census.
There were 2,312 "other Hispanic" residents in the village, according to the census.
Like many of them, Mr.
Aguirre left his parents, two brothers and a sister at home in Ecuador and has lived with his uncle and brother in an apartment near the Sing Sing Correctional Facility for five years.
A baker who works nights, he said he had been denied a green card (the common name for the alien registration card), but he said he would try again.
The card is obtained when either a close family member is a legal resident or an employer files a petition with the Immigration and Naturalization Service asking that the person be granted lawful permanent resident status.
Some applications are processed quickly.
Some are more complicated.
Many illegal immigrants fall prey to fraudulent schemes promising a green card.
Mr.
Aquirre said he was attacked while walking along Spring Street in the village.
His attackers yelled, "Speak English!" before roughing him up, he said.
He added that banks will not open accounts without Social Security numbers and that Ecuadoreans are frequently beaten and robbed for their savings, which they carry with them.
Anibal Gonzalez Jr., who is of Puerto Rican descent, is one of two Hispanic police officers in the village of Ossining who have tried to explain American life to the newest Spanish-speaking immigrants.
He said, "If they're going to get into trouble, it's because they're drinking and then driving, or sometimes they wander into certain areas and guys will hassle them."
Mr.
Gonzalez added: "We see them with their pockets torn and their faces bloody, or the victims of a car crash, and they refuse medical care. They think the hospitals won't treat their emergency needs.
"Or they refuse to report a crime to us. They're afraid of being found out if they're here illegally and being deported. We try to straighten them out and tell them that they have to trust the system a little more."
Reacting to the Ecuadoreans' fear of authority, Dr.
Emil Nigro, director of emergency medicine at the Phelps Memorial Hospital Center in neighboring North Tarrytown, said, "We never, never turn anyone away." He said that not only does his emergency room evaluate everyone who comes to them and treat them if needed but that it also does not require identification or insurance.
Only a few simple questions are asked at admission and, Dr.
Nigro added, "All records are confidential." He added that in most cases hospitals must absorb the cost of emergency room visits by illegal aliens.
Diego Santiago, a Colombian-born police officer who lives in Ossining, has visited St.
Ann's Roman Catholic Church on Eastern Avenue to tell Hispanic men how to protect themselves.
St.
Ann's is known as the immigrants' church in the community.
"Walk in groups, never alone," Officer Santiago said.
"Don't drink to drunkenness. Don't carry large amounts of cash. Don't be afraid of the police." The Rev.
Frank Oliverio has told these groups that they may feel free to keep their strongboxes with their savings in his rectory, just across the street from St.
Ann's.
About 350 Hispanic families attend the Spanish Masses at St.
Ann's, but the church also offers special Masses in Italian, Portuguese and Korean.
St.
Ann's also serves many second- and third-generation Irish-Americans and Italian-Americans.
Father Oliverio said he hopes to form a support group for Ecuadoreans and other Hispanic men in this country without their families.
Not all Hispanic men are disillusioned.
Luis Pani, a 31-year-old laborer, said he has never been assaulted.
"Maybe that's why I'm so happy here," he said.
Although he has been unsuccessful in obtaining a green card, Mr.
Pani, a bachelor, has formed a network of friends and made a life for himself in Ossining.
He has become active in St.
Ann's Church and has become a familiar and popular figure in his English-as-a-second-language classes.
"America is a country of green fields, blue-eyed blond girls, wonderful summers and houses with green gardens and lawnmowers," he said.
"That is my dream, to have a house in the suburbs, a wife, a couple of kids and a lawnmower that can blow the leaves in the fall."
Marcia Siguenza, an Ecuadorean who recently moved to North Tarrytown after nine years in Ossining, worries about the social havoc caused by the mostly male migration from Ecuador.
"It is sad, very sad," she said.
"The men are coming to this country without their wives. Sometimes they remarry here, but it is not really a marriage. They do this because it helps them get a green card.
"It is breaking up the families in Ecuador. In some places in southern Ecuador, there are no men, only women. And there are bad men who are selling visas for too much, $4,000, which takes many years to pay off with interest."
Ms.
Siguenza, who has an Alien Registration Card, the so-called green card, is the supervisor of housekeeping at Kings College in Briarcliff.
Her four grown children have done well in life, she said.
But she said she failed to understand why so many young Ecuadorean men chose this country over their own.
"They have a nice, simple life in Ecuador," she said.
"Maybe not with TV or cars. But there's too much here. It's a big transformation for them, and they're not really ready for it. They come mostly from the farms, from the countryside."
Jose and Zoila Illescas have four children they left in Ecuador in the care of grandparents.
The Illescases are both working, he in construction and she as a housecleaner.
They have green cards and eagerly await the day they can afford to bring their children to the United States.
An Unofficial Protector
Carlos Castro, a constable and court officer, is a second-generation Colombian-American who has lived in Ossining for 25 years.
He is an unofficial protector and adviser to the newest Hispanic immigrants who end up in the village courtroom.
He said he is appalled by their living conditions.
"Many homes have them stacked up inside," Mr.
Castro said.
"But you wouldn't know it from the street."
Frank Vardy, an immigration authority from the New York City Department of City Planning, suggested that the Ecuadoreans are similar to the immigrant groups who preceded them.
Those Ecuadoreans who choose to return to their native country are "much like the Italian 'birds of passage' from the late 1800's and early 1900's," he said.
"Those men came and lived cheaply and sent money home to the wife and children," Mr.
Vardy said.
"Then, after 5 or 10 years, they went home with a bankroll and bought a farm or opened up a business."
Despite his steady job as a baker, Mr.
Aguirre said he has been disillusioned and feels estranged.
He added that he must continue working hard, living simply and watching his back if he is ever to be able to return home with anything to show for his time here.


Is Air Travel Safe?
COLLISION COURSE The Truth About Airline Safety.
By Ralph Nader and Wesley J. Smith. 378 pp.
Blue Ridge Summit, Pa.: TAB Books/McGraw-Hill Inc. $21.95.


Picture Perfect Celebration
ABOVE 8:10 P.M.: RICHARD AVEDON framing TWYLA THARP at a dinner-dance celebrating his new book.
ABOVE 8:25 P.M.: CARMEN DELL'ORIFICE pantomimes shock as CHINA MACHADO smokes a cigarette before dinner.
ABOVE 7:45 P.M.: From left, ELAINE MAY, DIANE SAWYER and her husband, MIKE NICHOLS, at the cocktail reception before the Avedon dinner.
ABOVE 8:45 P.M.: The Celeste Bartos Forum at the New York Public Library, decorated by Robert Isabell to resemble a winter garden, was the setting for a party given by Random House and The New Yorker to celebrate the publication of Mr.
Avedon's autobiography.
ABOVE 7:35 P.M.: The evening's hosts were TINA BROWN, editor of The New Yorker, and her husband, HAROLD EVANS, president and publisher of the Random House Trade Publishing Group.
RIGHT 8:20 P.M.: The actress LAUREN BACALL hugs HIRO, the photographer.


Neighborhood Report: Upper West Side; High Death Toll on Amsterdam Avenue
Valentina Popovic, a 25-year-old engineering student from Serbia, last week became the fourth pedestrian to be killed this year in an auto accident on Amsterdam Avenue.
Ms.
Popovic was hit at 110th Street by a stolen jeep whose driver was trying to evade several police cars.
She was dragged 10 blocks.
Amsterdam Avenue, on which six pedestrians died in 1992, was the only Manhattan street listed on the Department of Transportation's 1992 list of the 10 most dangerous streets in the city.
It was ranked No. 3.


Laurel A. Giobbie, David A. Buegler
Laurel A. Giobbie, a daughter of Florence and Anthony Giobbie of Forked River, N.J., was married yesterday to David A. Buegler, the son of Richard and Helen Buegler of Meiers Corners, S.I.
The Rev.
James R. Richards, a United Methodist minister, officiated at the couple's home in Ledgewood, N.J.
Mrs.
Buegler, 35, is an administrator in the department of medicine at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.
She graduated from the Columbia University School of Dental Hygiene and received a master's degree from Columbia's School of Public Health.
Her father is a retired New York City police officer.


Novels for the Computer
To the Editor:
Readers intrigued by Robert Coover's remarks on hypertext should consider looking into Theodor Nelson's "Computer Lib/Dream Machines," which first appeared in 1974; a recent edition was published in 1987.
Not only does the physical design of the book lend itself to browsing, it also contains quite a number of "links" in the old-fashioned form of bibliographies.
S.
E.
B.
PARUOLO  Poway, Calif.


2 Largest Hospital Chains in U.S. Merge
In the latest consolidation reflecting powerful pressures for change in health care, the nation's largest hospital chains, Columbia Healthcare Inc. and HCA-Hospital Corporation of America, said yesterday that they had agreed to merge.
The new company, which would operate 190 hospitals, would be the largest investor-owned hospital chain in the world.
Richard L. Scott, the chairman and chief executive of Columbia, who will be the president and chief executive of the new company, said the value of the deal was $10.25 billion, making it the seventh-largest merger in any industry since 1981.
He said it would be accomplished in a tax-free exchange of shares.
No cash will be involved.


Private Money for Science Buys Hypotheses and Hype
GALILEO had the Medicis.
Darwin had the Wedgwoods and their porcelain wealth via his maternal grandparents and wife.
And modern ecology, for better or worse, has Edward P. Bass, the Texas billionaire who bankrolled the $150 million planet-in-a-bottle from which eight very thin people emerged last Sunday.
Private patronage, as old as science itself, is becoming a new force in the world of research as the Federal Government tightens its belt and as tycoons, foundations and businesses sink billions into pushing back the frontiers of knowledge.
But as the Biosphere 2 hoopla in the Arizona desert makes clear, a lot of ideological baggage can come with the money.


NOTES
Elton John's upcoming "Duets" album will have a debut of sorts at Gianni Versace's fashion show in Milan today.
As the designer's spring offerings go down the runway, the fashion press will be the first audience to hear Mr.
John's collaborations with singers like K. D. Lang, Stevie Wonder and Bonnie Raitt.
"Duets" is due out in November from MCA Records.
Art meets fashion all the time, but the Interart Center, a nonprofit gallery at 167 Spring Street, is trying to make more than just an introduction.
Its current show, "The Rag Trade (Right Off the Rack)," features sculptures and installations by artists who use clothing in their work.
Organized by Saul Ostrow, an independent curator, it runs through Oct. 30.


No Excess Baggage in This Collection
"French master drawings" at the Pierpont Morgan Library is an exhibition that treads lightly and firmly across five centuries.
Its 125 drawings carry no excess baggage, never bog down and owe nothing to showmanship.
Nor has any one of them been sold at auction for a record price.
This is in line with the history of the drawings collection in the Morgan Library.
It got off to a flying start.
Already in the first years of this century J. Pierpont Morgan was buying rarities like the sketchbook of boxwood leaves now dated circa 1400 and attributed to the circle of Jacquemart de Hesdin, court painter to Jean, Duc de Berri.
This is item No. 1 in the present show (on view through Jan. 2), and it is a touching experience to see what the unidentified artist made of those six little pieces of boxwood close on 600 years ago.


Meatloaf, for the Back-to-Basics Crowd
MEATLOAF has been attracting considerable attention in recent years.
It is the darling of the back-to-basics food movement, whetting the appetites of those with retro tastes.
It is also cheap and, when combined with mashed potatoes, it may be the ultimate comfort food.
And there are thousands of ways to make it.
I'll never forget the first meatloaf I ever made.
I was newly married and vaguely remembered how my mother put a meatloaf together.
I recalled onions, green pepper, egg and seasonings like ketchup and Worcestershire sauce.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS A Graf-Novotna Rematch in Final Top-seeded Steffi Graf and Jana Novotna won semifinal matches yesterday at the Volkswagen Card Cup in Leipzig, Germany, setting up a rematch of their dramatic Wimbledon final.
Graf won her 39th straight match but struggled in slipping past Judith Wiesner of Austria, 6-7 (4-7), 6-2, 6-3.
Novotna celebrated her 25th birthday by trouncing Conchita Martinez of Spain, ranked fifth in the world, 6-1, 6-1.
In today's final, the two will meet for the first time since the Wimbledon final in which Novotna led by 4-1 in the third set before her game collapsed and she ending up losing.
"I hope it turns out better than Wimbledon," Novotna said. (AP)


Novels for the Computer
To the Editor:
Your essay on hyperfiction recalled my own introduction to "Finnegans Wake" many years ago.
Intimidated by the Joycean epic, I left it in the bathroom unread for several months until one day I found myself idly thumbing through it and laughing out loud.
Thereafter I would pick it up whenever I went to the bathroom, starting from midway through the text or somewhere near the end or the beginning, and reading backward and forward and without any particular order at all.
Outside the "proper" order, the book was a terrific read, revealing its extraordinary scope and design in nooks and crannies of stupefying language, brilliant humor and dreamlike myth.
Hypertext awaits its own creative genius to raise it above the electronic soap opera level.
NANCY LEDERMAN  New York


Debunking the Myths About Public Schools
To the Editor:
As a public-school teacher and a parent of two children attending public school -- all of us in District 2 in Manhattan -- I wholeheartedly support the main idea of Eric Rothenberg's article on his daughter's switch from private to public school: "I can't help but wonder what might be accomplished citywide if those of us who have been running away from the public schools stopped running" ("When a Product of the Private Schools Goes Public," Sept. 19).


Native Plants Survive Amid Adversity
FALL is here.
There is no better time to reflect on the summer gone by and judge how well the garden grew.
Besides, it is more pleasant to be outdoors, to take a closer look now that cooler weather is here.
According to this year's weather summaries, 1993 was among the hottest summer on record.
And for many who live in the Northeast, it was also one of the driest summers with little rainfall to spur growth.
As for the hot weather, there was a record-tying number of days in the 90 degree range or higher than ever before.
In fact, this summer tied a record of 39 hot days that was set just two years ago.
The month of July was singled out as having 20 days when the temperature was 90 degrees or higher.


Susan M. Smith, Douglas Mitchell
Dr. and Mrs.
James P. Smith of Englewood, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Marie Smith to Douglas John Mitchell, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Mitchell of Venice, Fla.
An April wedding is planned.
Miss Smith, a graduate of St.
Bonaventure University, is studying for a master's degree in reading education and literacy at Michigan State University.
Her father, a clinical professor of medicine at the Cornell University Medical College, is a senior attending physician in pulmonary medicine at New York Hospital.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  TEXAS RANGERS -- Renewed the contracts of Mickey Hatcher, Perry Hill, Jackie Moore, Dave Oliver, Claude Osteen and Willie Upshaw, coaches.


Lifts for Buses
To the Editor: In the Practical Traveler column "Slow Going for Disabled on Private Buses," Betsy Wade (Aug. 29) properly points out that there are virtually no wheelchair-lift-equipped intercity buses, while all the new transit buses now have wheelchair lifts.
The reason for this is simple: the Federal Government pays 90 percent of the cost of federally mandated equipment for disabled travelers on transit buses while it pays none of the cost for over-the-road buses.
In the last few months, I have testified in Congress and written to Transportation Secretary Frederico F. Pena urging Federal funding of an expedited research and development program to develop a cost-effective lift.


THE TRIALS OF BOB PACKWOOD
Bob Packwood, like many men who are awkward and shy, may have assumed that women respond to visual and tactile stimuli with instant arousal.
The rejections he received may have been less painful than rejections to "real courting" may have been.
After all, men are used to having their faces slapped for being fresh.
H.
MCKINLEY Altamont, N.Y.


Native Plants Survive Amid Adversity
FALL is here.
There is no better time to reflect on the summer gone by and judge how well the garden grew.
Besides, it is more pleasant to be outdoors, to take a closer look now that cooler weather is here.
According to this year's weather summaries, 1993 was among the hottest summer on record.
And for many who live in the Northeast, it was also one of the driest summers with little rainfall to spur growth.
As for the hot weather, there was a record-tying number of days in the 90 degree range or higher than ever before.
In fact, this summer tied a record of 39 hot days that was set just two years ago.
The month of July was singled out as having 20 days when the temperature was 90 degrees or higher.


Gains Cited at U.N. on Cutting Infant Deaths
Representatives from more than 60 developing countries reported significant progress this week toward meeting health goals that are expected to prevent some two million infant deaths a year by 1995.
Achieving those mid-decade targets, which include immunizing at least 80 percent of the children in those countries against six major illnesses, would improve the odds of achieving goals set three years ago at the World Summit for Children.
A total of 149 countries were represented at the summit meeting here in September 1990, 71 of them by their heads of state or government.


'Belmont Avenue Social Club' Opens
THE Belmont Avenue Social Club is the sort of political back room where you can count on Fran Barelli, the big boss, to fix your parking ticket or squeeze your mother into an overcrowded old-age home.
If you're loyal.
Forget about the bad guys versus the good guys.
Here, everyone is bad (or "too old or indicted").
And one, Doug, is worse than everyone else.
Only Tommy may be the best of the bad, because he makes a show of reluctance as a captive candidate for small-time councilman to replace Pete, who died.


Their 15 Minutes
RUDOLPH GREY has the wary, unshaven face of a New Yorker who finds sunlight irritating.
Even in the dimness of his apartment, a second-floor walk-up in the Hell's Kitchen neighborhood in New York, he squints.
His hipster threads -- olive jacket with thin collar turned up, white shirt with big cufflinks, black jeans -- are nicely wrinkled.
He chain-smokes thin brown Sherman MCD cigarettes, the ashes from which have, over time, formed a kind of fossil layer on his thousands of LP's and 45's.
Most of his adult life ("just say I'm in my late 30's," he insists) Mr.
Grey has existed on the tattered fringe of New York's art and music scene.
Since 1972, he has been known professionally and to his friends as Rudolph Grey, a persona chosen because "Rudolph is colorful and Grey is sort of neutral," he says.
He won't give his real name.


Novels for the Computer
To the Editor:
Robert Coover's essay signals the coming of age of computer-mediated media as staples of contemporary life.
But the question remains, as with all genies liberated from their bottles: will this new approach to information delivery assume the role of master or servant?


Ann Cummings, William Kissinger
Mrs.
Ellis Cummings of Providence, R.I., and Robert Cummings of Little Compton, R.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Ann Devlin Cummings to William David Kissinger, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Walter B. Kissinger of Huntington Bay, L.I.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Cummings, a graduate of Brown University, is a lawyer for the Pacific Gas and Electric Company in San Francisco.
She received a law degree from the University of California at Berkeley, as did her husband.
Her father is a partner in the Providence investment firm of Brown, Lisle, Cummings.


A Free-Spirited Survivor Lands on Her Feet
For Annie Ross, living on the edge has become a fine art.
In 1958, this cool-yet-sultry redhead earned a place in jazz vocal history when she became the female third of Lambert, Hendricks and Ross, the trio famous for setting bullet-fire lyrics to jazz instrumentals.
Ms.
Ross's octave-leaping, sweet-and-sour voice intrigued Miles Davis, Dizzy Gillespie and other musicians who had little time for female singers.
So did her capacity for partying -- until drugs nearly ended the fun permanently.
But her instinct for self-destruction was exceeded by a knack for survival.
After beating heroin addiction, bankruptcy and chronic unemployment, the 63-year-old singer and actress has landed on her feet again.
In Robert Altman's new film "Short Cuts," she plays a ravaged jazz singer named Tess Trainer who tries to block out reality with booze, pot, cynical love songs and bittersweet memories of a rocky past.


Relief for Victims of Indian Quake Comes Slowly
As the precise dimensions of India's worst earthquake in more than five decades remained uncertain today -- official death tolls ranged from 9,000 to 21,000, with tens of thousands of others homeless -- the shortcomings in the official relief effort became more glaring.
In many villages devastated by Thursday's tremors, it was the survivors themselves who dug for the dead, who stacked the funeral pyres, who began the slow task of rebuilding their lives.
Rain hampered the cremation of bodies that were being rushed to funeral pyres for health reasons.


Racquet Sense
To the Sports Editor:
In September during the United States Open, the United States Tennis Association and the Tennis Industry Association announced the formation of an alliance to cooperate on a program aimed at increasing the number of new tennis players in the United States


Sports of The Times; For Pro Football, Hard Hits of a Different Sort
Taking a hit in the National Football League is now financial as well as physical.
Just as the players have been liberated by football's new free-agent era, Commissioner Paul Tagliabue has been liberated in disciplining them.
Instead of merely slapping their wrists, he's now able to at least smudge their portfolios with substantial fines.


Curbing Guns To Deter Violence
After I read the article, "When Women Decide Not to Be Easy Targets" (Aug. 22), I had two responses.
On the one hand, I was outraged that women are being visualized by carjackers, robbers, burglars, etc. as "easy victims." On the other hand, I was shocked that an increasing number of women, as well as men, are apparently choosing to arm themselves in case they are victimized by a carjacker, robber or intruder.
The writer specifically mentioned Horretta Wilkins of Stamford who was sideswiped by some individuals in another car.
She thought they were attempting to force her off the highway, presumably as a prelude to robbing her.
Her call to the police on her car telephone got no response from the police because she did not know specifically in which town she was.
Her disappointment with the lack of police interest in the case, and her fear she might have been killed, prompted her to buy not one gun, but two.
She now has a permit to carry a gun, and does so almost everywhere she goes.


THE LOOK OF THE NINETIES
What retired beauty parlor operator could splurge on a $4,500 wool and cashmere coat by Romeo Gigli?
Although huge disparities between designer prices and actual consumer buying power are commonplace in the fantasy world of fashion, the disparity assumes a kind of tragic obscenity in your photo essay, given the economic reality of most older consumers: a struggle to survive on a small, fixed income.


More Speed, Fewer Whacks, Extra Aches
Martha Graham helped to create American modern dance and to define American culture.
Her dancers were gods and goddesses.
So there was surprise -- and consternation -- when the Martha Graham Dance Company announced that Twyla Tharp had been chosen to create a dance that was seen as a centerpiece in the troupe's yearlong celebration of the centennial of Graham's birth.
Twyla Tharp?
That wise-cracking whippersnapper who wouldn't know a god from a guppy?
That choreographer who set her dancers slithering across the floor to popular music, throwing a hat or two into the air for good measure, and declared herself early on to be the next Martha Graham?
That woman who had the nerve to demand megabucks for her work and the unseriousness to choreograph for film and the Broadway musical?


Technology; New Crusader in Software's Holy War
IT was less than four months ago that Novell Inc. acquired Unix System Laboratories from A.T.&amp; T. in a stock swap valued at about $320 million.
Within the next few weeks, Novell intends to give the Unix trademark away.
Bizarre?
Not in the context of Unix, the software system with a troubled past.
Created in 1969 by Kenneth Thompson and Dennis Ritchie at A.T.&amp; T.'s Bell Labs, Unix is an operating system -- basic software that controls the movement of data within a computer from processor to memory or to disk, and within a network from one computer to another.


THE LOOK OF THE NINETIES
The photos of nonagenarians in their Sunday finery just about took my breath away.
What a relief from postpubescent waifs who look like children and prepubescent children made up like women.
You simply allowed these wonderful people to be themselves.
MARILYN DELSON Saugerties, N.Y.


The Executive Life; A Penchant for Prose In the Corner Office
ASK Harriet Rubin, a vice president at Doubleday, about the job of editing books by top executives, especially those from the high-speed world of high-tech, and she takes off.
"It's like going through a cloud bank at 7,000 miles an hour," she said.
"It's bumpy and you may pass out along the way, but you're so happy when you pass through to the other side."


In America; Dangerous Turf
President Clinton came to town last week, made a pass at the race issue in an effort to help get Mayor Dinkins re-elected, and then moved on.
Speaking last Sunday night to a crowd of Dinkins supporters at the Sheraton New York Hotel, the President lamented that "too many of us are still too unwilling to vote for people who are different than we are."


Vivid Expressions From a People Scarcely Known
The richly figured murals, sculpture and ceramics of Teotihuacan, which were widely imitated by the Aztecs but virtually unknown to all but pre-Columbian historians, are now recognized as some of the most innovative of the ancient Americas.
Teotihuacan (pronounced tay-oh-tee-wah-kahn) was Mexico's first urban state.
It lay 25 miles northeast of what is now Mexico City and flourished from the first century A.D. to 750, when it collapsed for unexplained reasons.
But now examples of emblematic art from this mysterious society, which left no written language, can be seen in "Teotihuacan: City of the Gods," at the M. H. de Young Memorial Museum, through Oct. 31.


Seeking A Chance For a Home
Lydia Watt stuffs pillows, blankets and sheets under the door to keep rats out of her bedroom at night in her small apartment in the Williamsburg section of Brooklyn.
Some mornings, she wakes up to find her small kitchen ransacked by the rodents, with cereal, sugar and flour spilled everywhere.
"I just got fed up," she said, speaking through the window of a second-floor, two-bedroom apartment that she invaded with friends on Friday in a nearly completed public housing project at South 10th and Berry Streets in Williamsburg.
"What we've done here should put everyone on notice that we're not going to tolerate these living conditions. It's not by choice that some of us live like this. The system forces it on us."


Trade Agreement Means Fat Cats Get Fatter; The March of the Jobs
To the Editor:
One problem with the analysis of the North American Free Trade Agreement by the academic community is summed up in a revealing phrase by Prof.
Paul Krugman, "on the average" (front page, Sept. 17).
Like the river whose average depth is one foot, there are some very deep areas that cannot be easily crossed.


THE LOOK OF THE NINETIES
I found myself reading every word, wanting to know what the nonagenarians were saying.
Our country needs more loving contact with its older members, and I hope you've begun a trend.
JO LIEF Evanston, Ill.


Rain Puts 2 Strikes On London Exhibition
On Friday, there was supposed to be an outdoor baseball clinic for British schoolchildren, but it rained.
Then, today, minor league players from the Mets and Boston Red Sox organizations were scheduled to play a nine-inning exhibition game at the Oval, one of London's oldest cricket venues.
But it rained again.


Kim Kassel, Markus Diethelm
Kim Jordana Kassel, a daughter of Alvin and Doris Kassel of Roslyn, L.I., was married yesterday to Markus Ulrich Diethelm, the son of Adrian and Jolanda Diethelm of Zurich.
The Rev.
Lewis Poag performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Church of St.
Pierre in Ermenonville, France.
Mrs.
Diethelm is a lawyer at the Societe Internationale de Telecommunications Aeronautiques, a Paris concern.
Her father is a special counsel to the New York law firm of Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius.


COMMERCE LEADER FACES MAJOR TEST
Ronald H. Brown, who easily weathered questions about ties to wealthy and powerful interests when he was confirmed as Commerce Secretary, is facing the most withering scrutiny of his career.
Mr.
Brown is confronting accusations by a Vietnamese businessman that he sought $700,000 in return for his help lifting the trade embargo against Vietnam, at a time when he was moving from his quasi-official role as a political party official to the Government.


Public &amp; Private; Bad and Blue
Walk the streets of Brownsville, Brooklyn, where even in a steady downpour people line up outside a bricked-up building that might as well have a neon sign that says "CRACK HOUSE," and you know what bad scene means.
Blocks and blocks of burned-out houses, drugs and crime, funerals for little kids.
Inside the Soap Suds Laundromat, which shares a strip of Pitkin Avenue with the Revelation Temple of Jesus Christ and the Bargain Hunters Home Center, tired women watch the wash go round and round, making the laundry a hundred times cleaner than the streets.
This they all agree upon: the sound of gunshots at night, the need to stay safe indoors, the impossible desire to get out for good.


Amy J. Rosenberg, John L. Slafsky
April wedding plans have been announced by Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Rosenberg of Denver for their daughter, Amy Jill Rosenberg, and John Lawrence Slafsky, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
S.
Frederick Slafsky of Providence, R.I.
Ms.
Rosenberg, 28, is an associate producer at NBC News in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University.
Her father is a wage investigator in the auditor's office at Denver International Airport.
Her mother, Marilyn S. Rosenberg, is the director of the home-detention program of the Denver Department of Safety.


SEPT. 26-OCT. 2: Vice Cycle; Another Generation Of Police Corruption
Testifying last week before an investigative commission, a parade of wayward New York City police officers -- and some honest colleagues -- gave graphic portraits of clusters of New York City officers committing narcotics-related crimes since 1986 with little fear of exposure by Police Department internal watchdogs.
A renegade officer, Bernard Cawley, said colleagues nicknamed him "the Mechanic" for his zeal in brutally assaulting dealers, addicts and innocent people in the Bronx.
A former officer, Michael Dowd, said he had split $8,000 a week with a police partner to protect Brooklyn drug dealers from arrest and harass rival dealers.
After testifying that higher-ups had hampered his efforts to stop a ring led by Mr.
Dowd, Sgt.
Joseph F. Trimboli retired.
He suggested that his anti-corruption efforts had ruined his career.


The Executive Computer; From the Practical to the Fantastic, Books for the Beleaguered
THERE is no reason, as millions of Americans head back to the classroom, that executives should not be hitting the books as well.
Here are suggestions for what to do on long flights when the laptop battery, as usual, fails to fulfill its promised life.
"No Excuses Management: Proven Systems for Starting Fast, Growing Quickly and Surviving Hard Times," T. J. Rodgers, William Taylor and Rick Foreman ($35, Currency/Doubleday).


Bosnia's Desperate Gamble: Winter in Time of War
When the Muslim-led Parliament of Bosnia walked away from a peace plan this week, some members said they had given up their last chance of salvaging a territory of their own from the wreckage of their country.
As the Parliament dispersed, one legislator after another spoke of the agonies of conscience involved in rejecting a chance for peace.
Several said that the Parliament's decision could mean life or death for tens of thousands of people, mainly Muslims.


Trade Agreement Means Fat Cats Get Fatter
To the Editor:
"Caterpillar Sees Free-Trade Boon" (Business Day, Sept. 21) shows a disturbing class conflict arising in the United States over the North American Free Trade Agreement.
It is between the organized money class and the disorganized masses.
Working class, middle class, manufacturing and clerical workers, even white-collar professionals like schoolteachers, lower management people and engineers, all have a nagging fear that the treaty will further redistribute income and jobs from them to the executives of large corporations, Wall Street bankers and brokers, corporate lawyers and politicians.


Caroline Pasman and Richard Craig
Caroline Ellen Pasman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James S. Pasman Jr. of Pittsburgh, was married yesterday to Richard Paul Craig, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul R. Craig of Rockport, Mass.
The Rev.
Richard J. Craig, a Roman Catholic priest and an uncle of the bridegroom, officiated at St.
Mary's, Our Lady of the Isle in Nantucket, Mass.
Mrs.
Craig and her husband graduated from Boston College.
She is an account executive for Kamer/Singer &amp; Associates, a public relations agency in San Francisco.
Her father retired as the chairman and chief executive of the Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Corporation in Pittsburgh.


Shari-Lynn Umlas And Ari Odzer
Stephen and Marsha Moriber Umlas of North Miami Beach, Fla., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Shari-Lynn Umlas, to Ari Odzer, the son of Norman and Meriam Odzer of Deerfield Beach, Fla.
A June 1994 wedding is planned.
Dr.
Umlas, 27, is a radiology resident at the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in New York.
She received bachelor's and medical degrees from Brown University.


FISHING WITH PRESIDENTS
Howell Raines's article "Fishing With Presidents" (Sept. 5) was an amusing example of the use of sports as political metaphor.
I feel compelled, however, to correct him on one point.
Under Carter, both interest rates and inflation soared, as both Ronald Reagan and George Bush have never tired of reminding us.
By contrast, during the Depression, prices actually went down (for some items, drastically) and interest rates dropped as well.
My grandparents, for instance, took out a mortgage at under 2 percent interest in 1938 to finance building a summer home; after World War II, the bank constantly pestered them to pay it off and take out a new (higher-interest) one.


China in the Year 2000 -- Repressive? Expressive? Anarchic?
The emperor appears to be dying.
Deng Xiaoping is a fighter, and it is possible he will hang on for months or even years.
But each time China's 89-year-old paramount leader hobbles a few steps in one of his rare television appearances, his trembling hands and blank stares invite a fundamental question: what next?
When an emperor last died in China, in 1976, the country changed course.
Mao Zedong's death led to basic changes in the way people lived: black miniskirts replaced Mao jackets; angry rock music succeeded tunes like "The Party Is My Mommy"; living standards surged so that many peasants could enjoy a measure of prosperity for the first time in thousands of years.


How Good Are Jets? Eagles and Cunningham Will Tell
For most National Football League teams there is a game, usually early in the season, that indicates the direction the team is heading.
The Jets (2-1) have reached that time in the season, and their game against the Eagles today will give them a good idea of just where they stand.
Are the Jets, currently in a four-way tie for first place in the American Conference East division, a playoff contender?
After the 4 P.M. game at Giants Stadium, the Jets will know.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
LIVES OF THE MUSICIANS Good Times, Bad Times (And What the Neighbors Thought).
By Kathleen Krull.
Illustrated by Kathryn Hewitt. 96 pp.
San Diego: Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $18.95. (Ages 10 and up)


The Cost of Medicine
To the Editor:
We all notice that American pharmaceutical companies are beginning to voice their fears that President Clinton's health plans may curb their profits, so necessary, they say, for their medical research.
It is perhaps illuminating then to compare prices for a common medication in France and the United States.
In Paris, the current price in a pharmacy for 50 Endoxan pills is $7.50.
In the United States, the pharmacy price for the same product, known here as Cytoxan, is $135, just 18 times the cost of the French product.


Meatloaf, for the Back-to-Basics Crowd
MEATLOAF has been attracting considerable attention in recent years.
It is the darling of the back-to-basics food movement, whetting the appetites of those with retro tastes.
It is also cheap and, when combined with mashed potatoes, it may be the ultimate comfort food.
And there are thousands of ways to make it.
I'll never forget the first meatloaf I ever made.
I was newly married and vaguely remembered how my mother put a meatloaf together.
I recalled onions, green pepper, egg and seasonings like ketchup and Worcestershire sauce.


THE BULLY OF THE SKIES CRIES UNCLE
Robert Crandall isn't having fun anymore so he threatens to pull American out of the airlines business ("The Bully of the Skies Cries Uncle," by Stephen D. Solomon, Sept. 5.) As an American Airlines flight attendant whose wages have declined nearly 40 percent in the last decade, and who has also "worked like hell," it's been no picnic.
Now I find out that the "growth plan" has failed and Crandall has tried everything.
It doesn't take a Wharton graduate to figure out that eventually the market would be saturated with airline seats (after all, United and Delta were expanding, too) and adjustments would have to be made.
Crandall needs to stop griping and do his job or step aside.
ANNE LOEW Weston, Conn.


Neighborhood Report: Park Slope; Pressure Growing Against Former Sponsor of a Racial Talk Show
Bitter protests have erupted along the shaded streets of Park Slope in recent weeks.
Their focus is Ian Lipner, a neighborhood resident who until last spring sponsored a talk show whose host urged the deportation of blacks to Africa and described the Holocaust as fiction.
At synagogues, over coffee in neighborhood diners, on morning jogs and in the parlors of brownstones, people are talking about Mr.
Lipner.
And many of them want him to leave.


CALL FOR REMOVAL OF CHIEF ADMIRAL SHAKES PENTAGON
A call to remove the Navy's top officer for failing to prevent a sexual harassment scandal two years ago has stirred turmoil among senior Pentagon and White House officials, who today sought a way of punishing offenders without disgracing a distinguished Naval officer.
The fate of the officer, Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, remained undecided today, even after he met with Defense Secretary Les Aspin for about 20 minutes.
Navy Secretary John H. Dalton has asked that Admiral Kelso be dismissed and that 12 other admirals and Marine generals be disciplined, but Pentagon officials said Mr.
Aspin would make no final decision before Monday.


Failing Grades on the First Waco Attack
The Clinton Administration concluded last week that Federal law enforcement officials lied about, and tried to cover up, the mistakes in their initial failed effort to capture David Koresh, the apocalyptic leader of the heavily armed Branch Davidian cult near Waco, Tex.
That raid, on Feb. 28, ended in a gun battle in which four agents and six cult members died.
A 51-day standoff followed; it ended when fire consumed the cult's compound during a Federal assault and dozens died.
For months, senior officials of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, led by Stephen E. Higgins, said the Feb. 28 raid was well planned and executed.


On Sunday; No Creature More Durable Than Blattidae
AMID the various life rhythms of the city -- currently, the 20-year police corruption cycle is back upon us -- none is so impervious to probing and reform as the vast cockroach population cycle on which L. Randy Dupree is about to lecture once more for the new class of aspiring integrated pest managers at Bronx Community College.
"That's the term they use now instead of exterminators," says Mr.
Dupree, the city's expert on the cockroach, who offers no demurral at the political fanciness of the title, for it acknowledges the city can, at best, only manage its roaches, never defeat them.


The House of Windsor? Don't They Make Sheets?
WATERLOO aside, Napoleon may have been right -- the British are a nation of shopkeepers.
But it was always thought their gracious Queen was above all that.
No longer.
Now, doing its bit for British exports, the royal family is lending its name to a retail enterprise -- a catalogue filled with choice knick-knacks.


Modern Cowboys Riding for a Cause
THE Black Cowboys Association of Brooklyn will deck itself out in full Western regalia today and trot along Linden Boulevard, riding for pledges to raise money for the Pediatric AIDS program at Brookdale Hospital.
The Brooklyn organization, a branch of the American Black Cowboys Association, began as a small group of horse owners who wanted to do research and educate others on the history of black cowboys in America.


Army's Quarterback Takes to the Air to Defeat Akron
Army 35, Akron 14
AKron's defensive game plan was simple: stop the Army running attack.
After all, the Cadets were averaging 319 yards a game on the ground, second best in the country, and a mere 58 yards through the air.
In fact, the Zips were so concerned about the Cadets' wishbone attack that they used linemen as stand-ins for Akili King, Army's bruising fullback, in practice this past week.


Alexandra Birle and Scott Clifford
Alexandra Lea Birle, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James R. Birle of Greenwich, Conn., was married there yesterday to Scott Woodson Clifford, a son of Mrs.
Fred W. Clifford of Santa Barbara, Calif., and the late Mr.
Clifford.
The Rev.
Mark Connolly, a Roman Catholic priest, and the Rev.
Ralph Ahlberg, a Congregational minister, officiated at the Round Hill Community Church.
Mrs.
Clifford, 29, is a senior marketing manager in San Francisco for the American Express Travel Related Services Company.
She graduated from Hamilton College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father, a former senior vice president of the General Electric Company in New York, is a general partner in the Blackstone Group, an investment bank in New York.


The Coffee-Table Book Enters the TV Age
HAVE you played a good picture book on your television lately?
Rick Smolan, a photographer in Mill Valley, Calif., has created a multimedia book, "From Alice to Ocean: Alone Across the Outback" (Claris Corporation Publishers), which tells the story of Robyn Davidson's solo camel ride across Australia, a trek she first wrote about in National Geographic in 1978.
Along with the traditional hard-bound volume, "Alice" comes with two disks, one playable with a photo CD player on any TV screen.
The second disk can be played on a Macintosh CD Rom player and a computer.


Some Exhaust Fans Are Tricky to Install
INSTALLING an exhaust fan in a poorly ventilated bathroom, laundry or kitchen can help prevent indoor condensation and problems like mildew, peeling paint and damaged woodwork.
Mounting a fan on an outside wall may be reasonably easy, but mounting one in a ceiling can be difficult unless the ceiling is accessible from an attic.
That is because ceiling fans require separate and sometimes lengthy ducts to carry exhaust air outside.
In all cases, electrical wiring has also to be installed.


Neighborhood Report: Bayside; Police Scope Out Night Writers
The battle against graffiti writers in Bayside has taken a high-tech turn: police officers with a night-vision telescope.
Last week, the 111th Precinct added the telescope to its arsenal of weapons as part of a pilot program to snare the vandals, who often work under cover of darkness.


Denise Berson, Mitchell Tanzman
Denise Sharon Berson, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold Berson of Stuart, Fla., and New York, was married last evening to Mitchell Alan Tanzman, the son Mr. and Mrs.
Irwin Tanzman of Roslyn, L.I.
Rabbi Brooks Susman officiated at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Mrs.
Tanzman was until recently the telemarketing manager for Bergdorf Goodman in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Emory University, and she received an M.B.A. from Georgia State University.
Her father is a neuropsychiatrist in Stuart and New York.


Neighborhood Report: West Village; Remnant Sale: Triangular Lot, Ditto Building
The location is prime: Seventh Avenue South at Commerce Street, near Bleecker Street and Sheridan Square.
But the property for sale is a neighborhood curiosity for its offbeat size and shape: a triangular patch of pavement 33 by 34 by 46 feet.
In one corner sits a tiny triangular building, 12 by 12 by 15 feet.


Never Down to Earth
THE LIVES OF BERYL MARKHAM "Out of Africa" 's Hidden Free Spirit and Denys Finch Hatton's Last Great Love.
By Errol Trzebinski.
Illustrated. 396 pp.
New York:  W. W. Norton &amp; Company.


IN SHORT/FOOTBALL
THE BOYS By Skip Bayless.
Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.
TURNING THE THING AROUND  Pulling America's Team Out of the Dumps -- and Myself Out of the Doghouse.
By Jimmy Johnson as told to Ed Hinton.
Hyperion, $22.95.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Annie's Gun Goes P.C.
YOU can't get a man with a gun.
At least Ethel Merman couldn't in the original version of "Annie Get Your Gun." Back in the 40's, for Annie-Ethel to get her man, a male chauvinist named Frank Butler, she had to lose a shooting contest intentionally.


In Islamic Music, a Search for Ecstasy
Robert Browning, artistic director of the World Music Institute, remembers the first concerts of Islamic music that the institute presented, years ago, at Merkin Concert Hall in Abraham Goodman House.
"Some of the members," he said recently, "suggested that this was not the right thing to have in a Jewish hall. But obviously, the tides are changing fast."
Long before Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization formally recognized each other, Mr.
Browning had already planned "The Musical World of Islam," the most comprehensive festival of Islamic music ever held in New York.
The series of a dozen concerts was to begin last night, with the Pakistani Sufi singer Abida Parveen, and will conclude on March 11 with Alem Kassimov, a fiery singer from Azerbaijan.


New York's History, Between the Covers
New York City history has been the subject of thousands of books, covering everything from its architecture to its notorious crime scenes.
Here is a sampler.
Most of the books are available at New York Bound Bookshop, at 50 Rockefeller Plaza, and at other stores.
Many bookstores will order the out-of-print volumes.
HISTORIC NEW YORK  Edited by Maud Wilder Goodwin, Alice Carrington Royce and Ruth Putnam.
Two volumes. 1899.
Out of print. $65.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 5 about shopping for antiques on Cape Cod referred incorrectly to the view along Route 6A between Brewster and Barnstable.
Salt marshes are visible, but not sand bars and Cape Cod Bay.


Looking to Courts for Catharsis
THE land of the endless summer seems to have become the home of the endless Rodney King trial as one legal proceeding unfolds from another like waves rising in the surf.
Beating begets trial begets acquittal begets riot begets trial.
Suit spawns countersuit.
Victim becomes plaintiff, plaintiff becomes defendant.
Appeal counters appeal.
All flow from an 81-second videotaped beating of a black motorist by white police officers more than two years ago.
And yet there is no closure, only periodic strokes of theater that inflame a city that continues to seek, and fails to find, a catharsis in the legal system.
In the absence of successful social programs or economic renewal or inspired political leadership, the city has sought to come to terms with its ailments through courtroom drama.


The Haydn Opera Revival Died Too Soon, but It Lives on Disk
ONE OF THE MAJOR musicological events of the 1970's was the rediscovery of Haydn's operas.
The critic H. C. Robbins Landon reconstructed some scores that had been thought to be lost; several were successfully staged at the Holland Festival, including a memorable "Fedelta Premiata" directed by Jean-Pierre Ponnelle, and Antal Dorati recorded eight of the operas for Philips to great acclaim (now reissued, 432 413/38; 20 CD's).
And that, it seems, was the end of the great Haydn opera revival.
It is astonishing that none of these operas has found its way into the fringes of the repertory, for they contain some of the loveliest vocal writing of the 18th century, and the orchestrations are continually fresh and inventive.
Haydn, who is now best known as a composer of vocal music for his Masses and the great, late oratorios, had a high regard for the operas he composed as Kapellmeister at Eszterhaza castle.
In a 1781 letter to his publisher, Haydn said of "La Fedelta Premiata": "I assure you that no such work has been heard in Paris up to now, nor perhaps in Vienna either. It is my misfortune that I live in the country."


Correction
An article in the Neighborhood Report last Sunday about the Republic National Bank's plan for a tower at Fifth Avenue and 40th Street misstated the cost.
It is estimated at $40 million; the bank's restoration of a nearby landmark building would cost $2.6 million.


In Hanoi, U.S. Goods Sold but Not by U.S.
Wandering the narrow streets of what was the enemy capital in the Vietnam War, American visitors to Hanoi can find themselves wondering, what American trade embargo?
Vietnam Airlines flies many of them here on its shiny new Boeing jets.
The city's electronics stores carry I.B.M. and Apple computers, and even the computers that bear Taiwanese or Korean brand names are powered by a computer chip manufactured by the Intel Corporation.
Those familiar yellow boxes of Kodak film are on sale in plenty of photo shops and for Hanoi teen-agers, Coca-Cola is the soft drink of choice.


Target Shopping: A Guide
SAVVY shoppers already know where the diamond district is.
They learned long ago where cheap theater tickets can be found and that the best place to find antique bedposts is on University Place.
But do they know where to buy bundles of fringe or piles of horsehair?
If pressed, could they name exact streets where discounted auto parts can be found?
Could they conduct a tour of the antiques row at the southern tip of the Bronx?


U.S. REACHES PACT ON PLANT CLEANUP
With no hope of meeting deadlines for cleaning up highly radioactive wastes at the Hanford nuclear weapons plant, the Energy Department has struck a new agreement with environmental regulators that will give it another 10 years to get started.
As part of the accord, the department is promising to embed lower-level waste in longer-lasting materials.
The old goal, to start by 1999, was a hard-fought victory for environmental authorities in Washington State, where the plant is.
But earlier this year, the Energy Department said that it could not meet the deadline and that it wanted to do away with deadlines.


These Characters Specialize in Being Glazed and Bemused
IN 1946, THE MOVIE production Code Administration stated that no scenes should "show the use of illegal drugs, or their effects, in detail." Needless to say, the Production Code died a long time ago.
In two new movies, pot smokers are played purely for laughs.
Rory Cochrane is the dope-befogged high school student at the heart of "Dazed and Confused," and in "True Romance" Brad Pitt gives armed mobsters some fairly stoned instructions on how to catch a couple on the run.
Mr.
Pitt's character habitually smokes marijuana in a bong, a kind of pipe, shaped like a honey bear.


Jennifer A. Abel, Robert J. Krugel
Jennifer Lisa Abel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William D. Abel of Muttontown, L.I., was married last evening to Robert Jeffrey Krugel, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Krugel of West Bloomfield, Mich.
Rabbi Daniel Fogel officiated at the North Shore Synagogue in Syosset, L.I.


Why Put Up a Garage On a Park With a View?
To the Editor:
In regard to "Residents Fight to Save Their Small Park" (Sept. 26):


DEBATE FOR PEACE INTENSE IN ULSTER
As the British province of Northern Ireland enters its 26th year of sectarian violence involving its Protestant majority and Roman Catholic minority, a new peace initiative has provoked intense debate in the north and here in the Irish Republic.
Two questions are central to the debate on how to end the guerrilla war between the Irish Republican Army and the British forces.


Laureen Connelly, Russell L. Rowland
Laureen Ann Connelly, a daughter of Sheila Connelly and Richard Connelly, both of North Branford, Conn., was married yesterday to Russell Lloyd Rowland, a son of Herbert Rowland and Joan Rowland, both of New York.
Dr.
Jean Somerville Kotkin, the executive director of the American Ethical Union, officiated at the Riverview, a caterer in Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.
The Rev.
William R. Gannon, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.


Wall Street; Attention, Class: I.P.O.'s Can Be Fun
AH, those warm, familiar images of back-to-school.
The stack of new books.
The fresh box of chalk.
The knapsack full of last year's initial public offering prospectuses.
Prospectuses?


THE ANGUISHED POLITICS OF BREAST CANCER
Thank you for Susan Ferraro's important story on breast cancer and on the women who have pushed this epidemic to the front of the nation's political consciousness ("The Anguished Politics of Breast Cancer," Aug. 15).
The outrage felt by 1 in 9's Francine Kritchik and others when a state study dismissed any link between environmental pollution and breast cancer is entirely justified.
A growing body of evidence suggests that environmental contamination by synthetic chemicals and radiation may play an important role in breast cancer.
Especially suspect are the organochlorines, a class of chlorine-based chemicals that include such highly toxic substances as DDT, PCB's, dioxin, pesticides, plastics and industrial chemicals and byproducts.


Neighborhood Report: Washington Heights; A Delay in Dividing the 34th Precinct
In the summer of 1992, after a wave of violent protests aimed at the police, city officials pledged to bisect the embattled 34th Precinct to increase community policing.
But the birth of the new precinct, scheduled for this month, has been pushed back to February at the earliest, Capt.
Terence Monahan of the 34th Precinct said.
The new precinct, to be called either 34th South or 36th Precinct, would run from 155th Street to 181st.
The project was delayed when the owner of a gas station on the planned site of a temporary station house tried to stop the city from canceling his lease.


Never Out of Range
THE RUSH LIMBAUGH STORY Talent on Loan From God: An Unauthorized Biography.
By Paul D. Colford. 242 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $19.95.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen105.95
105.95
119.35
per Dollar
German Mark1.6309
1.6380
1.4090
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.3385
1.3198
1.2500
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.5055
1.5085
1.7290
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold$355.00
$357.40
$348.25
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Ms. Mahoney, Mr. Rollenhagen 3d
Alexandra Elizabeth Mahoney, a daughter of Dr.
John L. Mahoney of Lafayette, Calif., and Albione Becnel of El Cerrito, Calif., was married yesterday to Frederick vonMinden Rollenhagen 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rollenhagen Jr. of Summit, N.J.
The Rev.
Michael Kizzia, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Edgemere Club, a fishing club in Dingmans Ferry, Pa.
Ms.
Mahoney is keeping her name.
She and her husband teach English at Newark Academy in Livingston, N.J.
She graduated from Middlebury College, where she is a candidate for a master's degree in English literature.


Traffic Alert
TODAY  BROADWAY FESTIVAL: Broadway will be closed between Houston and Eighth Streets from 8 A.M. to 7 P.M.
EAST 33d STREET FAIR: East 33d Street will be closed between Fifth and Lexington Avenues from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
GRACIE SQUARE ART SHOW: East End Avenue will be closed between 84th and 87th Streets from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
NEW YORK FAIR: Madison Avenue will be closed between 23d and 42d Streets from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
PULASKI DAY PARADE: Fifth Avenue will be closed between 26th and 53d Streets beginning at noon.
Pearl Street will be closed between Park Row and Centre Street from 6 A.M. to 7 P.M. for new building construction.


An Uppity B.C. Takes Starch Out of Syracuse
A tipped interception of Marvin Graves's last pass stopped Syracuse 12 yards short of the goal line with 80 seconds left to play today and let Boston College capture a game it deserved to win, 33-29.
It was some game.
The lead changed hands eight times, including four times in the fourth quarter, and Boston College never had to punt.
Defense remained Syracuse's problem, as the Eagles piled up 558 yards on offense compared with the Orangemen's 315.
"We haven't stopped anybody all year," said Coach Paul Pasqualoni.


Why Put Up a Garage On a Park With a View?
To the Editor:
In regard to "Residents Fight to Save Their Small Park" (Sept. 26):


Violins Not Welcome


Rebuilt Pittsburgh Economy Braces for New Blow Under a U.S. Health Plan
This city may always be known as Steel Town, but Medicine City would more accurately describe its economy today.
Health care became the dominant industry here after global competition wiped out most of the area's steel mills in the early 1980's.
The health industry's steady growth, adding about 4,000 jobs a year in the last decade, helped revive the economy.
The local hospitals have a worldwide reputation for transplant surgery and high-technology medicine.


Playing Dix-Huit Holes
WHILE vacationing in Biarritz in the winter of 1890, William K. Vanderbilt and two other gentlemen from Southampton, L.I., stumbled upon an exhibition of golf -- a new sport to them -- performed on the Biarritz course by the Scottish professional "Young" Willie Dunn.
After watching young Willie lob several shots onto the green of the Chasm hole, a par three guarded by a deep pit, Vanderbilt turned to his friends and pronounced: "Gentlemen, this beats rifle shooting for distance and accuracy. It is a game that I think would go in our country."
The encounter proved to be an epochal one in the history of American golf, for Vanderbilt and his friends soon founded the Shinnecock Hills Golf Club in Southampton, one of the first in this country, where Willie Dunn arrived in March 1891 to serve as pro and expand the course.
But while the game caught hold in America, it never developed the same appeal in France, where it remained the preserve of an elite few.


A Percussionist Gives Pluck New Meaning
Her biography reads like that of any successful young musician -- perhaps more successful than most.
She was raised on the family farm in Scotland, showed early musical promise and graduated with honors from the Royal Academy of Music in London.
The first recording in which she took part, as percussionist in Bartok's Sonata for Two Pianos and Percussion with Sir Georg Solti and Murray Perahia, won a Grammy in 1989.
She was the first percussionist to give a solo recital at the Royal Albert Hall in London.
She has made several solo recordings and commissioned a spate of percussion scores.
She was voted Scotswoman of the Decade and recently designated a member of the Order of the British Empire, one notch above the honor bestowed on the Beatles.
And she is only 28.
But one tiny detail is omitted.
Since her early teens, Evelyn Glennie has been classified "profoundly deaf."


THE LOOK OF THE NINETIES
Wonderful!
Wonderful!
Why not do a calendar?
I want to be Clara Sperling when I grow up (I'm 48).


Are Women's Hearts Different
Elizabeth Rigdon didn't fit the description of a typical heart patient.
She was only 47, she was female and by many objective measures her heart function seemed normal.
Her electrocardiogram showed no significant abnormalities, though there were some suspicious blips when her heart activity was measured as she exercised.
But Rigdon's symptoms were worse than the test results indicated they should be.
She was suffering from angina, a crushing, terrifying pain in her chest, and was sure she was on the verge of a heart attack.
"My cardiologist didn't take me at all seriously," says Rigdon, a surgical nurse in New London, Conn.
She is now 54.
"All he said was, 'A lot of women live with this all the time -- so live with it.' "


A Sounder Pesticide Law
Lost in the hullabaloo surrounding President Clinton's health care speech last month was another important Administration proposal: a comprehensive overhaul of pesticide laws.
The proposal was promptly denounced by environmentalists as too permissive and by industry groups as too restrictive.
But it looks like a reasonable compromise that should make the food supply safer.
The core of the compromise is a swap that makes both sides angry.
The Administration proposes to do away with the 35-year-old Delaney Clause, a law that absolutely prohibits adding cancer-causing substances to processed foods but does not apply to fresh foods, which are allowed to contain cancer-causing residues.


Dreamy


Yale Inaugurates Dean and Economist as Its 22d President
Richard C. Levin was inaugurated today as the 22d president of Yale University in a traditional bell-ringing ceremony.
He capped the installation with a lyrical effort to heal the wounds from the faculty revolt last year that led to the resignation of his predecessor.
The new president, who is 46 and the former dean of the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, specializes in technological change, and he sought to reassure those engaged in university-based research that he is their champion.


Trade Agreement Means Fat Cats Get Fatter; Good for Environment
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 16 front page article reporting a split among environmentalists on the North American Free Trade Agreement misrepresents why many environmental groups support the treaty and its side agreements.
You maintain, until the final paragraphs, that environmental groups support the treaty only to strengthen ties with the Administration.


THE LOOK OF THE NINETIES
'The Look of the Nineties" (Fashion, Sept. 12) was a marvelous antidote to the stereotype that depicts very old people as residents of nursing homes or as living lonely, infirm lives. The people in your article may not be professional fashion models but they certainly are role models for Americans living in a time of rising life expectancy. WILLIAM F. POWERS Setuaket, L.I.


Put on a Harper's Face
A SLEW of copycats have emerged in the year since Fabien Baron, the creative director of Harper's Bazaar, directed that magazine's type-happy redesign (which in itself pays homage to the legendary Alexey Brodovitch's use of the Firmin Didot and other typefaces in the magazine in the 40's and 50's).
Whether the product is furniture or sneakers, the sell is similar: Words are BLOWN up to POP off the page.
Letters overlap and come in different colors.
Very Harper's Bazaar (or Calvin Klein, another Baron client).
Herewith, a sampling of current imitators: IKEA Mr.
Baron is fond of Firmin Didot.
So is Patrick O'Neal, an art director at Deutsch/ Dworin, the Manhattan agency that created the Ikea campaign.
"We use a similar typeface -- Bauer Bodoni," he said.
"We were trying to come out with a campaign that included people, and we had to blow up some words to get across strategic parts, like the bus that goes from Manhattan to Elizabeth," N.J.
"I guess it's a compliment to say it's influenced by Harper's Bazaar."


Similarities In Inquiries Into Crimes By Officers
Twenty years ago "pads" and "bagmen" were the cornerstones of corruption in New York City's police ranks.
Now the buzzwords for the acts of renegade officers are "scores" and "doing doors."
While the phrases can be confusing for people outside the world of law enforcement, their meanings point to what experts say is a radical and frightening shift in the nature of illegal acts committed by police officers.


Neighborhood Report: Highbridge; Easing the Day-Care Crunch With Affordable Options
Seeking to ease the strain from an influx of new families in Highbridge, the city has contracted a local group to offer new, affordable day-care options for nearly 300 children.
The city's contract, totaling about $3 million, will enable the group, the Highbridge Advisory Council, to maintain a low fee schedule while doubling the number of children it will serve.


Streetscapes/Window Awnings; A Small Revival for a Long-Vanished Adornment
THE hot weather is over and the apartment houses should start taking down their canvas window awnings -- except that they stopped putting them up half a century ago.
But over the last decade one building, 180 Riverside Drive at 90th Street, has staged a micro-revival of the floppy striped-canvas artifacts whose disappearance is still hard to explain.


Run-and-Shoot Offense Is Now Shooting Pardee
In recent days, two embattled coaches in the National Football League have received a vote of confidence from their club owners, and a vote of confidence often becomes a kiss of death.
Maybe not so with the Atlanta Falcons (0-4), where Jerry Glanville may survive the year.
Much more likely with the Houston Oilers (1-3), where Jack Pardee's potential Super Bowl team cannot seem to do anything right.


THE LOOK OF THE NINETIES
It is rare to see a fashion layout in which the faces are as interesting as the clothes.
ALISON SCHECTER New York, N.Y.


A Practical Woman With Dreams Intact
Willye B. White's grandfather led her out to the rattlesnake-infested fields of Greenwood, Miss., and laid out the options; she could get pregnant, drop out of school and spend her life right here chopping cotton or she could go to college and create her own destiny.
By the time she was 10 years old, Willye had plotted her escape.
She would run to freedom.
That was 43 years ago, and Willye White is still running, slower now, through the South Side of Chicago, so she can talk to girls along the way, tell them to take control of their lives, to be free and independent people.
A five-time Olympian who has never struck gold but who has always supported herself and spoken her mind, White has reached middle age a practical woman with dreams.


SEPT. 26-OCT. 2: Texas Politics; A New Senator Faces Indictment
In June, Kay Bailey Hutchison became the first woman elected a United States Senator from Texas.
Last week she became the first Texas Senator to be indicted while in office.


THE TRIALS OF BOB PACKWOOD
It is not always clear whether what is being condemned is sexual harassment or just sex.
For example, it is generally accepted that "uninvited sexual advances" constitute a form of sexual harassment.
What is an "invited" sexual advance?
SOL SAPORTA Seattle


Floating Fiesta Takes to the Air


ABOUT BOOKS
THE New Jersey Literary Hall of Fame is holding its fifth induction ceremony tonight at the Liberty Science Center at Liberty State Park in Jersey City.
The organization is calling the event "Literary Stargazing," so it seems only appropriate that one of the four authors to be honored is Carl Sagan, the Cornell University astronomer and Pulitzer Prize-winning author, who is a native of Rahway.
The other inductees are Patricia Lee Gauch of Basking Ridge, who has written more than 30 children's books; Robert Lipsyte of Closter, a sports columnist for The New York Times and the author of "The Contender," a young-adult novel published by Harper in 1967 and still in print, and Sister Margherita Marchione of Morristown, author of some 30 books in English and Italian and professor emeritus of Italian language and literature at the Florham Park-Madison campus of Fairleigh Dickinson University.
Each honoree will attend the event.


A Princess With A Noble Cause
Since her former country no longer exists, Princess Elizabeth of Yugoslavia has a title that doesn't make much sense.
"I agree it sounds strange," said the Princess, a member of the exiled Serbian royal family, on Monday from her home in Manhattan, "but it's something you are born with. It doesn't change even if the country vanishes."


Stark, Simple Forms in a Picture-Perfect Setting
THE Somerstown Gallery has left Somers to become the Schoolhouse Galleries here.
And its new home really is a schoolhouse, a 1920's building situated on a hill so that the sun pours through its huge windows.
The owner, Lee Pope, does not do things by halves: in addition to three large galleries, the space accommodates a theater and eight artists' studios, at least one of whose tenants commutes from Manhattan.
A more picture-perfect setup can scarcely be imagined.
On view in the galleries now is a show by two sculptors, John Nesbitt and Brett Stern, and two painters, Ann Richardson and Jean Tate.
Mr.
Nesbitt is the most experienced of the four, having shown extensively in his own country, Canada, since the mid-1950's.
He works with the precision of a jeweler, locking together by means of bolts and welds, forms in alabaster, marble, wood and various metals.
An example is the chunky bronze less than a foot tall, which is impregnated vertically by a sliver of lead and bisected horizontally by a layer of gray marble.
In shape and general character the piece recalls Brancusi's kissing couple.
There are other allusions to reality: a block of stained wood ornamented with bronze elements, which suggests a head, African style, and a bronze that could pass as a flowering plant growing out of a tree trunk.
Otherwise, Mr.
Nesbitt remains a nonobjective sculptor deeply preoccupied with his craft, leaving the skins of his carved elements alternately rough and smooth, welding (or soldering) the cast shapes and combining them all into masses that are virtually watertight.
One of his best efforts is a fence of small alabaster blocks.
He is easily the best artist in the show.
Although Mr.
Stern's is by far the largest contribution -- 13 ceramics -- art seems to be the least of his interests.
Having billed himself in a resume as the president of Symagery, a one-man research and new-product development company, he goes on to list numerous accomplishments.
These include a book titled "99 Ways to Open a Beer Bottle Without a Bottle Opener" and a method of manufacturing clothes without human intervention by way of a machine that can produce a garment in 45 seconds.
His achievements as a model maker include an eight-foot telephone for a television commercial, a four-foot brownie for National Kosher Foods and the beetle headdresses worn in the Broadway musical "Cats." Way down at the bottom of Mr.
Stern's remarkable document are listed the five ceramic shows in which he has participated during the last year or so, one of them at the American Craft Museum in Manhattan.
Given credits like these, a viewer might be forgiven for wondering why Mr.
Stern wants to diversify and how he has the time to do so.
But it is possible that he is following the example set by Samuel F. B. Morse when he turned to portraiture as a means of financing his scientific inventions.
In any case, the ceramics are purely exercises in craft, being variations on a bifurcated shape that looks a lot like the lower half of a standing female torso.
They come in black, gray and shades of brown, with a bubbly crater glaze on the outside and a smooth metallic luster applied to the crevices within.
Although not as obsessive as Mr.
Stern, Ms.
Tate also makes much of a small idea.
Each of her five large canvases is stained or lightly sprayed with color and embossed with rectangles, triangles and dabs of impasto applied thick and glossy in irregular rows.
The colors of these include ultramarine applied neat, and viridian seemingly glazed over white, and they generally hang against backgrounds tinted in a paler version of the same hue, accompanied by patches of, say, thin lemon yellow.
Ms.
Tate's canvases are not bad, but they would be better if she considered more carefully the effects that contiguous colors have on each other.
Ms.
Richardson does consider these effects and, hence, has slightly more success with her variations on a single image.
This is a disk enclosed by a rectangle, which in turn, is enclosed by two or three more rectangles.
The disk, usually black, is often rimmed in a contrasting color, as are the squares, which come in various grays, thinly applied, generally over a contrasting hue.
Nevertheless, the works seem more anxious than spontaneous.
It's as if the artist does not want to push them further for fear of spoiling her happy accidents.
Despite its occasional good points, the show on the whole conveys a feeling of emptiness, a feeling that is more often found in suburban than urban galleries.
Whether or not this is yet another side effect of zoning, Renee Kahn, a painter living in Stamford, has taken up arms against the problem by starting a Journal of American Suburban Art.
Having circulated a leaflet with questions like "Do you deny your suburban identity at New York parties?" and "Has living in the suburbs turned your brains to mush?" Ms.
Kahn plans a first issue based on the responses.
In a telephone conversation, the artist explained that $1 mailed to the journal at 78 Webb's Hill Road, Stamford, Conn. 06903, will yield a photocopy of Volume 1, No. 1, mailed unbound in a paper bag.
From little acorns. . .
The show at the Schoolhouse Galleries continues through Nov. 21.
The phone number is 277-3461.


To Snap and to Be Snapped
On Monday, a powerful and glamorous crowd turned up at the New York Public Library to celebrate the publication of Richard Avedon's new book of collected photographs titled simply "An Autobiography."
Barry Diller, calm even in the midst of his takeover battle for Paramount Communications, said he'd been in California for the weekend catching up on sleep.
Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan mixed with the likes of Jennifer Jason Leigh, Harold Brodkey, Arthur Schlesinger Jr., Jane Alexander, Ming-Na Wen (a star of "The Joy Luck Club"), Mort Zuckerman, Roger Ailes, Carol Matthau and models Mr.
Avedon has photographed, from Carmen, 62, to Stephanie Seymour, close to four decades her junior.


Jobs Programs and Free Trade
Linked to Nafta is the prospect of millions losing their jobs because of tremors in the world economy, unless training programs expand.
Page 28.


A la Carte; A Secret in Amagansett: Two Impressive Wine Cellars
WHEN the great restaurant wine lists of Long Island are discussed or rated, the American Hotel of Sag Harbor is nearly always mentioned.
So, too, are the Polo Grill in the Garden City Hotel, Starr Boggs of Westhampton Beach, the Chalet in Roslyn, Conrad's in Huntington and Casa Rustica in Smithtown.
But Gordon's, a 60-seat restaurant on Main Street in Amagansett, is rarely if ever recognized.
That is because George Polychronopoulos, the owner and resident wine expert, does not advertise the fact that the two temperature-controlled cellars underneath Gordon's contain one of the largest and most impressive collections of wines on the Island.


THE TRIALS OF BOB PACKWOOD
A Packwood associate states that, at parties, "the pinching, touching, feeling was considered to be friendly, not harassing." By whom?
By the women who went home with a shaken self-esteem and a feeling of having no control over their own bodies?


Native Plants Survive Amid Adversity
FALL is here.
There is no better time to reflect on the summer gone by and judge how well the garden grew.
Besides, it is more pleasant to be outdoors, to take a closer look now that cooler weather is here.
According to this year's weather summaries, 1993 was among the hottest summer on record.
And for many who live in the Northeast, it was also one of the driest summers with little rainfall to spur growth.
As for the hot weather, there was a record-tying number of days in the 90 degree range or higher than ever before.
In fact, this summer tied a record of 39 hot days that was set just two years ago.
The month of July was singled out as having 20 days when the temperature was 90 degrees or higher.


The Whole Show


Lisa Ann Kelly, John Madzin Jr.
Lisa Ann Kelly, a daughter of Thomas J. Kelly of Beach Haven, N.J., and the late Margaret J. Kelly, was married yesterday to John Bernard Madzin Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Madzin of Scranton, Pa.
The Rev.
John J. Heffernan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Thomas Aquinas Church in Beach Haven.


Novels for the Computer
To the Editor:
I can imagine more indignant letters than mine, provoked by Robert Coover's diligent overview of hyperfiction, but none more glum.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
MAQROLL.
Three Novellas: "The Snow of the Admiral," "Ilona Comes With the Rain," "Un Bel Morir." By Alvaro Mutis.
Translated by Edith Grossman.
Harper Perennial, $10.
Maqroll the Gaviero (lookout) searches everywhere for a purpose to his life.
Last year our reviewer, Leonard Michaels, said that in relating a tortured man's physical and spiritual wanderings, this Colombian author has produced "a fascinating and original work."  YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE By Norman Maclean.
University of Chicago, $9.95.
Winner of a National Book Critics Circle Award and named one of the nine best books of 1992 by The New York Times Book Review, this account examines the 1949 Mann Gulch fire in Montana, a disaster that killed 13 young Forest Service smoke jumpers trapped between the flames and a mountain ridge.
The author seeks not only to arrive at the truth of their tragedy, but also to confront his own mortality and the arbitrary nature of the accidents that often govern our fates.
"This great book takes us to that ancient reef blocking us from the summit and then whirls and looks straight into the heart of the fire," James R. Kincaid said here.


Pages Of Their Own?
DEEP inside a Trump Tower suite, from behind a desk the size of a city sidewalk, Steven Hoffenberg, debt-collection magnate and fledgling publisher, held forth about Women and Journalism.
"The New York Post is wrong about women," he said as he put several incoming calls on hold.
"You put a picture of a dead body on the cover? Disgusting! Women stop buying your paper."


Little-Noted Advantages Of Alternate-Side Parking
To the Editor:
As a New Yorker with wheels, I enjoyed "Car Owners vs. the Odds" (Sept. 19).
Alternate-side parking defines my life and makes me nuts, but there are two positives.
I can go grocery shopping from 9 to 10:30 and get back just in time for a safe, easy parking slot at 11.


Daryl A. Basham and Beryl E. Riley
Beryl Elise Riley, the daughter of Gwendolyn M. Riley of St.
Albans, Queens, and the late Dr.
Negail R. Riley, was married yesterday to Dr.
Daryl Aubrey Basham, a son of Audrey E. Basham of St.
Albans and the late Timothy W. Basham Sr.
The Rev.
Dr.
Cain Felder officiated at the Brooks Memorial United Methodist Church in Jamaica, Queens.
Mrs.
Basham, 33, is a vice president and the manager of residential lending for the Chase Community Development Corporation in Brooklyn, a subsidiary of Chase Manhattan Bank.
She graduated from Hampton Institute and received a master's degree in finance from Webster University.
Her mother is the librarian at Junior High School 72 at Rochdale Village in Jamaica, Queens.
Her father was the assistant general secretary of the Board of Global Ministries of the United Methodist Church, the denomination's governing body in New York.


Gee, That Dress Looks Familiar
To the Editor:
Further proof that there is nothing new under the sun -- or the bust:


Hawaii Check-Ins Behind the Wheel
A typical 10-day family vacation in Hawaii might include five days on Oahu and five on one of the other islands.
The annoying part comes when it's time to get from one island to the other -- dragging luggage and other paraphernalia from the rental car to the airline counter for what will be a very short flight.
Now Aloha Airlines' new Drive-Thru Check-In, which was begun in August, lets travelers check in without even getting out of the car.
Passengers drive to the fourth level of a new interisland terminal at Honolulu International Airport and get in the Drive-Thru Check-In lane, which has a conveyor belt on one side and an office at the end.
The driver pops the trunk and an Aloha employee checks in the passengers; other employees tag the bags.
The luggage goes to ground-level aircraft via a spiral chute.
Passengers then park and head for the gate.


Meatloaf, for the Back-to-Basics Crowd
MEATLOAF has been attracting considerable attention in recent years.
It is the darling of the back-to-basics food movement, whetting the appetites of those with retro tastes.
It is also cheap and, when combined with mashed potatoes, it may be the ultimate comfort food.
And there are thousands of ways to make it.
I'll never forget the first meatloaf I ever made.
I was newly married and vaguely remembered how my mother put a meatloaf together.
I recalled onions, green pepper, egg and seasonings like ketchup and Worcestershire sauce.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $319,000
10 West 15th Street  2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. postwar co-op; 24-hr. doorman, elevator, dining area, remodeled kitchen, 300-sq.-ft. terrace; maintenance $944, 51% tax-deductible, listed at $349,000, 2 months on market (Broker: Silverman Group)


How Rent Law Makes a Difference
To the Editor:
Your article on the extension of rent stabilization  [ "For Almost All Tenants, Little Change," July 18 ]  was, unfortunately, absolutely right: very few rent-regulated tenants will be affected by the new rules on luxury decontrol.
I say "unfortunately" because the Legislature had the chance to begin to lift the albatross of the rent laws off the backs of owners of affordable rental housing and the city itself.


Class, Sex and History
WHILE ENGLAND SLEEPS By David Leavitt. 304 pp. New York: Viking. $22.


Neighborhood Report: Upper West Side; Where, Oh Where, Has the Post Office Gone?
"Where is 10023?" That was the question that bombarded a postal representative at a recent Community Board 7 meeting, in which the residents tried to pin down the floating post office for that ZIP code.
The Ansonia Station post office moved in August 1992, when its building on Broadway between 67th and 68th Streets was demolished to make way for a new tower being built by Millennium Partners and Lincoln Metrocenter Partners.
The post office is eventually to return to the building, probably by the spring of 1995.


Barbara Loomis, Thomas Liptack
Barbara Carol Loomis, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John R. Loomis of Larchmont, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Thomas Gerard Liptack, a son of Maureen Liptack of Larchmont and the late Robert F. Liptack.
The Rev.
Richard Martin performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Larchmont Avenue Church.
The bride is the manager of sales administration in New York at Comedy Central, a cable television network.
She graduated from Tufts University.
Her father is a partner in the First Manhattan Company, a financial services concern in New York..


Maria L. Brisbane, W. C. Henderson
Maria Love Brisbane, an investment manager at Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Company, the private bank in New York, was married yesterday to Wallace Colby Henderson, a vice president of CS First Boston, the New York investment banking firm.
The Rev.
Charles Newbery performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's of Lattingtown Church in Locust Valley, L.I.
The bride graduated from New York University and received a master's degree in urban planning from the University of Virginia.
She is a daughter of Doris Fauser Brisbane of Oyster Bay, L.I., and the late Seward Brisbane.
Her grandfather the late Arthur Brisbane was an editor and syndicated columnist for the Hearst Organization.


Suspension May Be Revised
GARY BETTMAN, the National Hockey League commissioner, is considering easing restrictions on the practice time of the suspended Washington Capitals forward DALE HUNTER.
"I'm focusing on the practicing part of the suspension," Bettman said on Friday, "and the question in my own mind is whether or not I diminish its severity by letting him practice. And that's the only part that I'm reconsidering."


The Subject Is Himself
AN AUTOBIOGRAPHY By Richard Avedon.
Illustrated.
Unpaged.
New York: Eastman Kodak/Random House. $100.


Sarah Radcliffe, Andrew Quigley
Sarah Townsend Radcliffe, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Warren A. Radcliffe of Mountainville, N.J., was married yesterday to Andrew Lawrence Quigley, a son of Mrs.
Cornelius J. Reed of Mill Neck, N.Y., and the late Lawrence A. Quigley.
The Rev.
Janice Smith Ammon performed the ceremony at the Central Presbyterian Church in Summit, N.J.


Sauce for The Gander?
To the Editor:
A friend posed an interesting question regarding the film "Sleepless in Seattle"  [ "In a Stab at a Strategy, Hollywood Tries Some Variety," Sept. 5 ] .
Had the roles been reversed, with Tom Hanks's character becoming obsessed with a woman he'd never met, and had he stalked her, hired a detective to investigate her, and finally dumped his fiancee on a romantic Valentine's Day weekend, all for a stranger, what would the audience's reaction be?


Miss Magidson And Mr. Handler
Deborah Sue Magidson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael D. Magidson of Westport, Conn., was married last evening to Steven H. Handler, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Stanley Handler of White Plains.
Rabbi Barry Friedman officiated at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
Mrs.
Handler, 27, teaches the fourth grade at the Stillmeadow School in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Washington University in St.
Louis and received a master's degree in computer education from the University of Bridgeport.


POSTINGS: New Bank Headquarters; Independence On the Move
Independence Savings Bank, the largest savings bank based in Brooklyn, last week announced that it would move its corporate headquarters next September into 195 Montague Street, the former headquarters of Brooklyn Union Gas, which has moved to the Metrotech office center.
The bank will take a condominium interest in 69,200 square feet on six floors of the 13-story, 200,000-square-foot structure, which will be renamed the Independence Building.
The bank will open its 21st branch in 6,500 square feet on the ground floor and lower level.


On the Line


Users Outmuscle Investors for Foreclosed Co-ops
IN a matter-of-fact voice, with no sign of regret, Jonathan Barrett described an apartment catch that slipped off his bidding hook at an auction last June.
"The building was in Bayside," he said.
"It was 60 percent sold. The monthly maintenance was reasonable. A nice apartment. We thought it had a resale value of $45,000. We bid $22,500.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
60's MINIMALISM
Art connoisseurs who believe that the 60's and 70's got it right will enjoy the new exhibition at the Lyman Allyn Museum in New London.
But "Maximal Minimalism: Selected Works from the LeWitt Collection" is a liberal view of the concept, containing pieces by Sol LeWitt, an acknowledged progenitor of the minimalist movement, and numerous works from his collection, executed by other artists whom he inspired.


Luxury-Tax Repeal Encourages Sellers
LAST month, Thomas G. Caruso, owner of Total Marine Ltd. in Mamaroneck, sold a 37-foot Phoenix convertible sports fishing boat for $400,000.
"It's a beauty," he said.
"Sleeps six. Has everything, including air-conditioning, a microwave and two big diesel engines."
Mr.
Caruso added that negotiations for the sale had begun earlier in anticipation of the repeal of the 10 percent excise or luxury tax on boats costing more than $110,000 and on other expensive items like jewelry and furs, but not on automobiles.
"The customer told me he would have never bought the boat if he had had to pay the luxury tax, which would have added $30,000 more to the purchase price," Mr.
Caruso said.


Suspect in Assault Dies in Custody
A homeless man who was arrested for assault died last night in police custody after a three-block ride inside a police car to a precinct house in Manhattan, the police said.
The man, who was not identified, was pronounced dead at 7:15 P.M. inside a bathroom of the 10th Precinct station house at 230 West 20th Street, where the police and emergency medical workers had tried to revive him, said Lieut.
Thomas Naroney of the 10th Precinct.


The Clinton Health Plan Is Alive On Arrival
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON dazzled five Congressional committees last week, advocating health care legislation in the most impressive testimony on a complex program anyone could remember, and raising hopes that an issue that had stymied Congress for 50 years was now near solution.
Again and again she heard, as Representative Dan Rostenkowski of Illinois put it, "the President has succeeded in changing the debate from whether we should have reform to what type of reform we should have."


Corrections
An article last week about Family Advocates, a group that wants to change the way judges and lawyers work on matrimonial disputes, misstated the affiliation of Bonnie Green of East Meadow.
She is president and co-founder of another group, Protection of the Family, not a member of Family Advocates, whose views she says she does not share.


Mary Buttrick and R. B. Burnham 3d
Mary Buttrick, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Buttrick of New York, was married yesterday to R. Bradford Burnham 3d, a son of Mr.
Burnham Jr. of Hudson, Ohio, and the late Anne Hopkins Burnham.
The Rev.
Hugh Hildesley performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
The bride is an architect in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in architecture from Yale University.
Her father is the senior partner in the architectural firm of Buttrick White &amp; Burtis in New York, where her mother is a designer.
The bride's great-grandfather was Stanford White, the architect.


Growing Old in the 90's
OLD FRIENDS By Tracy Kidder. 352 pp.
Boston: A Richard Todd Book/ Houghton Mifflin Company. $22.95.


Stephanie Malloy, Thomas Connelly
Stephanie Sharp Malloy, a daughter of Verna B. Malloy of Tenafly, N.J., and the late John B. Malloy was married in Newport, R.I., yesterday to Thomas Bayne Connelly, a son of Capt.
Robert B. Connelly, U.S.N., retired, and Mrs.
Connelly of Jamestown, R.I.
The Rev.
Mary B. Johnstone officiated at Trinity Episcopal Church.


Bad News Comes in Threes As Columbia Folds Late
Columbia squandered a 24-7 lead today, surrendering three touchdowns in the final five minutes as Colgate rallied for a 27-24 victory.
Colgate running back Bill Sparacio rushed 32 times for 168 yards, falling just 1 yard short of his career-high, which he set against Columbia last year.
In the second quarter, he was unstoppable, rushing for 67 yards on one drive, which ended in his scoring on a 5-yard run.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
RENAISSANCE FAIR
For $20 a carload, a family or any group arriving by automobile can spend today at the Caramoor Center for the Arts in Katonah, enjoying the atmosphere of a 16th-century European fair from 11 A.M. to 5 P.M.
In the setting of the Venetian Theater and Spanish Courtyard and outdoors in the gardens and on the lawns, a number of entertainments are taking place.
I Giullari di Piazza (Jesters in the Square), a lively troupe of musicians, will present its version of the story of Don Giovanni.
A selection of madrigals will be performed by the costumed Fox Lane High School Chamber Choir, and "Pulchinello, the Old Man of the Mountains," a puppet theater adaptation of the Rip Van Winkle story, will be performed by Jeff Greenspan's puppeteers.


Caught in a Culture of Failure
LIFE FOR ME AIN'T BEEN NO CRYSTAL STAIR By Susan Sheehan. 174 pp.
New York:  Pantheon Books. $21.


In the Region/Westchester; Updating Corporate Parks to Meet Today's Needs
IN recent years, the physical layouts and landscaping of office parks built in the 70's have proved totally unsuited to the needs of today's highly discriminating and demanding tenants.
Twenty years ago, the emphasis was on putting up office buildings as quickly and inexpensively as possible to meet an ever-growing demand for space.


IN SHORT/FOOTBALL
INSIDE THE HELMET A Player's-Eye View of the NFL.
By Peter King.
Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.


Recounting Bayside Killings That Occurred Near Officers
A double killing that occurred in Queens near several off-duty New York City police officers, who failed to come forward and volunteer what they knew, is being graphically recounted at the gunman's trial.
The defendant, Patrick Bannon, is accused of murdering two men and trying to murder a third after an alcohol-fueled brawl exploded into lethal gunfire on July 18, 1992, on a bar-studded strip of Bell Boulevard in Bayside.


For Ashley Judd Acting Was The Siren Song
Ashley Judd, kin to Wynonna and Naomi, the country-singing Judds, describes the process of acting as "guts coming from my toenails." The most recent display of her work can be seen in "Ruby in Paradise," which will be shown on Thursday and Friday at the New York Film Festival and will open commercially later this month.
In the film, directed by Victor Nunez, the 25-year-old Ms.
Judd stars as Ruby Lee Gissing, who escapes a small town in Tennessee to seek her identity working in a gift shop in Panama City, Fla.
After the movie's premiere in January at the Sundance Film Festival, where it shared the Grand Jury Prize with Bryan Singer's "Public Access," many people were asking the director, "Where did you find her?"


Triptych Minus Two


Neighborhood Report: Bayside; Across the Great Subdivide
Bayside is a leafy neighborhood of homeowners where most of the residents are, well, homeowners.
That's an important distinction these days.
In a recurring battle, civic groups and residents have pressed their campaign to prevent single-family homes from being subdivided and used as rental properties in violation of New York City's zoning laws.
The laws specify that a home zoned for single-family use cannot be subdivided into a multi-family dwelling.


200 Protesters Leave Project Peacefully
An 18-hour occupation of a newly constructed public housing project in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, came to a peaceful conclusion yesterday afternoon when about 200 mostly Hispanic protesters, who were demanding more apartments in the complex, began trickling out, clutching blankets, television sets and the hands of their children.
City officials promised the protesters the right to closely monitor the selection of tenants for the 150-apartment, four-building complex, due to open next month at South 10th and Berry Streets, in the shadow of the Williamsburg Bridge.
But they did not agree to change the selection process.


Police Hearings' Effects Defy the Usual Wisdom
As the Mollen Commission puts an intense spotlight on an underworld where police officers beat the innocent, traffic in drugs and protect the criminal, an intricate political calculus has been added to the mayoral race.
Which candidate suffers more from hearings that leave the corrosive, dispiriting impression that even the city's guardians have gone bad?
By rights it should be Mayor David N. Dinkins, who has been the steward of the police force for four years.
"Anything that happens on an incumbent's watch in recent political history tends to reflect poorly and consistently on the incumbent," said Jay Severin, a Republican consultant in New York.


After Child's Play, What Comes Next?
The line of well-wishers stretched down the hall, and the violin soloist, Sarah Chang, greeted each one with the polite, tired smile of a hostess at a reception.
This late August concert with the Philadelphia Orchestra at the Saratoga Performing Arts Center in upstate New York was her last date in what had been a breathless summer: Korea, Italy, Philadelphia, Chicago, Dallas, Aspen, Montreal, the Hollywood Bowl.
This season she will rack up even more frequent flyer miles, with concerts in Toronto, Berlin, Paris, Amsterdam, London and Tokyo.
On Monday evening she plays Paganini's First Concerto with Wolfgang Sawallisch and the Philadelphia Orchestra, then they record the work for EMI Classics, as part of her third album.
On Thursday she makes her New York Philharmonic subscription series debut, in the Tchaikovsky Concerto with Kurt Masur.


PUMPING IRON IN THE PARLOR
THE MORNING THE GYM disappeared, a small group of us gathered on the sidewalk, our faces numb with winter cold and with the shock of it: the padlocked door, the bankruptcy notice taped to the window.
Orphaned!
By a health club!
We stood there clutching our gym bags, shivering poignantly, as if unable to start the day without a dose of Nautilus-induced endorphins.
But when the shock wore off, I was relieved.
For some time I'd been toying with the idea of installing a home gym -- how nice it would be not to waste time commuting to the gym or waiting in line to use the machines -- but I'd put it off because of the expense.
Now it was time to put the plan into action.
I already owned a set of free weights, which is all the equipment you need for a proper workout.
But I wanted to make a statement.
I wanted a corner of the apartment to proclaim, "Gym."


Backstage


Bookshelf
NORA'S ROSES.
Written and illustrated by Satomi Ichikawa.
Philomel. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9) In the fourth book about Nora, the little girl has a head cold and watches with her bear and doll as passers-by pick the roses blooming outside.
WHO SAYS A DOG GOES BOW-WOW?
By Hank De Zutter.
Illustrated by Suse MacDonald.
Doubleday. $15. (Ages 4 to 10) Creatures great and small, all shown in collage illustrations, speak.
The surprisingly different "translations" of the sounds they make are written out in more than a dozen languages.
THE COW BUZZED.
By Andrea Zimmerman and David Clemesha.
Illustrated by Paul Meisel.
HarperCollins. $15. (Ages 3 to 6) One day the cow catches a bee's cold and starts to buzz buzz as well as moo moo.
The result is a very confused, silly barnyard.
MATTHEW AND THE SEA SINGER.
By Jill Paton Walsh.
Illustrated by Alan Marks.
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $13. (Ages 7 to 10) Matthew, the orphan boy who was bought for a shilling and sings like a dream, is snatched by the seal queen and then rescued.
Magical fable.
Charming, watery illustrations.
MOONDANCE.
Written and illustrated by Frank Asch.
Scholastic. $12.95. (Ages 5 to 8) In the seventh gentle book about Bear and his friend Little Bird, Bear wants to dance with the moon.
First he cavorts with the fog and later he dances with the rain, then he gets his wish in a refracted sort of way.
FANNY &amp; MARGARITA: Five Stories About Two Best Friends.
Written and illustrated by Kate Spohn.
Viking. $13.99. (Ages 3 to 8) Fanny, a pear, and Margarita, a banana, who are devoted to each other, have adventures in a pastel world.
YANKEE DOODLE.
Written and illustrated by Gary Chalk.
Dorling Kindersley. $14.95. (Ages 5 to 9) A patriotic mouse named Yankee Doodle tells the story of the American Revolution.
The mice wear period costume and use popguns.


About the Baby, The Bathwater And Beyond
Long before parent became a verb, mothers and fathers were driving themselves crazy over how best to care for their babies.
That's one lesson of "Total Baby," one of 62 works in the 17th annual Margaret Mead Film and Video Festival.
The six-day event opens tomorrow at the American Museum of Natural History, then travels to half a dozen cities.
"Total Baby," which was written and directed by two New Yorkers, Kate Davis and Alyson Denny, trains an anthropologist's cool eye on the staggering array of new products and programs (womb-simulating pillows, video mobiles, exercise workouts for newborns, cooking classes for toddlers) aimed at perfecting the American middle-class child from birth to 3 years of age.


Walking Away, While He Still Can; Troubled and Fearing Injury, Timm Rosenbach Quit Football
Timm Rosenbach remembers clearly the beginning of the end because everything was pitch black.
He woke up in a dark room with his head strapped to a table, still wearing his Phoenix Cardinals uniform and shoulder pads and hip pads and cleats.
He was frightened and alone, not sure if he was alive or dead.
He couldn't move, didn't want to move.
He knew he had been hurt, but didn't know how badly.
He thought about his friend and former college teammate, Mike Utley of the Lions, who the year before had taken a tumble in a game and been left paralyzed for life from the chest down.


Corrections
Because of a transcription error, an interview with Ron Chernow, author of "The Warburgs," on page 3 of The Times Book Review today, renders a word incorrectly in a quotation from Mr.
Chernow in the third paragraph.
The comment should read, "To the extent that American writers had dealt with this world before, for instance in Stephen Birmingham's 'Our Crowd,' they had dealt only with the American side of the Warburg family." (Mr. Chernow did not say "the arrogant side.")


Ms. Goldenson And Mr. Cramer
Jennifer R. Goldenson, an associate, in New York, with the Atlanta law firm of Sutherland, Asbill &amp; Brennan, was married last evening to Jeffrey H. Cramer, an assistant district attorney in Manhattan.
Rabbi Henry Bamberger officiated at Temple Emanu-El in Utica, N.Y.
Mrs.
Cramer graduated from Cornell University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a daughter of David and Sharon Goldenson of New Hartford, N.Y.


Lara M. Goldstein and Steven A. Rudd
Lara Marcelle Goldstein, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Bernard Goldstein of Westfield, N.J., was married last evening to Dr.
Steven Alan Rudd, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley Rudd of North Miami Beach, Fla.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbi Charles Kroloff at the Voorhees Chapel at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, N.J.
Mrs.
Rudd is the collections assistant in history and archives at the American Academy of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery in Alexandria, Va.
She graduated from Rutgers, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in museum studies from George Washington University.


The Do-It-Yourself Armamentarium
AT FALK DRUG ON EAST 72D STREET in Manhattan, as at many drugstores around the country, the self-appointed home doctor can choose from a growing arsenal of home-care products.
Tucked into the densely packed shelves are the Clearblue Easy pregnancy test, the First Response ovulation test, the Biotel UTI test for urinary tract infections, several blood-glucose tests for diabetics, the Marshall Home Blood Pressure Kit and the Omron Automatic Oscillometer Digital Blood Pressure Monitor.
Even the Harvey Elite stethoscope, the grown-up version of what children get at the toy store, is there.
A snub-nosed man with untamed brown hair introduces himself as a diabetic who has stopped by to purchase some glucose kits so that he can test himself at home.
He is admittedly something of a self-care junkie.
"I've got a blood-pressure monitor at the apartment, too," he announces proudly.
"I hook that up every so often and make sure I'm alive. My wife, of course, has used the pregnancy tests. I hear that the cholesterol test is on the way, and I can't wait. I'm a big believer in keeping a close eye on my body. It may not surprise you that my wife likes to call me Mr. M.D."


Seeing Stars in Midtown
LAST Monday at the Guild Theater in midtown, Jack Lemmon and Matthew Broderick were floating up the aisle together like branches on a river of love.
They had just seen themselves in the intimate and unsentimental David Mamet teleplay "A Life in the Theater," to be broadcast by Turner Network Television on Saturday.
Surrounded by theater artists and professionals who understood every gesture in the movie, they were basking in a warm moment among family and friends.
"I love David Mamet's writing," Mr.
Lemmon said.
"It was a real privilege to work on this." When he saw Gregory Mosher, who directed the show, he gave him a hug and said, "Thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you," in a way that was as unaffected as it was sincere.


THE TRIALS OF BOB PACKWOOD
I am tired of hearing women call almost every word or action by a man "sexual harassment" ("The Trials of Bob Packwood," by Trip Gabriel, Aug. 29).
If we continue in this way, men will be so turned off that they will hesitate even to show kindness for fear it will be misinterpreted.
BUNNY ABRAHAM New York, N.Y.


Sonar Maker Offers Gunfire Detector
Using sonar technology developed to detect submarines, a military contractor is proposing putting a system of sound sensors in cities to alert police to gunfire almost instantly.
The company, Alliant Techsystems of Edina, Minn., has asked the Federal Government to help set up a pilot project in the District of Columbia to see if the detection system is feasible and useful.


Civil War Memories In Revenue Issues
REVENUE stamps, far more common in the United States in the 19th century than they are now, sometimes turn up at odd intersections of history.
One little-explored corner occurs where war meets banking.
Revenue stamps show payment of taxes, much as postage stamps are receipts for payment of postal fees.
Designs of 19th-century revenue stamps have a certain sameness, but most are very well engraved.


Ashley Powell, John W. Stanier
Elizabeth Ashley Powell, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
James B. Powell 2d of Asheville, N.C., was married there yesterday to John Woollcott Stanier, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William W. Stanier of Youngstown, Ohio.
The Rev.
Michael Brown performed the Methodist ceremony at Trinity Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Stanier, 26, who is known as Ashley, is a senior account executive at Burns McClellan, a public relations company in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father is an otolaryngologist in Asheville.


A Governor Shoots, But His Guilty Plea Is Wide of the Mark
First he shot some raccoons, and then he shot from the hip, but a court has determined that Rhode Island's gun-toting Governor was guilty of nothing more serious than insisting he was guilty.
The episode began one night in July when the Governor, Bruce Sundlun, grabbed a 12-gauge shotgun and headed outside to investigate a racket in the yard of his four-acre waterfront estate in Newport.


From Defiance to Defeat: Union's Struggle Ends in Bitterness
Reporters, editors and advertising workers at The New York Post voted yesterday to end their bitter weeklong strike, but it remained uncertain whether they would have jobs to return to as the paper's new owner, Rupert Murdoch, planned to force them to reapply.
At the headquarters of their union, the Newspaper Guild of New York, the workers who had defiantly walked off the job on Monday, shutting down The Post for three days, voted to take down their picket line at noon on Monday and acquiesce to Mr.
Murdoch's demand.
The vote followed an emotional, at times angry, 90-minute meeting yesterday.


Some Exhaust Fans Are Tricky to Install
INSTALLING an exhaust fan in a poorly ventilated bathroom, laundry or kitchen can help prevent indoor condensation and problems like mildew, peeling paint and damaged woodwork.
Mounting a fan on an outside wall may be reasonably easy, but mounting one in a ceiling can be difficult unless the ceiling is accessible from an attic.
That is because ceiling fans require separate and sometimes lengthy ducts to carry exhaust air outside.
In all cases, electrical wiring has also to be installed.


Miss Williams And Mr. Braff
Margaret Elizabeth Williams, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Fayette Creed Williams of Tupelo, Miss., was married yesterday to Douglas Paul Braff, a son of Mrs.
Edmund Calvert Lynch Jr. of Hobe Sound, Fla.
The Rev.
McCoy Franklin performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church of Tupelo.
Mrs.
Braff, an interior designer in New York, graduated from Vanderbilt University, as did her husband, and received a graduate design degree from the Parsons School of Design.
Her father is an orthodontist in Tupelo.


What Were They Chanting? '100 Wins in '94'?
Sid Fernandez gave a meaningless game some meaning for five and one-third innings tonight.
That's how long the Mets' left-hander held the Florida Marlins without a hit.
Bret Barberie ended the suspense with a soft liner to center field.
Later that inning, Fernandez also lost his shutout.
But the victory was no problem, a 7-1 triumph that was the Mets' fifth straight.


Corrections
The Design column in The Times Magazine last Sunday omitted a credit for the picture of Rudolf Nureyev.
The photographer was Roy Round.


Andrea J. Hagan, Paul G. Parker
Andrea Jane Hagan and Paul Gray Parker, investment bankers in New York, were married yesterday in Charleston, S.C.
The Rev.
Benjamin Breitkreuz, a United Methodist minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Unitarian Church.
Ms.
Hagan is keeping her name.
She works at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Denver and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University, as did her husband.
The bride is a daughter of Benjamin M. Hagan of El Paso and the late Hazel Crabtree Hagan.


Return of Fairness Doctrine to Air Wouldn't Harm Free Speech
To the Editor:
In "The Unfairness Doctrine" (Op-Ed, Sept. 20), Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo attacks regulatory schemes such as the fairness doctrine by conjuring the specter of state censorship.
Yet, Governor Cuomo overlooks the dangers of creating a system of practical censorship based on corporate and consumer patronage.
Certainly a free marketplace of ideas is an agreeable image.
But in the United States -- as opposed to virtually all other western democracies -- we actually rely on the market and private marketing decisions to disseminate political information.


Making Music


Linda Berrafati, Thomas P. Moran
Linda Christine Berrafati, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald Berrafati of Irvington, N.Y., was married yesterday to Thomas Paul Moran, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John Moran of Woburn, Mass.
The Rev.
Terence Moran, a Roman Catholic priest and a brother of the bridegroom, officiated at the Monastery Church of the Sacred Heart in Yonkers.
The bride, 28, is an assistant corporation counsel for the New York City Law Department in Brooklyn.
She graduated from Tufts University and received a law degree from George Washington University.
Her father is a senior attending physician in obstetrics and gynecology at St.
John's Riverside Hospital in Yonkers.


Jericho, Trumpets, Walls, Etc.
What signing of a peace agreement on the White House lawn -- will it be remembered as a historical moment?
No.
Historical refers generally to history, as in "a historical fact"; the shorter historic, however, means "a moment or event of great significance, to be long remembered."
A second problem: What article belongs before historic, a or an?


SEPT. 26-OCT. 2: No Special Prosecutor; Inquiry Into Dealings By Brown Heats Up
For months, an accusation that Commerce Secretary Ron Brown had sought a $700,000 payment in exchange for help in lifting the United States trade embargo against Vietnam only smoldered.
It seemed vague, having originated with a Vietnamese businessman in Florida, Ly Thanh Binh, who said his information came from a former partner, Nguyen Van Hao, who denied the story.
Mr.
Brown and his aides said the charge was preposterous; the aides suggested that the Secretary did not know Mr.
Hao.


Controversy Flares Over Lyme Disease
"I WANT you to imagine that someone is inside your skull squeezing your brain like a sponge," said Anne Ebert, a Howell Township resident, describing one symptom of Lyme disease, which she has had since the late 1970's.
Ms.
Ebert, whose three children also suffer from Lyme disease, is the founder of a grass-roots organization that is at the center of a controversy surrounding the disease.
The controversy has set physician against physician, researcher against researcher, and victims of the disease against the health insurance companies that pay for the medicine used to treat it.
It touches nearly every aspect, from diagnosis to treatment to cure.


Carole Lawson, Christopher Lang
Carole Lynn Lawson, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
J.
Larry Lawson of Paragould, Ark., was married yesterday to Christopher William Lang, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dale W. Lang of Woodstock, Vt.
The Rev.
James Keith performed the ceremony at the Pulaski Heights United Methodist Church in Little Rock, Ark.
Mrs.
Lang, 27, graduated from the University of Arkansas and was Miss Arkansas of 1987.
She is a product development manager at Revlon in New York.
Her father is a general surgeon in Paragould and a past president of the Arkansas Medical Society.


Meatloaf, for the Back-to-Basics Crowd
MEATLOAF has been attracting considerable attention in recent years.
It is the darling of the back-to-basics food movement, whetting the appetites of those with retro tastes.
It is also cheap and, when combined with mashed potatoes, it may be the ultimate comfort food.
And there are thousands of ways to make it.
I'll never forget the first meatloaf I ever made.
I was newly married and vaguely remembered how my mother put a meatloaf together.
I recalled onions, green pepper, egg and seasonings like ketchup and Worcestershire sauce.


Whitman and Florio Issue Pair of Hard-Edged Ads
With a month of campaigning to go in the race for governor, Jim Florio and his Republican challenger, Christine Todd Whitman, have begun pounding away at each other with new ads.
The hard-edged advertisements are a familiar strategy for Mr.
Florio and his campaign.
But they are new ground for Mrs.
Whitman, who had avoided so-called negative advertisements until recent polls showed her losing ground to Mr.
Florio in what had been a dead heat as late as three weeks ago.


Shevardnadze's Fight With Rebels Links His Fate to Georgia's Future
At one point during the 11-day siege of Sukhumi, when Abkhazian separatist forces aided by Russian irregulars were bearing down on the coastal city, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the Georgian leader, found out that his own bodyguards, fearing for his safety, had confiscated the keys to his car.
"They said he yelled at them, called them wet rags, cowards and, excuse me, old women," said a top aide, Teymuraz Stepanov.
"And then he jumped into another car and drove off to the front."


Keyboards of a Different Sort
THOUSANDS of aspiring actors, dancers, writers and composers try to break into New York's fiercely competitive creative fields every year, and almost all of them face the problem of supporting themselves during the inevitable years of anonymity and rejection.
But David Pogue, a music major fresh out of Yale in 1985, found a means of financial sustenance that became far more lucrative than most side jobs.
In the process, he brought Silicon Valley to Broadway, met celebrities, and pushed his original career choice into the shadows.


Cracow
To the Editor: We enjoyed "Sprucing Up in Eastern Europe" (July 18).
However, we were disappointed that there was no mention of three easy day trips from Cracow to historically and culturally important sites.
These trips are what made our visit to Cracow so rewarding.
The trips are the concentration camps of Auschwitz and Birkenau (about an hour by train); the Jasna Gora monastery in Czestochowa, home of the Black Madonna, an important Catholic and nationalist site (two to three hours by train,) and the Wieliczka Salt-Mine and Underground Mining Museum, a 700-year-old mine still in production, with spectacular carvings and chapels executed in salt, some dating from the 17th century (less than an hour by train).
JANET SCHRENK, JOSEPH EYERMANN  Wilmington, Del.


Ripe for the Picking


Playing Favorites: The Pros and Cons
To the Editor:
Regarding "Hey Boomers: Share the Wealth, Dudes" (Viewpoints, Sept. 26), it's about time for the geniuses in corporate America to wake up and recognize the danger of destroying their customer base as demonstrated by their unwillingness to provide real jobs for the twentysomething generation.
The brain trust of business once again illustrates their wonderful capacity to think solely in terms of short-run profits.
Just who do these companies expect to buy their goods and services in the future?


Karen L. Brill, James Q. Peebles
Karen Louise Brill, the daughter of Edward G. Brill of Irvington, N.Y., and the late Caroline A. Brill, was married yesterday to James Querze Peebles, a son of Dr.
Robert W. Peebles of Alexandria, Va., and Lois Q. Peebles of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
David R. Harkness performed the ceremony at the Presbyterian Church in Irvington.
Mrs.
Peebles, 30, is a manager in New York for Research International, a London marketing research company.
She graduated from the State University College at Oswego, N.Y.
Her father is the senior manager of treasury services for Beiersdorf Inc., a maker of health-care products in Norwalk, Conn.
Her mother was an executive secretary at James Harvie &amp; Partners, a real estate developer in White Plains.


Debunking the Myths About Public Schools
To the Editor:
As a public-school teacher and a parent of two children attending public school -- all of us in District 2 in Manhattan -- I wholeheartedly support the main idea of Eric Rothenberg's article on his daughter's switch from private to public school: "I can't help but wonder what might be accomplished citywide if those of us who have been running away from the public schools stopped running" ("When a Product of the Private Schools Goes Public," Sept. 19).


Trying to Make Molehills Out of Medical Mountains
WHEN Dr.
Stephen P. Kelly hung out his shingle 17 years ago, he had one secretary mailing out bills to patients and answering phones in his busy Dobbs Ferry office.
Today, the 43-year-old general practitioner has an office manager, five full-time secretaries and six computer terminals in an effort to stay on top of what has become a Sisyphean task: processing patients' insurance forms for a myriad of health-care plans.


Cracow
To the Editor: Jane Perlez's otherwise comprehensive "Cracow Emerges From the Shadows" (July 18) leaves the impression that there are no Catholic churches in Nowa Huta, "a soulless satellite city" the Communists built outside Cracow.
As Archbishop of Cracow, Karol Cardinal Wojtyla oversaw the erection at Nowa Huta of a church dedicated to Mary, Queen of Poland.
On his second visit to Poland, in 1983, when he was Pope John Paul II, he consecrated a great church at Nowa Huta dedicated to Father Maximilian Kolbe, the Franciscan friar martyred by the Nazis.
VINCENT W. HARTNETT  Tuckahoe, N.Y.


Sports of The Times; Help Save Poor George From Exile
GEORGE STEINBRENNER is not a fool.
A bully, yes.
A blowhard, yes.
An auslander, the Man From Tampa, yes.
But he is not a fool.
George Steinbrenner even reads a history book now and then, and he is bright enough to know that people are eventually remembered and even stereotyped for one single act, one fateful decision, one ultimate defining moment.


Intellectuals in Love: My Speak-Easy Romance With Lionel Trilling
WE met at a speak-easy; it was 1927 and Prohibition was at its height.
The speak-easy was called Mario's; later, it was where Lionel Trilling and I had much of our courtship.
There were more elegant speak-easies in New York than Mario's, converted East Side mansions with handsome iron gates and the imposing air of art galleries that deal only in Old Masters, but they were expensive and intimidating.
Mario's occupied the two lower floors of a rundown brownstone in the West 40's; it could once have been a theatrical boardinghouse and was now a speak-easy only in the sense that it sold illegal liquor and that its owner went through the required ritual of inspecting his customers through a peephole in the locked front door.
In all other respects it was a family-style trattoria, serving excellent home-cooked food at low prices.
Most important, it was safe to drink its liquor.
Every day during the Prohibition years the newspapers published their grim toll of people blinded or killed by wood alcohol.
We were no more deterred by their warnings than a later generation would be deterred from the use of drugs by warnings in the press.
There was no problem in gaining access to a speak-easy in Prohibition; anyone could turn up a "friend" whose name would open some thickly bolted door.
The innocent, as opposed to the sinister, speak-easy scene is wonderfully portrayed in that rarest of American literary achievements, a good comic novel: Elmer Davis's "Friends of Mr. Sweeney." Not the police but death or blindness was what people like ourselves had to fear from Prohibition.


Bourque Decision Is Coming
The Boston Bruins and defenseman RAYMOND BOURQUE met for six hours with a salary arbitrator in Tampa, Fla., on Friday, but a decision isn't expected on the case for another five days.
Bourque, a 10-time All-Star, is thought to be asking for a contract in the range of $4.25 million annually for two seasons.
The Bruins are offering about $2 million a year.


For 3 Tabloid Papers, Some More Tightrope
With the successful completion of Rupert Murdoch's long struggle to buy back The New York Post, newspaper analysts and executives say New York City's three money-losing tabloid newspapers appear to be poised on the brink of a strange new era of resilient nonprosperity.
It is shaping up, these experts say, as an extended period of unaccustomed stability for The Post, The Daily News and New York Newsday, based on the deep pockets of their owners -- a period of labor peace and financial security that seemed highly unlikely even a few months ago.


HOSTILITY LINGERS IN ISRAEL AND P.L.O.
For anyone who thought that the Israeli-Palestinian conflict would suddenly melt with handshakes at the White House, the last few days have brought sobering reminders of the hostility and violence that lurk ever around the corner here.
Today Israeli soldiers evacuated dozens of Gazans from their homes and fired hand-held rockets at houses in a search for fugitives of the Islamic militant group Hamas in Gaza City and the nearby Bureij refugee camp.
Two Hamas commanders were killed and 16 members of the movement were arrested, the army said, in what appeared to be a major blow to the group.


A Chance to Meet the Artists
VARIETY is the essence of the 17th Annual Morristown Craftmarket.
Many of the 150 artists, who were chosen by a jury of their peers, are experimenting with new forms and innovative media.
Others are producing handsome traditional crafts, using centuries-old techniques.
More than 15,000 visitors are expected to wander the aisles of the National Guard Armory next weekend.
Shopping for craft items can be an educational and creative experience.
These fairs provide opportunities to talk to the artists, who come from from 31 states, and learn how an object was made.


At Work; Getting Ahead in a Diverse World
AS corporate America slouches toward the millenium, it slouches with the knowledge that the workplace of the future will be increasingly representative of the country's diverse population.
Several books on diversity meant to help corporations in their transition to the new world order have slipped onto book shelves in the last year or so, only to die the death of a thousand glazed eyes.
This year, diversity books are oriented toward employees rather than human resources departments.
The obvious audiences for the books discussed here are members of minority groups looking for jobs or advancement.
Maybe it's a white thing to say so, but much of the information presented transcends race, gender and ethnicity.
"The Minority Career Guide" (Peterson's, Princeton, N.J.) comes with a long subtitle -- "What African Americans, Hispanics, and Asian Americans Must Know to Succeed in Corporate America" -- and a troika of authors: Michael F. Kastre, Nydia Rodriguez Kastre and Alfred G. Edwards.


THE TRIALS OF BOB PACKWOOD
Grabbing arms and waists?
Pulling back hair without warning or invitation?
What is Senator Packwood guilty of?
Plainly, assault.
Why does following this with a gross imitation of a passionate kiss turn it into sexual harassment?
These women could have filed charges with the police.
DOROTHY J. MAGLIOCCA East Brunswick, N.J.


An Elegant Place for a Seafood Lunch
WHEN we heard several months ago that Cafe du Bec Fin in Old Greenwich was eliminating its dinner service and converting its main dining room to a fish store, to be called Bec Fin Fish Market and Cafe, we were dismayed.
Few good seafood restaurants exist in Connecticut, and since 1986 it has been one of the very best.
But, seafood fanciers, we are delighted to report that all is not lost.
Bec Fin continues to serve lunch every day but Sunday, and an elegant lunch it is.
Incorporating the words fish market in its title suggests something less than fancy, but the chef and owner, Joseph Cizynski, has kept intact the front part of his restaurant (where lunch was always served), with a stucco half-wall separating it from the glass display cases of the shop.
The cafe is a bright and cozy place for lunch, with a blue tiled floor, blue and white Mexican tile trim on creamy stucco walls and cafe curtains at the windows.
There is seating for 20 at well-spaced, well-napped tables set with blue and white Villeroy &amp; Boch china and fresh roses.
And at the end of lunch each woman diner is still presented with a single rose, a reminder that lunch can be as comely as dinner.
Service is as careful and the staff as well-trained as ever.
A mural depicts cafe life at Moulin Rouge.
The French theme is appropriate, for Chef Cizynski's skills are French-based, with a few Asian accents and ingredients.


POSTINGS: Transforming a Cinema City; From Show Biz to the Business of Education
When the Fox Film Corporation built it in 1919, 444 West 56th Street was publicized as the world's biggest movie studio under one roof.
It was a veritable motion-picture city, complete with two 40-foot-high, 15,000-square-foot stages, in which numerous silent classics were filmed and screened.
Then talkies came in, and the building's once-budding show biz career got reduced to cameo appearances (William Fox's wood paneled office stood in for a Harvard dining club in the 1971 film "Love Story").
Loath to spend the huge amount it would have taken to convert it to sound stages, Fox instead used the building for offices.
In 1973 Enterprise Development Associates bought it and converted it into a midtown campus for the John Jay College of Criminal Justice, which has since moved to the old Haaren High School building a few blocks north on 10th Avenue.


Business Diary/September 26 - October 1
THE ECONOMY Can Anything Resist Hillary Clinton?
Time Will Tell An irresistible force met an immovable body last week; at press time, the world had not ended.
First, one very powerful force, Hillary Rodham Clinton by name, stormed Capitol Hill in search of support for "health security," and even the crustiest of pols were moved to applaud her.
But a day later the health plan hit a wall called the American Medical Association.
After working quietly to shape the plan, the A.M.A. suddenly went public with a long list of gripes, complaining, for example, that "physicians will be given financial incentives to provide less care." Lawmakers no doubt heard this loud and clear, for doctors are big political contributors.
Well, no one said it would be easy.


Corrections
A dance listing on page 44 of the Arts and Leisure section today reverses two performance times for the Pi Dance Theater in some copies.
The Toni Taylor Company will appear on Friday at 9 P.M. (not 8) and on Saturday at 8 P.M. (not 9).


Only Thing Missing Is an Oompah Band
NEARLY a half-century ago, when Victor Koenig opened Koenig's in Floral Park, servicemen returning from World War II were moving to Long Island with their young families.
Those former G.I.'s still flock to Koenig's with their grown children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren.
Continuity of this sort is a rarity on an island where a restaurant of 10 or 20 years is considered old.


All for Good Causes
ABOVE Sept. 28, 8:35 P.M.: JUDI ZAZULA holding Goldy, a capuchin monkey, with NAOMI PITCAIRN, a member of Helping Hands, an organization that trains monkeys to assist quadriplegics.
The group held a fund-raising party that included a dinner-dance and silent auction at the Metropolitan Club.
ABOVE Sept. 28, 7:10 P.M.: From left, TANINA FROUGE, WINSTON HAGVON and GLENN SHARPE were among the guests who retreated to the Humidor, a smoking boutique in the Dunhill store, which was celebrating its 100th anniversary.
The evening honored the Fall Dance Men's Committee of the Boys' Club of New York.
LEFT Sept. 27, 6:50 P.M.: KATHY LACEY volunteered at a reception and auction at Sotheby's that benefitted the Child Care Action Campaign, an advocacy group.


Mandela Looking for Free-Market Investors
Having been viewed as a liberator and a martyr, Nelson Mandela has now cast himself in a new, seemingly unfamiliar role: salesman for his country.
But Mr.
Mandela, the head of the African National Congress, has found himself somewhat frustrated by the hesitancy of some members of the anti-apartheid movement in the United States to back fully the lifting of sanctions on South Africa.


Trailer-Park Chic Is No Joke
To the Editor:
The article on the "trailer-park esthetic" ("Trash Fash," Sept. 12) asked whether dysfunctional behavior was caused by gas fumes (unlikely) and mentioned beer for breakfast (a certainty).


Rink Exchanges Pucks for Big Bird
AS the New York Islanders trained at the Rinx at Hidden Pond Park in Hauppauge, coaches and executives gathered around a conference table in a room above the ice to discuss roster moves, salaries and logistics.
As soon as camp ended, however, the personality of the room changed quickly.
Workers decorated the walls with large pictures of Big Bird and the Cookie Monster.
A rocking horse and toddlers' toys took over part of the space as a preschool set up shop.
Children visited to see where they would spend the next nine months.


FISHING WITH PRESIDENTS
Raines's article does indeed enforce my view that fishing refreshes the spirit as well as the flesh.


Carolyn Clough, David Kilgus
Carolyn Neale Clough, a psychotherapist in Pleasantville, N.Y., was married yesterday to David George Kilgus, a manager in management consulting at Ernst &amp; Young in New York.
The Rev.
John Mahler, a Congregational minister, officiated at the Bates Mansion, an inn in Cavendish, Vt.


Little-Noted Advantages Of Alternate-Side Parking
To the Editor:
I was interested in your article on automobiles.
As a disabled New Yorker, I am "automobile dependent."


Lisa A. S. Mensah and Barry D. Ford
Lisa Afua Serwah Mensah, the deputy director of the rural poverty and resources program at the Ford Foundation in New York, was married yesterday to Barry Dwayne Ford, who is to become an associate with the New York law firm of Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton next month.
The Rev.
Ruby Waluyn, a Pentecostal minister, performed the ceremony at Cadman Memorial Congregational Church in Brooklyn.
Ms.
Mensah, 32, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Radcliffe College and received a master's degree in international relations from Johns Hopkins University.


Neighborhood Report: East New York; Long Quest for a New School Gets Longer
The students of Intermediate School 171 in East New York may be wondering if they'll ever get a break.
They're sitting in classrooms far from their former, desperately crowded school at 528 Ridgewood Avenue, which has been closed because of asbestos contamination.
But that's the least of their troubles.


When Creation Fills a Deathly Silence
THE EFFECT OF THE VIRUS IS blatant, too blatant even to think of concealing: his skin is a dull copper color and hangs on him "like the shirt of Nessus" -- as he states in "Blue," his latest film.
His right eye is frozen in a surreal, sightless opacity; he is unable to walk a straight line.
Still, this is his show, and he is determined not to be found wanting.
Surrounded by an affectionate entourage, he makes an understated but deliberate entrance in a loose-fitting white linen suit that belies, just for this evening, the pallor of his illness.
Somehow he musters the strength to cross the high-ceilinged hall, to climb the monumental stairs and to smile long enough to charm the several hundred visitors who have come to the opening of "Queer," an exhibition of his paintings during the summer at the Palazzo delle Esposizioni here.


Mary E. Hughes, Peter M. Tevebaugh
Mary Elizabeth Hughes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James J. Hughes Jr. of Skillman, N.J., was married yesterday to Peter M. Tevebaugh, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Richard Tevebaugh of Woodbridge, Conn.
The Rev.
Vincent Gartland performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Our Lady of Princeton, in Princeton, N.J.
Mrs.
Tevebaugh, 29, is the assistant director of the children's day treatment program at the Family Guidance Center of Mercer County, in Trenton, N.J.
She graduated from Springfield College and received a master's degree in social work from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the vice president of business and finance at Rider College in Lawrenceville, N.J.
Her mother, Peggy Hughes, is a real estate broker in Princeton.


Hem. Ahem. Hum!
As the curtain goes up on the fall fashion season, many women are enjoying the freedom to choose the hem length that suits them -- from micromini, left, to ankle-length, lower left, as worn by a mother and her daughter after services on Yom Kippur.
With designers in Paris showing miniskirts and designers in New York showing ankle-length skirts, some women are feeling confused and insecure.
Should they follow their own instincts or rely on designers to decide on a single length?
One woman, at right, answered the question whimsically with a dress that was long in front and short in back.
Three Fifth Avenue shoppers, above right, stopped to discuss the merits of long versus short.
Below right, two women pausing to greet each other represented the coexistence of long and short.
It has taken 20 years for women to gain the freedom to ignore dictated hemlines and to wear the length they please when they please.
On the days they don't choose to wear leggings or pants.


SEPT. 26-OCT. 2: Boutros-Ghali Demurs; Clinton Sets Limits On U.S. Readiness For U.N. Peacekeeping
The Clinton Administration took a big step last week away from its earlier embrace of international peacekeeping as a means of preventing conflicts and maintaining security.
Having absorbed a handful of American casualties in Somalia, and now facing the prospect that 25,000 American troops may be called upon to help enforce an uneasy peace in Bosnia (if one is ever signed), the Administration made it clear that it wants to set its own rules for when and how Americans will take part in peacekeeping missions.
President Clinton's maiden speech before the United Nations included arms control proposals, a lecture on bureaucratic inefficiency, and a pledge that America would remain a leader.
But it pointedly set out conditions for a wise peacekeeping mission, and the sentence that resonated in the delegates' lounge was: "If the American people are to say yes to U.N. peacekeeping, the United Nations must know when to say no."


Sound Bytes; Drawing on Family Values To Fight the Software Wars
AS a graduate student in Utah in 1969, Alan Ashton proposed two summer projects: linking the school's organ to a computer for "music by numbers," or developing a word processing program.
His professors chose the music project.
Nine years later Mr.
Ashton revived the word processing idea as a way to augment his teacher's salary and support his growing family, and today he is president of the Wordperfect Corporation, the maker of the Wordperfect word processing program and the largest privately held company in the personal computer software industry.
The company has estimated sales of more than $500 million a year.


Neighborhood Report: Upper West Side; Room for Books or Cars, Not Both
In Morningside Heights, the love of books is clashing with a more mundane concern: the need for parking spaces.
Since 1936, the neighborhood branch of the New York Public Library has been in the basement of Butler Library at Columbia University.
But during the summer, the university informed the city that, because it was renovating and expanding Butler, the branch would have to move by January 1995.


Andre Watts Joins Stamford Recital
IT is a pretty impressive line-up -- Andre Watts, George Shearing, Joe Williams, the American Indian Dance Theater -- as the Stamford Center for the Arts swings into its cultural programming.
At the Palace Theater, at 8 P.M. on Friday, Mr.
Watts, known worldwide as a superlative soloist, takes on the more modest role of chamber musician, joining five colleagues -- Marcia Butler, Gary Hoffman, Ani Kavafian, Georg Schenk and David Shifrin -- in an evening of sonatas by Brahms and Poulenc, sets of variations by Saint-Saens and Lutoslawski, and Mendelssohn's Trio in D Minor.
Next Sunday at 3 the keyboard spotlight falls on George Shearing while Joe Williams adds his vocal stylings to an afternoon dubbed "Just Friends"; the chants and ritual dances of Indians will be on display at 8 P.M. on Oct. 11 when the American Indian Dance Theater performs.
The colorfully costumed singers, dancers and musicians then stay on for a 10 A.M. program the following day in the center's Young Audience Series.


And on Sunday, Boggs (3 for 4) Can Rest
When Wade Boggs went to sleep Friday night, he was laboring under the misconception that all he had to do was show up for yesterday's game against Detroit at Yankee Stadium, get a hit to guarantee the 11th .300 batting average of his career and then take the rest of the season off.
"When I got here, Buck Showalter called me into his office and told me that instead of needing to get just one hit, I had to go 2 for 4," said Boggs, the five-time American League batting champion.


Time for A Timeout
To the Editor:


Dinkins Disavows Backer's 'Fascist' Remark
Stung by two days of criticism over a supporter's charge that Rudolph W. Giuliani is backed by "fascist" elements, Mayor David N. Dinkins strove late yesterday to put the issue behind him.
"My whole life in public service has been about bringing the people of our city together," Mr.
Dinkins said in a written statement released just before 5 P.M.
"So, again, I will not tolerate nor have I ever tolerated any religious, ethnic or racial statements by supporters of any candidate. I value and appreciate all my supporters, but obviously I do not agree with every statement made by every supporter." 'No Candidate Is Racist'
He added, "No candidate in this election is racist, fascist or anti-Semitic."


Native Plants Survive Amid Adversity
FALL is here.
There is no better time to reflect on the summer gone by and judge how well the garden grew.
Besides, it is more pleasant to be outdoors, to take a closer look now that cooler weather is here.
According to this year's weather summaries, 1993 was among the hottest summer on record.
And for many who live in the Northeast, it was also one of the driest summers with little rainfall to spur growth.
As for the hot weather, there was a record-tying number of days in the 90 degree range or higher than ever before.
In fact, this summer tied a record of 39 hot days that was set just two years ago.
The month of July was singled out as having 20 days when the temperature was 90 degrees or higher.


Fordham, Ahead 24-7, Loses to Penn to Stay Without a Victory
Penn 34, Fordham 30
Penn surrendered 24 unanswered points in the first half to Fordham (0-4), then roared back in the second half yesterday to claim a 34-30 victory in Philadelphia.


Partitioned in Fact, Bosnia Sees Even Its Dream Die
ON a chilly night last week, the alumni of one of Sarajevo's best high schools met for a 20th reunion.
Of the 30 graduates, only six remained in the city, most of the others having fled months before, when it was easier to escape the Serbian siege.
The former classmates made it an occasion, dressing as they hadn't since the war began.
They pooled meager stocks of coffee and food, and walked to the gathering through pitch-black streets.
The six had more than the usual reasons to celebrate a shared youth.
Among them were Croats, Muslims and Serbs, a matter of little significance two decades ago, when most young people defined themselves not by culture or religion but as Yugoslavs.
But that was before the rise of the ethnic nationalism that has fueled the Bosnian war.
All present were conscious that their gathering now, under the Serbian nationalist guns that have destroyed the city, was a symbol of defiance.


Haunting Works From the 60's
IN THE NEW YORK ART WORLD OF the early 1960's, Lee Bontecou was one of the hottest young artists around.
Her glowering canvas reliefs with their aggressively protruding mouthlike orifices were widely seen as offering an alternative to the exhausted formulas of Abstract Expressionism.
She exhibited with Leo Castelli, the city's most prestigious dealer for new art, and museums across the country bought her work.
But by the early 1970's, Bontecou (BON-ta-coo) was fading from sight.
The new work she unveiled in 1971, which consisted of large plastic flowers and fish, was poorly received -- although from today's vantage point it bears a startling resemblance to the popular fish lamps of the architect Frank Gehry.
In the meantime, the artist had married and moved to Pennsylvania.
The museums that owned her work displayed it less and less often.


St. Thomas Gets Triathlon Event
For the first time, St.
Thomas in the United States Virgin Islands is playing host to America's Paradise Triathlon, a sports event that since 1988 had been held on St.
Croix.
One thousand people from 80 countries are expected to take part in the triathlon on Oct. 24.
Events, which will be held on Sapphire Beach, in Charlotte Amalie and elsewhere on the island, include the International Triathlon Union World Cup Final, the 1993 Pan-American Championship and the TriFed U.S.A.
National Relay Championship.
The events will be preceded by a weeklong Sports Festival, starting Oct. 16, including athletics, swimming, golf, tennis and sailing.


Local Indians Seeking Ways To Aid Earthquake Victims
This was supposed to be a happy time for the Indian community in the New York area.
Hindu groups have been preparing for the fesitival of Navrati, which celebrates the triumph of good over evil.
Sam and Raj, an appliance store that was the first in the "Little India" section of Jackson Heights, Queens, was holding a 20th anniversary sale.
But Thursday's news of a devastating earthquake in India has changed plans.
Some Navrati festivals will be used to collect money and supplies to help the survivors of the quake.


Kimberly Timmis and Kevin Hynes
Kimberly Evan Timmis, the daughter of John H. Timmis of North Salem, N.Y., and Kay Timmis of Pound Ridge, N.Y., was married yesterday to Kevin Joseph Hynes, a son of Charles J. Hynes, the Brooklyn District Attorney, and Patricia Hynes of Brooklyn.
Msgr.
Thomas Brady and the Rev.
Jeffrey Rider, a Congregational minister, jointly officiated at the New Canaan (Conn.) Congregational Church.
The bride, 26, is a political consultant in Manhattan and an adviser to Charles Hynes's re-election campaign.
She graduated from Boston College.
Her father is an investment counselor in North Salem.
Her mother is the coordinator of substitute teachers at New Canaan (Conn.) High School.


Ms. Kupferman And Mr. Creadore
Stephanie Elisabeth Kupferman, a daughter of Justice and Mrs.
Theodore Kupferman of New York, was married yesterday to Donald E. Creadore Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Creadore of Rye Brook, N.Y.
The bride's father, an associate justice of the Appellate Division of the State Supreme Court in Manhattan, officiated at Christ Church in Pawling, N.Y.
Ms.
Kupferman, 29, is keeping her name.
She is an assistant corporation counsel for the City of New York, in Jamaica, Queens.
A graduate of Marymount Manhattan College, she received a law degree from Hofstra University.
Her father, a Republican, is a former member of Congress and New York City Councilman.


Kasparov Takes an Old Path to Safety
Either Gary Kasparov or Nigel Short was out to probe the opponent's acquaintance with a line of play two decades old in Game 13 of their world championship match yesterday in London.
But neither had any problem with the task, nor with the endgame that ensued.
The result was a draw.
Kasparov reached the score of 8 1/2 points to Short's 3 1/2 and thus continued to creep relentlessly toward the 12 1/2 points that will gain the winner's prize of $1.43 million of the $2.55 million purse in the 24-game series.


Neighborhood Report: Highbridge; Busy Sidewalks, Busy Thieves
East 77th Street between Lexington and Third Avenues is a busy block.
There are four subway entrances, three public garages, numerous medical offices, seven large apartment buildings, five schools in the immediate area and Lenox Hill Hospital just down the street.
Added to the normal congestion, there are quite a few vendors and pickpockets.
"The place has become chaotic," said Nikki Henkin, who heads the 100-299 East 77th Street Block Association, which campaigned for three years to rid the area of vendors.
The sidewalk hawkers sell everything from Oriental rugs to jewelry, often forcing pedestrians to take to the streets.


U.S. Delays Sanctions for Libya in Pan Am Blast
The United States, Britain and France have agreed to delay new economic sanctions against Libya for another two weeks to give that country more time to hand over two Libyans for trial in connection with the 1988 bombing of an American jetliner over Scotland, diplomats said today.
The delay was urged by the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, who told those governments last week he was convinced that the Libyan leader, Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi, was now ready to surrender the suspects but wanted more time to prepare his country for the decision.


F.Y.I.
Avenue Overhaul Q.  Is it my imagination or is the city constantly ripping up, refilling and then reripping up the Avenue of the Americas?
This has been going on for a while, and the effect on traffic is disastrous.
A.
Road construction is done in phases, so digging and redigging is necessary.
In the first stage of major overhauls like the present job on Avenue of the Americas between West 32d and 59th Streets, the contractor rips up the street to get at the sewer lines, 10 to 30 feet below the street.
After the lines are replaced, temporary asphalt is laid down so traffic can proceed -- that is, until the street is ripped up again to accommodate work on the water main, 5 to 10 feet below the street's surface.
"This gives the appearance that they did something wrong and have to go back to fix it," said Lisa Doglian, a spokeswoman for the Department of Transportation.
"But really this is the best way. Otherwise we would have to close down an entire route for two years, or a few blocks for several months."
The project will stop for a while around Thanksgiving, to avoid holiday traffic tie-ups, and should be near completion by next summer.
A Tree Grows
Q.
How do you go about getting trees for your block?
A.
It's not as hard as you might imagine.
Find the address of your community board in the telephone book.
Then simply file a request with the board, which will work with the street tree coordinator in the Parks Department to put a tree on your block.
Equal Haircuts
Q.
Why do New York salons charge more for women's haircuts than men's?
Why would an otherwise liberal city tolerate sexist scissors?
Is it even legal?
A.
Absolutely not, according to Linda Sachs, the assistant commissioner for the City Department of Consumer Affairs.
"If salons are engaged in setting prices based on gender, it is a violation of the New York City Human Rights law," she said.
The commission has sued various hair salons violating the law, and the salons were forced to equalize their pricing.
The logic behind the difference varies.
Some stylists say that women generally have longer hair; others that men don't get their hair blown dry -- a notion often belied by contemporary hair fashions.
Many salon workers say they don't know how their pricing policy came about.
"It's just always been the rate," said an employee at the West Eighth Street branch of International Haircutters, a citywide chain that charges $13 and up for men, $18 and up for women.
Another salon, Rubann on East 57th Street, charges men $45 and women $50.
If you are charged more for a cut than a man, you can report the salon to the Human Rights Commission at (212) 306-7500.
JENNIFER STEINHAUER


Honda Rolls Out Its New Accord
IT was noon and traffic was oozing on New York's 42d Street.
I was pointed west, momentarily moribund in front of Grand Central Terminal when an eastbound 5.0-liter Mustang crept alongside.
"Hey," the driver said, "is that thing smaller than it used to be? It looks smaller."


'Good' Jobs in Hard Times
ALMOST unnoticed, discount retailers like Wal-Mart, Kmart, Target, Venture and Home Depot are becoming a huge source of new employment in America.
The jobs they offer, mostly at $5 to $9 an hour, would have been unappealing in another era.
But in these hard times, the low hourly pay -- sweetened with health insurance and profit sharing -- is turning out to be one of the best deals that corporate America is offering to the mass of Americans looking for "good" jobs.
Leading this process is Wal-Mart, the nation's second-biggest private employer, after General Motors.
In the 30 months since the recession ended, no other company has added so many jobs to the national work force as has Wal-Mart: 153,000 of them, a significant contribution to the net increase of 1.9 million jobs created in the United States during the recovery.
The other 165 or so discount retail chains together accounted for an additional 186,000 jobs, according to Chain Store Guide, a trade publication, which gathers such data.
The Labor Department does not track employment at discount stores.


Robyn A. Wolf, Steven Schulman
Robyn A. Wolf, the daughter of Harriet and John Wolf of Dix Hills, L.I., was married last evening to Dr.
Steven B. Schulman, the son of Simi and Allen Schulman of Morganville, N.J.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbi Marc Gellman at the Tam O'Shanter Club in Brookville, L.I.
Mrs.
Schulman, 28, is a personnel manager at the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett.
She graduated from New York University.


White Tablecloths and Warehouses
ARQUA **  (212) 334-1888; 281 Church Street, at White Street; $$$; AE


Shireen Bangash, Lawrence Meistrich
Dr.
Mahmud and Barbara Bangash of Ridgewood, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Shireen Bangash to Lawrence Meistrich, the son of Alfred and Susan Nardelli of Riverdale, the Bronx.
A spring wedding is planned.
Miss Bangash is a psychiatric social worker at the Bellevue Hospital Center in Manhattan.
She graduated from Goucher College and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
Her father, a cardiovascular and thoracic surgeon, is an attending physician at Valley Hospital in Ridgewood.


Fallacious Assumption?
To the Editor:
I am grateful to Edward Rothstein for alerting your readers to the fact that one of the finest programs on radio, "First Hearing," will continue to be produced by the radio station owned by The New York Times, WQXR, but will no longer be broadcast by that station  [ "No Room on the Radio for Classics?," Sept. 19 ] .


INSIDE
Hospital Chains to Merge
Columbia Healthcare and HCA-Hospital Corporation plan to merge, creating a huge hospital chain.
Page 25.
India's Relief Effort Failing
India's relief effort for its worst earthquake in 50 years is mired in government bureaucracy.
Page 3.


Novels for the Computer
To the Editor:
Hyperfiction may conceal countless layers of creative computerized subplots, but it is clearly revealing our boredom with decades of hyped but, alas, hollow modern fiction.
The "volumeless imagination" and exaggeration of modern writing, which apparently hasn't satisfied the reader in book form, will ultimately lose its fascination in this new form.
JEANNIE J. FERBER  Andover, Mass.


Neighborhood Report: Highbridge; A Bittersweet Season
The growing doubts about the Yankees' future in the Bronx have been especially painful for the small merchants in the shadow of Yankee Stadium.
That's because the new talk comes after a year in which the Yankees played well for a change and helped drum up business for their neighbors along the way.
Indeed, the team's unexpected run for first place, down to the very last days of the season, kept fans and revelers flooding into the economically struggling neighborhood in greater numbers, and for far longer, than in less-competitive years.


His Urban Harvest
BARRY BENEPE is a 65-year-old pit bull.
His tenacity has produced 20 Greenmarkets for New York City, stretching from City Hall to Harlem Hospital, from the Grand Concourse to Grand Army Plaza, enlivening public spaces and providing food so fresh that restaurant owners go out of their way to shop at the markets.
But instead of thanking Mr.
Benepe, the city's bureaucracy -- the Police, Sanitation and Transportation Departments, the community boards, the Port Authority, the Board of Education -- has thrown up obstacles as daunting today as they were in 1976, when the first farmers' market opened at 59th Street and Second Avenue.
Like most visionaries, Mr.
Benepe cannot be deterred, and his stubbornness has produced its share of detractors.
But if he were not so single-minded, there might be no Greenmarkets.


For Florio, Comfort From Other Governors' Distress?
Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey may have reason to be grateful for the fiscal problems in New York and Connecticut as he campaigns for re-election, based on research by two Princeton University economists.
In their study of the impact of tax increases on the re-election chances of incumbent governors in 48 states between 1960 and 1989, Timothy Besley and Anne Case said that a governor who has presided over an increase of at least $100 per year in the tax bills of households earning $40,000 or more in 1976 dollars is 15 percent less likely to win another term than governors in states with lower increases or none at all.


THE LOOK OF THE NINETIES
The dignity of these elder models was so riveting I had to look at the clothes -- clothes that I routinely ignore when shown on over-painted, teen-age, runway models.
This should tell advertisers something.
LEAH RUTH ROBINSON New York, N.Y.


IN SHORT/FOOTBALL
RISE AND WALK  The Trial and Triumph of Dennis Byrd.
By Dennis Byrd with Michael D'Orso.
Zondervan/HarperCollins, $20.


An Elite Group Gains 2 Members
IN the last 18 years, since the Italian Blue Team ended its run of successes, very few players have successfully defended a world title.
Almost all have been Americans.
In the Bermuda Bowl, four players, Bill Eisenberg, Paul Soloway, Bob Wolff and Bob Hamman, have won three straight.
In the Venice Cup for women's teams, that streak has been matched by Dorothy Truscott and Emma Jean Hawes.


Judgment Call


FERMAT'S THEOREM
We've learned a thing or two.
We know we live in a small corner of an expanding universe.
We know that matter is made of atoms.
We know that absolute truth is hard to come by.
And now we know -- having spent three and a half centuries on it -- that no number cubed can be the sum of two other cubed numbers, nor any fourth power the sum of two fourth powers, nor any higher power the sum of two like powers.
What a peculiar bit of knowledge!
Yet if anyone is out there judging the galaxy's civilizations according to some handbook of "What Every Bright Species Ought to Know," it seems reasonable to suppose that somewhere on the list will be the fact of arithmetic that we call Fermat's Last Theorem.
It must be a universal truth -- true here, true everywhere, true now, true always.


Playing Favorites: The Pros and Cons
To the Editor:
The suggestion that employers hire more of the members of the generation born after 1961, not as temps but in real jobs with real opportunities, should prompt any fair-minded employer to make the following reply:


What Makes a Building Shrivel Up and Die?
Back in the 1960's, Andy Warhol was invited to participate in a group show, but instead of contributing a painting, Warhol took a broom and swept the gallery floor.
I thought it was one of the smartest works he ever made -- if people could bring themselves to collect soup cans, why not gather dust? -- and I thought of it again recently when the asbestos scare came crashing down, plunging New York City into panic over the safety of its public schools.
The story highlighted the appalling lack of maintenance in the city's school buildings, but it also illuminated a need to refurbish ways of thinking about architecture itself.
This is not the school story we were supposed to be reading this year.
These were not the pictures we were supposed to see.
Instead of the daily deluge of images of decaying floor tiles, falling-down ceilings and distraught parents, we were meant to be looking with pride and amazement at the remarkable new school buildings that have opened their doors this year throughout the city.
The work of the School Construction Authority, a city agency established in 1988 with an appropriation of $4.3 billion, these new buildings represent one of the most important public works programs in the country.
They ought to be illustrating an uplifting narrative about the city's ability to turn itself around.
Instead, the School Construction Authority found itself mired in yet another episode in the continuing saga of urban decrepitude, as the asbestos rained down on its parade.


A Little Dueling Music
When the world's two greatest tenors drew their swords on the Metropolitan Opera stage Monday and began to fight, it might have seemed business as usual.
Operas are full of tenors who, if not actually engaging in duels, often sing as if they are.
And these two -- Placido Domingo and Luciano Pavarotti -- have provided much amusement for lovers of operatic badinage as the numbers of rivals able to artfully master the lyrical roles of the Italian repertory diminished.
Each has asserted that he was above any jealousy of the other but why did the other not share his high-minded view?


Some Exhaust Fans Are Tricky to Install
INSTALLING an exhaust fan in a poorly ventilated bathroom, laundry or kitchen can help prevent indoor condensation and problems like mildew, peeling paint and damaged woodwork.
Mounting a fan on an outside wall may be reasonably easy, but mounting one in a ceiling can be difficult unless the ceiling is accessible from an attic.
That is because ceiling fans require separate and sometimes lengthy ducts to carry exhaust air outside.
In all cases, electrical wiring has also to be installed.


BUTTONED UP
I was not surprised to read that David Dinkins balances his public civility with private fury ("Buttoned Up," by Todd S. Purdum, Sept. 12).
I've always understood the turbulence and anger beneath the Mayor's good manners.
He doesn't try to hide anything.
Rather, he seems to be saying, "My good behavior does not mean I'm pleased by all that discourages and disturbs me." This honesty of image from a politician is Mayor Dinkins's rarest grace.
RONALD BAZARINI New York, N.Y.


Neighborhood Report: Park Slope; The Changing of the Guard
The huge, dilapidated brick armory off Seventh Avenue, which houses a women's shelter and National Guard unit, hardly looks worth fighting over.
But the armory is about to change hands -- from the state to the city -- and suddenly ideas for its use are coming thick and fast.
There are proposals to turn the building into a sports center, Police Department outpost, museum of Brooklyn military history, or a combined residential/ commercial structure that would be host to the occasional antique show.
Underlying all the proposals is the assumption that the women's shelter -- now financed by the state and long opposed by nearby residents -- will be gone.
But it seems unlikely that the city will move the women soon.


Story of My Life? Glad You Asked.
EVERY FALL THEY TURN UP: new television characters with new families, workplaces or both, hoping viewers will learn to love them.
But when networks may only give a show six episodes to live or die, viewers had better get acquainted fast.
Maybe that's why, when it comes to exposition, some stars are saying it all in one speech.
Here's how six new sitcoms handled things.
ANITA GATES "The Boys" (CBS)
Setting: A book signing.
A customer asks a writer, Doug Kirkfield (Chris Meloni), when his next book is coming out.


Papal Encyclical Says Church Must Enforce Basic Morality
In an encyclical that Pope John Paul II clearly considers one of the most important of his papacy, the Roman Catholic leader asserts that there is a basic morality that transcends all eras and cultures and absolutely forbids certain actions.
The encyclical, named "Veritatis Splendor" ("The Splendor of Truth"), does little to spell out what these intrinsically evil acts are, although it does have an unmistakable subtext referring to sexual themes.


In a Bid for Casinos, Chicago Comes Up With Snake-Eyes
THE tune is familiar, but instead of the lyric "Chicago, Chicago, that toddlin' town . . . ," the advertisement radio listeners throughout the upper Midwest are hearing says, "Aurora, Aurora, that Hollywood town. . . ."
The advertisement aims to lure gamblers to the Hollywood Casino's two new river boats based in a middle-class suburb about an hour's drive west of here on the Fox River.
But the casino's snatching of Chicago's semi-official theme song is a grating reminder that the city's political and business leaders have thus far been powerless to win Chicago a piece of the action as casino gambling spreads throughout the Midwest.


THE LOOK OF THE NINETIES
I am so sick of slinky, chisel-boned 16-year-olds.
I wish you would always offer this variety.
PAULA HOLLINS Brooklyn


THE LOOK OF THE NINETIES
'The Look of the Nineties" is a delight and an inspiration. Perhaps, after all, the best is yet to be. BARBARA PEARL New York, N.Y.


Neighborhood Report: Lower Manhattan; 2 Buildings, 200 Years Old, To Be Rubble
Despite last-minute pleas from preservationists, demolition is to start this week on two of the city's oldest buildings.
City officials have hired a contractor to tear down the buildings, in the South Street Seaport Historic District, as safety hazards.
The landmark buildings at 227 and 229 Water Street, both of which are nearly two centuries old, were doomed by the bureaucratic, legal, political and fiscal stresses of modern New York.


Turkish Carpet
To the Editor: Reading your article on buying carpets in Istanbul (Aug. 22) has made me feel a little bit better about a most humiliating experience I had there just weeks ago.
I, who can negotiate for a used car with expertise and aplomb, became the owner of a Kilim rug I had no intention of purchasing.
I followed my guidebook's suggestion to visit a carpet store where they would teach me all about carpets and serve me apple tea.
In a half hour, I had acquired a carpet at a ridiculously high price.
And my husband, who was born in the Middle East and is a master of bargaining, stood by helplessly.


Alison Friedman And Andrew Brod
Mr. and Mrs.
Alan Friedman of Boca Raton, Fla., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter, Alison Friedman, and Andrew Marc Brod, the son of Ruth and Alvin Brod of Manhasset Hills, L.I.


California Questioning Clinton's Promise of Aid
When President Clinton arrives in California on Sunday evening for his second visit in a month, he will find growing impatience and political rancor over his Administration's response to the battered local economy.
Increasingly, even strong backers of the President among business and political leaders here are saying he must act quickly to reverse California's deepening slide into recession or risk losing the most populous state's 54 electoral votes in 1996.


Norman Jaffee Made a Mark on the Landscape of the East End
NORMAN JAFFE viewed the landscape of Eastern Long Island with the passion of a true romantic.
He talked and wrote lovingly of the farms, of the dunes, of the surf and of the villages and the sky, but he spoke most of all about the light, about that marvelous light that he so aptly called "distilled yet brilliant" and compared to the light in a work by Turner or Vermeer.
Like all architects he worked wherever he could, but he wanted most of all to design buildings that fulfilled the promise of his passion and celebrated the qualities that he had led him many years ago to settle on the South Fork of Long Island.
Over the years of his practice in Bridgehampton he designed a wide range of houses and other kinds of buildings that, taken together, constitute a clear and powerful statement of belief in a place.


Argentines Vote Today, but Menem's Eye Is on '95
Two weeks ago, President Carlos Saul Menem was on the campaign trail in the northern Argentine province of Formosa when the helicopter he was flying in lost power and fell 15 feet to the ground.
It was the second time Mr.
Menem had faced tragedy in an air accident, but no one was hurt.
Outwardly he was serene.
"God doesn't want me to be killed," he said.
"He's saving me for '95."


Rods and Rituals in Scotland
IN the remote highland mountains north of Inverness flow a series of clear, peaty rivers whose names themselves stir vivid images of Scottish firth and strath: Brora, Cassley, Carron, Helmsdale, Naver and, a personal favorite, the lovely River Oykel.
Throughout most of the year, sportsmen from all over Britain line their banks engaged in that keenest of Scottish traditions, fishing for salmon on a colorful, hand-tied fly.
This is not the timid, intellectual angling of North American trout streams but the hearty, two-fisted manhandling of a 16-foot salmon rod along the craggy outcroppings and raging currents of Europe's finest spate rivers -- those that rise and fall rapidly depending upon local rainfall.
It is also not an enterprise for the faint of heart -- or wallet.
The rights to fish salmon in Scottish rivers are often owned separately from the surrounding land, and many rivers are virtually inaccessible because their salmon stocks are held by private individuals or syndicates who reserve fishing rights.
Those wishing to wet a line must book through a hotel with its own fishing rights or rent a private lodge through estate managers who specialize in fishing leases.
A week's fishing on one of the better salmon rivers can cost up to $1,500 a rod. (A rod means one person fishing a full day; two or three anglers often divide a rod, alternating with each other in the course of the day, and split the cost.) It's no surprise, then, that few anglers ever release a catch.
The salmon are earmarked for the table.


Russia's Next if Reaction Wins in Georgia
To the Editor:
On July 18, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, the Georgian leader, sent an appeal for support for democracy and peace in Georgia to me and fellow artists, Holocaust survivors and leaders of the Jewish and Muslim communities meeting in Britain at the "Wake Up World" concert.
He explained that reactionary forces outside Georgia were backing the secessionist Abkhazian attack on the city of Sukhumi, that a democratic Russia was vital for Georgia and that there could be no democratic Russia without peace and democracy in Georgia.


Typecast


Placing Ballparks in the Sweep of History
THE defining moment of childhood for Michael Gershman of Westport occurred the afternoon he first walked into Ebbets Field in Brooklyn.
He was 6 years old.
"It was my mother's birthday and my parents celebrated by going to Ebbets Field, which they did often," Mr.
Gershman recalled.
"I remember walking through the marble rotunda at the entrance, and how every sound echoed. To me, it was like Grand Central Station. And then I saw it -- the grass on the field. It was like seeing Oz."


Detailing The New Tax Law
AS the dust settles on the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993, signed into law in August, the ramifications for homeowners are becoming clear.
Some changes will affect the elderly.
There are also important considerations for anyone in a high-income bracket and for people who own rental property.
And there are equally meaningful implications for shareholders in some New York City co-ops.
"Though the homeowner was not specifically addressed," said Julian Block, a tax lawyer in Larchmont, N.Y., and author of "Julian Block's Year-Round Tax Strategies," 1994 Edition (Prima Publishing, $14.95, available this month), "the changes will have meaning for quite a lot of people."


FISHING WITH PRESIDENTS
There is no mention of President Reagan in the article.
Is it possible that Reagan might have the same thing to say about fish that he once said about trees: "If you've seen one, you've seen them all"?
GEORGE WALLERSTEIN Seattle


Deborah Brennan, David S. Leslie
Deborah Anne Brennan, the daughter of Valerie C. Brennan of New York, and the late Jack Brennan, was married yesterday to David Stuart Leslie, a son of Capt. and Mrs.
Donald H. Leslie of Melbourne, Australia.
The Rev.
Stan Mosley performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
The bride, 28, graduated from Sweet Briar College and was until recently the administrative supervisor in New York for Automatic Data Processing.


BEST SELLERS: October 3, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
60
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
1
LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching Hour."
3
2
6
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
4
5
4
THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Concluding the "Griffin &amp; Sabine" trilogy.
5
1
SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $23.) Two Navajo tribal policemen undertake to unravel a web of politics and murder.
6
3
25
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
7
4
29
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
8
6
8
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and woman and for the woman's first lover.
9
8
4
STRIP TEASE, by Carl Hiaasen. (Knopf, $21.) The problems, political and sexual, of a Florida Congressman.
10
7
9
STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a train robber and killer.
11
12
4
THE DEATH AND LIFE OF SUPERMAN, by Roger Stern. (Spectra/Bantam, $19.95.) A novel about the comic-book hero, including his rebirth in the near future.
12
9
15
PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $22.) The stresses and strains that befall a mother and her adopted Cherokee daughter.
13
1
POT OF GOLD, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon, $23.) A single mother and her teen-age daughter go on a spree after winning $60 million in a lottery.
14
10
12
THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) A Zurich hotelman's life in the world of arms dealers, dope smugglers and international terrorists.
15
16
37
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through illustrated cards and letters.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
4
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
2
2
21
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
3
6
6
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
4
3
7
MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Essays suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected ways and places.
5
4
12
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their effects on a person's self.
6
5
60
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
7
7
17
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
8
13
3
CASE CLOSED, by Gerald Posner. (Random House, $25.) A reassessment of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.
9
8
42
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
10
1
MORE MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Putnam, $21.95.) Stories about country music stars from the host of the "Nashville Now" television show.
11
1
UNDER THE TARNISHED DOME, by Don Yaeger and Douglas S. Looney. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) A critique of Notre Dame's recent football program.
12
1
THE FOUNTAIN OF AGE, by Betty Friedan. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A call for men and women to regard life after age 60 as an exciting adventure.
13
10
15
DAYS OF GRACE, by Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad. (Knopf, $24.) The memoirs of the late tennis star.
14
9
17
MAMA MAKES UP HER MIND, by Bailey White. (Addison-Wesley, $17.95.) Life in a tiny Georgia town; by a first-grade teacher and radio commentator.
15
12
16
THE FIFTIES, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $27.50.) A journalist's social, political, economic and cultural history of the 1950's.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
10
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
2
3
20
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
3
4
2
THE WINNER WITHIN, by Pat Riley. (Putnam, $22.95.) The basketball coach's advice for achieving successful teamwork in sports and other endeavors.
4
2
14
EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Counsel about diet.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 18, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
ACROSS THE BRIDGE: Stories, by Mavis Gallant. (Random House, $19.) In these 11 lucid urban stories, most of which are set in Paris or Montreal, Mrs.
Gallant's wit and exactitude subvert the antiquity of her material.
THE BEAST WITHIN, by Adam Douglas. (Chapmans/Trafalgar Square, $24.95.) The battle with the Devil is at the center of this careful dissection of the werewolf legend, an illegal border crossing between man and beast.
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT IN AMERICAN HISTORY, by Lawrence M. Friedman. (Basic Books, $30.) A law professor's impressive panoramic history of the criminal justice system, which, he argues, hasn't controlled crime since Plymouth Rock and will not control it now.
THE CULTURE OF DISBELIEF: How American Law and Politics Trivialize Religious Devotion, by Stephen L. Carter. (Basic Books, $25.) A professor of law at Yale examines what he calls a 20-year-old tendency to ban religion from public discourse, and argues that a just balance of mutually respectful forces is required, not a victory for church or secularism.
FEATHER CROWNS, by Bobbie Ann Mason. (HarperCollins, $23.) In Kentucky in 1900, the birth of quintuplets stirs apocalyptic speculation and brings plenty of unwanted change to the population of this substantial, attentive novel.
FIDEL CASTRO, by Robert E. Quirk. (Norton, $35.) An indictment, often devastating, of its ego-driven subject and his works, drawn chiefly from public materials by orthodox scholarship.
FLY FISHING THROUGH THE MIDLIFE CRISIS, by Howell Raines. (Morrow, $22.) The editorial page editor of The New York Times nobly describes his passionate fishermanship and the fly-fishing guru who helped him attain it.
THE GRISLY WIFE, by Rodney Hall. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.) This volume of Mr.
Hall's Australian trilogy is narrated by a female missionary who has seen 32 years of dark and bloody doings since coming to New South Wales.
LENI RIEFENSTAHL: A Memoir, by Leni Riefenstahl. (St. Martin's, $35.) That she put her art at the service of the Nazis is not seriously addressed in this nevertheless spellbinding autobiography by the film maker, actress, mountaineer, dancer and all-round uberachiever.
THE NORTON HISTORY OF CHEMISTRY, by William H. Brock. (Norton, $35.) A discipline that has formed society far more than any war or revolution is here made clear and accessible.
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) This seductive meditation on the human condition by a Danish writer takes the form of a suspense novel whose irresistible heroine is a Greenland Eskimo.
UTOPIA UNARMED: The Latin American Left After the Cold War, by Jorge G. Castaneda. (Knopf, $27.50.) A scholar's history of the left since World War II, and a program for leftist conduct now that revolution is a moribund ideal.


Scientists Put Age of Bones At 8,000 Years
Some 8,000 years ago, a mountain climber in the Colorado Rockies entered a cave at more than 10,000 feet, squeezing through low, narrow passages by the light of a flaming pine torch.
He was a robust man, about 5 foot 5 and 40 years old, possibly an ancestor of the Southern Ute Indians.
Something happened to him in the cave and there he died.
And there his skeletal remains were discovered last year by amateur cave explorers.
With results of a detailed analysis and radiocarbon dating, anthropologists announced yesterday that these were among the oldest human remains ever found in North America and were the earliest example anywhere of people using caves at such high elevations.


Dance of Doom


Ann Sexton and Paul Foye
Ann Sexton, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard Sexton of Brooklyn, was married yesterday to Paul Christopher Foye, a son of Elizabeth Foye of New London, Conn., and the late William L. Foye.
The Rev.
Mark Lane performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Watch Hill (R.I.) Chapel.
Mrs.
Foye, 27, is a history teacher at the Town School in San Francisco.
She and her husband graduated from Amherst College.
The bride received a master's degree in education from Brown University.
Her father is a lawyer in New York.


Harris Is Tops In Fifth Ave. Mile
Ron Harris, a Navy lieutenant stationed in Arlington, Va., won the men's invitation mile in 3 minutes 58 seconds and Lauren Gubicza, a former Fordham University star, took the women's mile in 4:37.9 yesterday in the 13th annual Fifth Avenue Mile.
The event was staged by the New York Road Runners Club.
Because it lacked a sponsor this year, the club was not able to offer stipends and large prizes to attract top runners.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
I.B.M. Repair Workers Buy Their Brooklyn Plant
Workers at a Bedford-Stuyvesant I.B.M. repair plant bought the operation last week through an employee stock-ownership plan.
The 200 employees of the plant at 585 DeKalb Avenue paid $7 million, with the help of a bank loan.
I.B.M. announced in March that it would pull the plant's operations from New York, and offered to sell the factory to employees.
The new company, now called Advanced Technological Solutions, will continue to provide service for I.B.M. and other computer equipment.


Q and A
Finding Furnished Rentals in Israel Q. We are interested in renting a furnished one-bedroom apartment in Israel for one or two months.
Tel Aviv would be our first choice and Jerusalem our second choice.
We would like to rent from the owner.
Any suggestions? . . .
Lilian Fields, Nyack, N.Y.


Gypsy Life In Hungary
Twentieth-century Gypsy life in Hungary is the subject of an exhibition at Budapest's Ethnographic Museum, housed in a palatial building across from the Parliament.
The show, which includes photographs and re-creations of Gypsy dwellings ranging from tents to starkly furnished workers' hostels, will run through Dec. 31.


You Read? Me Too!
"PICKUP" seems too rough-edged to describe what happens when one interested party meets another in the sedate confines of a bookstore.
Still, it happens, and not only at the new mega-Barnes &amp; Noble, which has gained a reputation as one of the Upper West Side's most flourishing social scenes.
Here's what some bookstore owners and employees had to say about the action at their shops.
ARGOSY BOOK STORE, 116 East 59th Street.
"There always seems to be a lot of flirting going on. We have this rack of sheet music from the 30's and 40's. You hear them talking about their favorite songs, and sometimes they start humming together." NAOMI HAMPLE, co-owner


Canada's U.S. Trade Experience Fuels Opposition to the New Pact
Debbie Annis came to the door of her gray two-story, vinyl-sided house on Ninth Avenue, in the shadow of the industrial skeletons on Mohawk Street that used to make tractors, electric blankets and woolens in Canada's manufacturing heartland.
Michael Smith, candidate on the political left for Brantford's parliamentary seat in the federal elections on Oct. 25, told her that his New Democratic Party, which has held the seat for 22 years, would jettison both the North American Free Trade Agreement and free trade with the United States.


Adirondacks
At almost any time of year, there is something deliciously isolated about the Adirondacks.
But it is especially so in the fall.
With no cities within a three-hour drive -- New York City is a five-hour drive away -- the leaf-peeping crowds here are smaller than in the Catskills or the White Mountains, and solitude is abundant on the innumerable mountain trails, streams and glassy lakes.
The Adirondacks are, after all, the largest park in America outside Alaska: a six-million-acre region larger than Massachusettes and as wild as many national parks in the West.
This is where Ralph Waldo Emerson, seeking haven from civilization, established his "philosopher's camp" on Follensby Pond.
And this is where a host of 19th-century millionaires with names like Whitney, Vanderbilt and Rockefeller built sprawling villas -- also called camps, no matter what their size -- around distant lakes, giving aristocratic cachet to the notion that remoteness somehow augmented the natural beauty of a place.


Corrections
A map on Sept. 12 with an article about the Montrealer, a train that links Montreal and Washington, included an erroneous section of the route, supplied by Amtrak.
The train turns north at New London, Conn., and not New Haven; it does not pass through Hartford or through Springfield, Mass.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
SOHO A Cast of Characters Rolled Into One
Nora Cole, who played the character Sweet Anita more than 40 times in the Broadway show "Jelly's Last Jam," brings her one-woman show to SoHo before taking it to the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington for the National Black Theater Festival.
In her multi-media play, "Olivia's Opus," Ms.
Cole plays both a young woman living in a small Southern town in the 1960's and a troop of characters who enter her life.
The play is based loosely on Ms.
Cole's childhood in Louisville, Ky.; she was "the fourth child, second girl and blackest of eight." She dances, sings and delivers monologues, against projections of news film and family photographs.
"Olivia's Opus," Castillo Cultural Center, 500 Greenwich Street, between Spring and Canal Streets; Thursdays through Saturdays, 8 P.M., Sundays, 3 P.M., through Oct. 24; $20, $10 for children, students and the elderly; (212) 941-1234.
MIDTOWN Jazz Musicians With Style From All Over the Map
Marty Ehrlich and his Emergency Peace Ensemble and Don Byron, a jazz clarinetist, are to perform at Weill Recital Hall on Tuesday night under the auspices of the World Music Institute.
Both men are well-known figures on the contemporary improvisational American music scene.
Mr.
Byron has taken his clarinet to gigs where the music has ranged from rock-and-roll to waltzes, and he has played with everyone from klezmer musicians to Reggie Workman, the bassist, to classical pianists.
Mr.
Ehrlich is a saxophonist, clarinetist and composer who moves between European and American jazz movements, sometimes playing in both styles at once.
He has played throughout the United States and Europe with an array of composers' ensembles.
Weill Recital Hall, at Carnegie Hall, 57th Street east of Seventh Avenue; Oct. 5, 8 P.M.; $10; Ticketmaster or (212) 307-7171.
CHINATOWN/BROOKLYN HEIGHTS Anchoring a Bridge In the River and the Air
It is almost a metaphysical question: What holds up a bridge?
More specifically, what holds up the Manhattan and Williamsburg Bridges, which many New Yorkers rattle across while praying silently that the roadway not collapse beneath them?
On Saturday, the New York Transit Museum, in Brooklyn Heights, will explain how the bridges stay up.
Engineers from the city Department of Transportation explain the bridges' construction in a Saturday tour called "Bridge Game: Manhattan and Williamsburg Bridges Close Up."
The tour begins at the Manhattan end of the Manhattan Bridge, where engineers will explain the function of the anchorages that hold the bridge firmly in the river.
After lunch (egg rolls and won ton soup; participants should take lunch money) the tour continues with the Williamsburg Bridge, where a new set of engineers will give the inside view.
Meet at the Manhattan end of the Manhattan Bridge; Oct. 9, 10 A.M. (tour ends at 2 P.M.); reservations required; (718) 330-5839.
FLUSHING White-Elephant Offerings At a Community Yard Sale
The Lutheran Church of the Redeemer will hold its twice-yearly yard sale with all the required trappings: old clothing, bicycles in various stages of ill repair, mismatched salt and pepper shakers.
About 100 families are expected to set up tables in the Rev.
Ernst R. Pflug's yard on Saturday from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.
Early birds will have first pick of the many sets of dishes and board games and a wood-burning stove.
The pastor will also flip burgers to sell along with hot dogs, barbecued-beef sandwiches, sodas and coffee throughout the day.
Proceeds will go to church programs.
Yard sale; 185-01 50th Avenue, on the corner of Peck Avenue off Utopia Parkway; Oct. 9; free; (718) 357-5194.
JENNIFER STEINHAUER


Cracow
To the Editor: Jane Perlez gave an excellent description of the physical side of Cracow.
May I add a postscript.
The student residence halls of the Jagiellonian University were completed 60 years before Columbus arrived in the New World.
The Poles were a studious crowd; they competed with the best of Dresden and Leipzig for academic superiority.
And today that pride is seen and heard in Cracow as taxi drivers and hotel porters discuss Plato and Socrates.
The 11th edition of the Britannica describes it as "the intellectual center of Poland."


The Recycling Scorecard
The recycling race in Manhattan is too close to call.
Two weeks ago, Community Board 8 on the Upper East Side applauded the announcement that it had taken the lead in the recycling effort, with 24.3 percent of its residential waste recycled.
Then last week, the Borough President's office announced that Board 6 has unseated the champions, with 24.5 percent recycled.
Residential recycling became mandatory in New York City in 1989, with the process introduced progressively. (Regulations on commercial wste went into effect just last week.) To encourage recycling in Manhattan, the Borough President's office has turned it into a contest.


THE BULLY OF THE SKIES CRIES UNCLE
As a heavy user of airline services, with over 3 million frequent-traveler miles, of which more than 1.3 million accrued with American, I can state that Robert Crandall has built not only the finest airline in the United States but a world-class competitor.
He has done this despite the absurd situation whereby the Department of Transportation continues to allow bankrupt carriers to operate, thus eroding the franchise value of airlines like American that survived deregulation.
KENNETH J. TARR New York, N.Y.


For Sale, a Triangular Piece of the Village
For a mere $295,000, you can own a genuine neighborhood curiosity -- a triangular patch of Seventh Avenue South, 33 by 34 by 46 feet, with a tiny triangular building, 12 by 12 by 15 feet.
Plus, an East New York school that seeks a home, and reports from Bayside, Highbridge and Washington Heights.
PAGES 6-12


New Questions About Rhode Island Chief Justice
Chief Justice Thomas F. Fay, who faces impeachment proceedings and a criminal investigation of ethics violations, used official Supreme Court stationery to write letters to influence the disposition of speeding tickets issued to friends and relatives.
It is unclear whether the letters written by Chief Justice Fay to lower court officials on behalf of his brother-in-law, a former law clerk, the teen-age children of a friend, a gas station worker and other associates, had any effect on the outcomes of the cases.


Neighborhood Report: East Side; Diplomacy Rare on U.N. Park
It is not often that neighbors fight tooth and nail to prevent a local park's expansion, but when some residents near the United Nations heard several weeks ago that Dag Hammarskjold Plaza would grow, they countered with petitions, fliers and strident speeches in angry meetings.
For the last decade, the plaza has been a popular forum for demonstrators, a refuge for the homeless and a big headache to people who live and work in the area.
The last thing they wanted was to close a lane of traffic, expand the park -- and gain more space for unwanted visitors.


Gunfire Holds Poor Residents of Washington Hostage
One thing Rufus Johnson enjoyed most after retiring was walking about his apartment complex in the city's Greenway neighborhood, chatting with friends, taking the sun on a quiet corner and just being free to do anything, or nothing, after a lifetime of hard work as a tile setter.
Now all that has changed.


Washington Memo; Policy on Jobs Holds Trade Pact's Fate
Every year for at least the rest of the decade, more than two million Americans, most of them solidly middle class, are likely to lose their jobs because of fundamental changes in the world economy.
It is one of the most vexing social and political problems facing President Clinton, and its immediate symbol has become the North American Free Trade Agreement.


Neighborhood Report: Lower Manhattan; A High School That Tries to Tame Wayward Students
A high school that opened in TriBeCa last year worried some neighbors when they learned it was for truants and other troubled students from across the city.
Its name was hardly reassuring: Wildcat Academy.
"Naturally everybody was up in arms," said Ron Tabano, vice president of the academy.
"It sounded like we were running 'Jail House Rock' here." A front-page tabloid headline warned: "Schools to Weed Out Troublemakers."


Neighborhood Report: Bayside; To Catch A Car Thief
In coming weeks, Bayside residents who usually leave their cars behind during the workday will be placing police-issued stickers on their windows -- and hoping they will be pulled over.
The cars, that is.
It's part of a new, sweeping effort by the police to fight car theft throughout northeastern Queens.
Overall, 47,000 cars were stolen in the borough last year.
Of New York City's 10 worst neighborhoods for car theft, 8 are in Queens, and Bayside is one of them.


Death Benefits
LOOKING BACK OVER a career, I wonder whether perhaps the opportunity to come to terms with death was not a major fringe benefit of my calling.
I'm not among the few journalists who grew rich on news, nor among the fewer still who enjoy the public esteem accorded to entertainment stars.
But I wouldn't have traded journalism for another calling; our trade is nearly always fun, it is often enlightening and it is occasionally uplifting.
More to the point, journalism helps its practitioners accept the ubiquity of death, permitting us to enter the heathen equivalent of a state of grace: a gift not to be scorned.


A Hunter's Blessing for Horse, Hound and Fox


Fortay and 2 Freshman Ignite Rutgers for a Romp
Quietly, he earned his starting job back.
Patiently, he threw consistent passes for solid numbers.
Cautiously, he addressed the questions afterward, questions already pointing to next week, a big week in Rutgers' season.
Senior quarterback Bryan Fortay started for the first time this season tonight and led Rutgers past Temple, 62-0, in Giants Stadium in a game in which two redshirt freshmen also came up with some dramatic plays.


Little-Noted Advantages Of Alternate-Side Parking
To the Editor:
I was interested in your article on automobiles.
As a disabled New Yorker, I am "automobile dependent."


K. A. Winston, A. P. Hartman
Kimberly Ann Winston and Alan Philip Hartman were married last evening by Rabbi Douglas Krantz at the Plaza in New York.
The bride is the daughter of Elizabeth Yaffa of Armonk, N.Y., and the late Maj.
Charles C. Winston 3d, and is the stepdaughter of Earle Yaffa.
The bridegroom is the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Hartman of Dallas.
Mrs.
Hartman is the director of administration and facilities planning at EJV Partners, a financial information-services company in New York.
She graduated from Tufts University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father was a major in the United States Air Force.
Her stepfather is the managing director of the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.


Fallout From '92 Senate Primary Leaves Careers of 3 Democrats
It was, some say, a nasty case of political poisoning.
Last year, the Democratic Party saw three of its most seasoned, well-known politicians, Robert Abrams, Geraldine A. Ferraro and Elizabeth Holtzman, climb into the race for their party's nomination for a seat in the United States Senate.
The Democrats had Bill Clinton's coattails to cling to.
The Republican incumbent, Alfonse M. D'Amato, was believed to be vulnerable.
Party leaders could taste victory.
Then the ugly realities of New York politics turned up like the cancerous underbelly of a dead fish.
The campaigning turned muddy and the candidates turned on each other.
In time, three ambitions were dashed and, it has become clear, three careers derailed.
Instead of another Democrat in the Senate, the party lost three of its best hopes to vicious infighting, residual bitterness and combat fatigue. 'A Terrible Mistake'
"I think they made a terrible mistake in '92," Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said of the combatants.
"And they have paid a terrible price."


Novels for the Computer
To the Editor:
Robert Coover's essay speaks of "the volumeless imagination" of hyperspace, a place full of hidden riches when the volumes, the books, are left behind.
Perhaps one of our greatest sources of inspiration over the centuries, the ancient Greek myths with their endless variations and reworkings, can be seen as early hypertexts.
Having originated in a "volumeless" world of oral tradition, they are precursors of hyperfiction.


THE TRIALS OF BOB PACKWOOD
One of the most disheartening aspects of this sordid story is that all of the women had, as a first response: "What did I do? How am I at fault?" C. W. HICKS Jupiter, Fla.


Teachers Go to Class to Learn Economics
AS she has for the last seven years, Ellen Purcigliotti took a course in economics this summer.
Economics was not something the Lakeland High School social studies teacher knew much about, she said, before the state decided, in 1986, to require high school seniors to study the subject for one semester.
About 20 states have a state mandate to teach economics.
Like many other social studies teachers, Ms.
Purcigliotti herself had taken only one college course in economics 25 years before.
"It was a rude awakening," she said of her efforts to master some basic principles before trying to teach them.
"It was scary."


Drug Use Isn't Hip
To the Editor:
I have a 15-year-old daughter who reads your paper from cover to cover for weekly school assignments.
To my dismay, the Sept. 26 Styles of the Times included a report by Bob Morris on a party in the West Village (The Night).


Old Sweet Song


Corrupt From Top to Bottom
THE PENTAGON WARS Reformers Challenge the Old Guard.
By James G. Burton.
Illustrated. 306 pp.
Annapolis, Md.: Naval Institute Press.


Movies That Push Buttons
This Christmas, along with home video games inspired by Hollywood movies -- "Cliffhanger," "Jurassic Park" -- there will be a new type of entertainment: video games that are Hollywood movies.
The most extravagant one is "Ground Zero Texas," an interactive film that cost more than $3 million and required an unprecedented collaboration between Silicon Valley programmers and veterans of movies like "Robocop."
Their product, to be introduced to the press on Tuesday and in stores next month, could be described as an action movie with a plot guided by the viewer, who watches on a television hooked to a Sega CD game machine.
It could also be described as a video game with real scenery and actors.
Its basic appeal was probably best summed up by Zack Kerns, aged 10, who went to the movie set in July to watch his father, Hubie Kerns Jr., play one of the extraterrestrial storm troopers invading a Texas border town.


Novels for the Computer
To the Editor:
It was a joy to see Robert Coover's front-page essay about hypertext ("Hyperfiction: Novels for the Computer," Aug. 29), a medium I have been extolling for at least four years to my friends, my agent, various New York publishers and anybody else who would listen; and a medium I am working in myself.


Supply-Side Economics Play New Jersey
IF she is elected Governor of New Jersey, Christine Todd Whitman says, she will join in the latest revival of supply-side economics, the theory preached by President Ronald Reagan and now proselytized by a small band of G.O.P.
Governors.
But first she must beat Gov.
Jim Florio on Nov. 2, and so she has taken a gamble that few in recent political history have dared.


Neighborhood Report: Washington Heights; A Mural for Marijuana Returns
When Jessica Brockington looks out the window of her apartment on West 163d Street, she sees a brightly colored mural depicting a man with a large gun, a marijuana leaf and the words "Lite 'em up."
West 163d Street, which has access to the George Washington Bridge, the Cross-Bronx Expressway and the Henry Hudson Parkway, is a thoroughfare for drug buyers.


Topics of The Times; CUNY's Timely Good Fortune
The City University of New York has a lot to brag about.
Among its graduates are 11 Nobel laureates and the nation's highest number of top corporate executives listed by Standard &amp; Poor's.
But for the 208,000 students who presently attend the City University, times have been hard, with increasing enrollments and painful budget cuts.
Now CUNY can boast of another achievement that will help ease the financial strain.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-21  STANDOFF HOLDS IN RUSSIA


Gigi Gutierrez and James Kuo
TALKING to Dr.
James Kuo and Dr.
Geraldine Gutierrez, it's easy to imagine the day when 100th wedding anniversaries or dinner with your great-great-great-grandmother will be ordinary occurrences.
Both Dr.
Kuo, 29, and Dr.
Gutierrez, 27, believe it's medically possible that people a generation or so from now will live to be 150 to 200 years old.
They even think that humans may eventually exist as long as redwood trees (thousands of years) and that the wedding vow, "till death do us part," will take on unfathomable gravity.


Correction
A report on Sept. 5 about the wedding of Wendy Wood and Jonathan Kwitny misstated a former title of Mr.
Kwitny's late father, Dr.
I.
J.
Kwitny, and described Mr.
Kwitny's book "Acceptable Risks" incorrectly.
Dr.
Kwitny was president of the medical staff at St.
Vincent's Hospital in Indianapolis.
"Acceptable Risks" is not a novel; it is a nonfiction account of two men who fought to alter the Federal rules for drug testing to benefit AIDS patients.


In Celebration of the Preservation of the Family


Miss Kaporis, Dr. Germanakos
Athena G. Kaporis, a fourth-year medical student at New York University, was married yesterday to Dr.
Nicholas Germanakos, a pediatrician in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
The Rev.
George Pashias performed the ceremony at St.
Nicholas Greek Orthodox Shrine Church in Flushing, Queens.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a daughter of George and Stella Kaporis of Whitestone, Queens.
She graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


Where Restrooms Aren't for Patrons Only
It may be the most dreaded sign a New Yorker can encounter: "Bathrooms for Customers Only." New York has many advantages, but an adequate number of public restrooms is not among them.


Crime Down in '92 in New York and Nationwide
The number of crimes reported in New York State dropped by 6 percent last year, a trend mirrored in a nationwide decline in crime in 1992, state and Federal officials said yesterday.
The New York figures made 1992 the second year in a row when reported crime decreased in the state.
The largest drop occurred in New York City, which experienced a 7.8 percent decline.
Crime in the suburbs dropped by 6.2 percent, while upstate areas showed a decline of 1.7 percent.


Single-Minded Shopping
Actually, it doesn't look like a place where you can go back in time.
Once a manufacturing district, now a traffic-clogged side street, West 18th between 5th and 7th Avenues is a bleak, industrial-looking stretch.
But tucked between the double-parked trucks is a small colony of antiquarian bookstores, most of them new tenants.
For those who know and appreciate them they provide escape, a communal relief from the blare of bestsellers.
Here is the way books used to be, jumbled on shelves, cloth covers worn to thread by countless other hands.
They conjure a time when information was precious, when reading was learning.
A privilege.
These stores sell out-of print, rare and used books.
An acquired taste, perhaps.
Years ago, when the Strand was still on Fourth Avenue, surrounded by smaller competitors, that area proved a mecca for devotees of dust and Dostoevsky.
But after the Strand moved to its current location at Broadway and 12th Street, most of those stores disappeared.


A Pianist Echoes Prokofiev's Own Fire and Ice
ANYONE WHO ASSOCIATES BUDGET LABELS with scrappy performances and scrawny sound might be surprised to hear some recordings currently appearing on the Naxos label.
The Hong Kong-based concern has flooded stores with 350 titles, more than a few of which are competitive with major-label releases.
The conductor Alexander Rahbari, the Kodaly Quartet and the pianist Jeno Jando have produced estimable accounts of Shostakovich, Haydn and Liszt.
The label's strongest effort so far is a recording of the Prokofiev piano concertos with Kun Woo Paik, a little-known but cultishly admired Parisian pianist who gave a phenomenal recital last year at Alice Tully Hall (8.550565/ 6; two CD's).
Versatile and mercurial, Mr.
Paik tends to adapt his manner to the situation: he can blast through 20th-century Russian repertory mercilessly but draws a diaphanous wash of sound in the French Impressionists.


BASEBALL: 103 and Counting: N.L. West Goes Down to Wire; Giants Receive Needed Relief
Barry Bonds is not swinging for the fences here; he is swinging for the mountain ranges.
The Los Angeles Dodgers finally wised up this afternoon and intentionally walked him twice, but were done in by Dave Martinez.
Martinez -- a late substitute for the injured Willie McGee -- broke this tense game open with a two-run, seventh-inning double, later caught a swerving fly ball as Dodger Stadium fans tapped him on the shoulder, and the San Francisco Giants scraped together enough pitching to win, 5-3.


Bookworm


U.S.T.A. Green
To the Sports Editor:
George Vecsey ("For Two Weeks, the World Looks to New York," The Times, Sept. 10) believes the New York City Council Land Use Committee was wise to recommend approval of a United States Tennis Association expansion in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park.
The expansion would give the U.S.T.A. 42.2 acres of park land (about 10 percent of the park's usable land) for a 99-year period, and his support appears to be based upon a belief: "The Open is all about New York: noisy, expensive, arrogant, crowded, demanding, even a tad dangerous." He is correct.
The expansion is all about New York.


Strolling the Byways of Rome
Secret Walks in Rome is a new cultural association that offers more than 30 guided walks through the Eternal City.
Organized by English and American scholars and artists, the association has devised itineraries that include a tour of the Aventine Hill and a Talking Statues of Rome walk, which includes visits to the Mastro Pasquino statue, dating from the third century B.C., in the Piazza Pasquino, and the Marforio statue, dating from the first century A.D., on the Capitoline Hill.
There is also a wine-tasting tour in the old city center on Tuesday and Friday evenings.
The guided walks, which are conducted in English, average two to three hours; reservations are not required.
Visitors can call the organization to get information on where a particular walk will begin.
Groups are limited to 18 people.
The guides, who include art historians, actors and musicians, are well versed in anecdotes about the city.


Courts Take A New Approach In Divorce Cases
WILLIAM and Monica McBride were at an impasse.
They had been separated for just over a year when a dispute arose over the custody of their 4-year-old daughter, Lauren.
A custody trial date was scheduled.
But the judge presiding over their case suggested that before the couple returned to court, they attend a voluntary program called Parent Education and Custody Effectiveness, or Peace program, which was begun as a pilot project last spring in the county's Supreme Court and Family Courts.


Neighborhood Report: West Village; Eighth Street Plan Aims for Safety and Charm
Local leaders and property owners along two main streets in Greenwich Village are starting a major program to spruce up the neighorhood, discourage crime and promote business.
The project will be run by the Village Alliance Business Improvement District, which was created (along with a similar district for 125th Street) by legislation that Mayor David N. Dinkins signed on Thursday.
In all, 31 neighborhoods now have such districts.
The Greenwich Village district and its program were proposed by the Village Alliance, a group formed in 1990 to fight deterioration in the neighborhood.


Planners Say That Early Retirees Might Add Billions in Health Costs
Clinton Administration health planners have begun to acknowledge that a politically important part of their plan could cost billions of dollars a year more than they anticipated.
The proposal would have the Government pay for most of the health insurance for early retirees, or those who retire before the age of 65, at which point they become eligible for Medicare.
The plan is intended to win support from large manufacturers saddled with skyrocketing health insurance bills.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.Medicaid Abortions: Vote on an amendment to an appropriation bill providing funds for the Department of Health and Human Services that would prohibit use of Medicaid funds for abortions unless the life of the woman is at stake or the pregnancy is said to be the result of rape or incest.
Approved 59 to 40, Sept. 28.
2.Supercollider: Vote to kill an amendment to a Department of Energy appropriation bill that would cut off money for the Superconducting Supercollider.
Approved 57 to 42, Sept. 30.
?
Dodd (D) . . .
Y
N
Lieberman (D) . . .
Y
Y
?New Jersey
Bradley (D) . . .
Y
N
Lautenberg (D) . . .
Y
N
New York
D'Amato (R) . . .
N
N
Moynihan (D) . . .
Y
Y
House
1.
House Rules: Vote on a change in House rules that would make it easier to bring bills to the floor over the objection of committee chairmen.
Approved 384 to 40, Sept. 28.
2.
Gay Troops: Vote on an amendment to a Defense Department authorization bill that would require the Department to ask recruits if they are homosexual or bisexual.
Rejected 291 to 144, Sept. 28.
3.
Gay Troops: Vote on an amendment to a Defense Department authorization bill that appproves a policy on homosexuals in the military, prohibiting homosexual conduct but halting questions of recruits about their sexual orientation.
Approved 301 to 134, Sept. 28.
4.
Somalia: Vote on a non-binding resoltuion requiring the Clinton Administration to seek congressional approval by Nov. 15 for keeping American troops in Somalia.
Approved 406 to 26, Sept. 28.
5.
Grazing Fees: Vote to instruct House conference negotiators on an Interior Department appropriation bill to reject a Senate provision that delays an administration plan to revise grazing fees and policies on federal land.
Approved 314 to 109, Sept. 29.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . .
Y
N
N
Y
Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . .
Y
N
N
Y
Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . .
Y
N
N
Y
Y
4. Shays (R) . . .
Y
N
N
Y
Y
5. Franks (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
6. Johnson (R) . . .
Y
N
N
Y
Y
New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
2. Hughes (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
3. Saxton (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
4. Smith (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
5. Roukema (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
6. Pallone (D) . . .
Y
N
N
Y
Y
7. Franks (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
8. Klein (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
9. Torricelli (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
10. Payne (D) . . .
N
N
N
N
Y
11. Gallo (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
12. Zimmer (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
13. Menendez (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
2. Lazio (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
3. King (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
4. Levy (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
5. Ackerman (D) . . .
Y
N
N
Y
Y
6. Flake (D) . . .
N
N
N
Y
Y
7. Manton (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
8. Nadler (D) . . .
Y
N
N
Y
Y
9. Schumer (D) . . .
Y
N
N
Y
Y
10. Towns (D) . . .
A
N
N
N
Y
11. Owens (D) . . .
A
N
N
Y
Y
12. Velazquez (D) . . .
N
N
N
Y
Y
13. Molinari (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
14. Maloney (D) . . .
Y
N
N
Y
Y
15. Rangel (D) . . .
N
N
N
Y
Y
16. Serrano (D) . . .
Y
N
N
Y
A
17. Engel (D) . . .
Y
N
N
Y
Y
18. Lowey (D) . . .
Y
N
N
Y
Y
19. Fish (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
20. Gilman (R) . . .
Y
N
N
Y
Y
21. McNulty (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
22. Solomon (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
23. Boehlert (R) . . .
Y
N
N
Y
Y
24. McHugh (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
25. Walsh (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
N
26. Hinchey (D) . . .
Y
N
N
Y
Y
27. Paxon (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
28. Slaughter (D) . . .
Y
N
N
Y
Y
29. LaFalce (D) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
30. Quinn (R) . . .
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
31. Houghton (R) . . .
Y
N
Y
Y
N
KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


On Wall Street, Some Crooks Get Off Easy
"SOME rob you with a six-gun, and some with a fountain pen." So wrote Woody Guthrie more than half a century ago.
But those who use the first technique are far more likely to wind up in prison than are their more refined fellow crooks.
Last week, in Federal court in Manhattan, a criminal trial began against a former Shearson broker.
The broker supposedly ripped off a customer through unauthorized trades, then used a forged document to cover up his activities.
A Shearson compliance officer is said to have been in on the scheme.


Story of My Life? Glad You Asked.
EVERY FALL THEY TURN UP: new television characters with new families, workplaces or both, hoping viewers will learn to love them.
But when networks may only give a show six episodes to live or die, viewers had better get acquainted fast.
Maybe that's why, when it comes to exposition, some stars are saying it all in one speech.
Here's how six new sitcoms handled things.
ANITA GATES "The Boys" (CBS)
Setting: A book signing.
A customer asks a writer, Doug Kirkfield (Chris Meloni), when his next book is coming out.


For an Analyst With a Bad Stock Pick, Truth Hurts
THE end of a Wall Street research report is usually where you learn that the analyst whose advice you have just trusted is riddled with conflicts.
But investors who plowed through a recent report by Volpe, Welty found a nice surprise: the analyst owned the stock he was trashing.
On Sept. 13, Charles H. Finnie issued a report on the Rasterops Corporation, a computer company.
An important product was late, and the company's outlook basically stank, Mr.
Finnie warned.
In the fine print at the end, the report revealed the author owned the stock.


SURFACING
PROPORTIONS Bigness: Or that which is outsized, like the enormous statues by Fernando Botero on Park Avenue between 54th and 61st streets; the new mega-Barneys; Conan O'Brien, who is 6-foot-4, and Big magazine, which covers avant-garde photography and design.
FASHION "Name" brand clothes: As in your name.
On T-shirts, button-downs, baseball caps and on and on, from the mail-order Perfect Shirt Company in Mount Pleasant, S.C.
LANGUAGE  "Capitalized fear": This ominous term, like many coined by academics, seems at once perfectly succinct and impossible to understand.
In a new anthology, "The Politics of Everyday Fear" (University of Minnesota Press), it refers to the mass production and consumption of fear in a capitalist society.
A publisher's note says that "the aim of the contributors" -- Charles Manson is one -- "is as much to enact fear as to analyze it."


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 3, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
THE AGE OF INNOCENCE, by Edith Wharton. (Collier/Macmillan, $5.95.) The 1920 novel about New York society life in the 1870's.
2
4
DRAGON TEARS, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) Two police detectives try to cope with a demonic serial killer in southern California.
3
3
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
4
33
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
5
77
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
6*
6
THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) A businesswoman's fortunes are imperiled by past and present secrets.
7*
40
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The investigation of a woman's death involves the American-Japanese rivalry.
8*
17
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
9
88
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
10
24
SPHERE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) Four scientists explore an alien spaceship found on the ocean floor.
11
63
JURASSIC PARK, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $6.99.) A biotechnician clones dinosaurs for use in a theme park.
12*
2
HIDDEN TALENTS, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.99.) The romance of a creative woman and a hard-boiled businessman.
13
1
DESCENT, by Diane Carey. (Pocket, $5.50.) "Star Trek"'s Federation tries to save itself from complete destruction by an old foe.
14
1
MITIGATING CIRCUMSTANCES, by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg. (Signet, $5.99.) A woman's revenge after she and a daughter are attacked.
15
2
THE SECRET HISTORY, by Donna Tartt. (Ivy, $6.99.) Close friends at a small college must deal with the consequences of a crime.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
3
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk-show host.
2
3
SAVE YOUR JOB, SAVE OUR COUNTRY, by Ross Perot with Pat Choate. (Hyperion, $6.95.) Arguments against the ratification of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
3
517
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
4
1
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Bantam, $6.99.) The autobiography of the general who commanded the allied forces in the gulf war.
5*
7
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces.
6
33
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
7
23
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
8
6
I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim Jerome. (Pocket, $5.99.) The autobiography of the television talk-show host.
9
2
SILENT WITNESS, by Don W. Weber and Charles Bosworth Jr. (Onyx, $5.99.) The mysterious death of a young Illinois woman.
10*
5
PRINCESS, by Jean P. Sasson. (Avon, $5.50.) Life as lived by a member of the royal family and other women in Saudi Arabia.
11*
103
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
12
12
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
13
10
A ROSE FOR HER GRAVE, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) Six true-crime stories.
14*
124
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
15*
20
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President.
16*
20
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Examples of waste.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
1
THE DAYS ARE JUST PACKED, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A new collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
137
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
3
153
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
15
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 18, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


BENEFITS
Alan King Performs
MONDAY -- The comedian and actor Alan King will perform in a benefit for the Richmond Children's Center, a residence for retarded and handicapped children and young adults in Yonkers.
The 20th-anniversary celebration at the Harmonie Club, 4 East 60th Street, will begin at 6 P.M. with a cocktail reception at which the pianist and singer Bob Geradi will play.
Tickets, $150, from (914) 968-7170.
Sports Legends
TUESDAY -- Frank Gifford will be the master of ceremonies at a dinner at the Waldorf-Astoria to honor 10 sports greats.
The event will raise money for the Nick and Marc Buoniconti Fund to Cure Paralysis, a research institute at the University of Miami Medical School.
The fund was established by Nick Buoniconti, a former linebacker for Miami Dolphins, after his son Marc was injured in a football accident.
The evening begins with cocktails at 6:30 P.M.
Honorees include Florence Griffith Joyner, a co-chairwoman of the President's Council on Physical Fitness, Walt Frazier, Chris Evert, Roger Staubach and Danny Sullivan.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 245-6570.
Succoth Celebration
TUESDAY -- Business and Professionals of New York, a group that raises money for the UJA-Federation, is sponsoring an evening for singles 35 and over from 6:30 to 10:30 P.M. at their headquarters, at 130 East 59th Street.
There will be dancing, drinks and hors d'oeuvres, and guests are asked to bring a nonperishable food item for the Jewish homeless.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 836-1683.
Intergenerational Aid
TUESDAY -- Ellen Cleghorne of "Saturday Night Live" will be the host and Debbie Shapiro Gravitte, a Broadway singer, will perform to raise money for the West End Intergenerational Residence, a mixed-age housing, education and social-services program on the Upper West Side.
The evening at Tavern on the Green, Central Park West at 67th Street, begins at 7 P.M. with cocktails, followed by a buffet dinner and jazz by the Charles Owen Band.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 873-6300, extension 321.
Protecting the Wolves
TUESDAY -- The Friends of Animals will sponsor an evening of dancing and vegetarian dining aboard the Riveranda to raise funds for its wolf-protection campaign.
Kevin Nealon of "Saturday Night Live" will be among the television performers expected to attend the cruise, which will include a casino.
The boat will travel around the lower tip of Manhattan.
Guests can board at 6:30 P.M. at Pier 81, West 41st Street and the Hudson River for the 7 P.M. departure; the boat will return at 10:30 P.M.
Parking is available at the pier for $10.
Tickets, $125, from (203) 866-5223, or at the pier.
Public Art
TUESDAY -- Kitty Carlisle Hart, the chairwoman of the New York State Council on the Arts, is the honorary chairwoman of a dinner honoring the artist Beverly Pepper.
The event will benefit the Public Art Fund, which seeks to incorporate contemporary art into urban areas.
Ms.
Pepper created the Todi Columns, a sculptural work at the Brooklyn Museum, and has been commissioned by the Public Art Fund to create artwork for 26 Federal Plaza.
The dinner, which begins with cocktails at 6:30 P.M. followed by dinner and a presentation ceremony, is at the Pegasus Suite at Rainbow, 30 Rockefeller Plaza.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 980-4575.
Israel Cancer Research
TUESDAY -- The singer Maureen McGovern will perform at the Pierre Hotel to raise money for the David Laser Memorial Fund, one of the donors to the Israel Cancer Research Fund.
A cocktail buffet begins at 6 P.M., followed by the performance at 7:30 and then dessert and coffee.
Tickets, $400, from (212) 969-9800.
U.S.O. Evening
WEDNESDAY -- The U.S.O. of Metropolitan New York will honor George V. Grune, the chairman of the Reader's Digest Association, at their 32d annual Gold Medal Award Dinner.
The proceeds will provide support for the organization's four centers in New York, as well as a new program to provide counseling and job-search assistance to military personnel.
The evening begins with a cocktail reception at 6:30 P.M., followed by dinner, the awards ceremony and dancing to Lester Lanin and his orchestra.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 719-5433.
Dream Ball
THURSDAY -- The ninth annual Cosmetics Industry Dream Ball, a joint effort of the American Cancer Society and the Cosmetics, Toiletries and Fragrances Association, will benefit their joint program, "Look Good . . . Feel Better." The program provides makeup instruction and wigs to chemotherapy and radiation patients.
Howard Socol, the chairman of the Burdine's department-store chain, and James Preston, the chairman and chief executive of Avon Products Inc., will be honored.
The evening, at the Pierre, begins at 7 P.M. with a cocktail reception, followed by dinner and dancing to Hank Lane and his orchestra.
Black tie.
Tickets, $800, from (212) 237-3872.
Reconstructive Surgery
THURSDAY -- The mezzo-soprano Frederica von Stade will sing operatic and American musical theater selections at a benefit for the National Foundation for Facial Reconstruction.
The foundation supports the Institute of Reconstructive Plastic Surgery at the New York University Medical Center.
The event is at the Supper Club, 240 West 47th Street.
It begins at 6:30 P.M. with cocktails, followed by dinner and the performance.
Tickets, $350, from (212) 263-6656.
Medical Research
FRIDAY -- Jane Alexander is the chairwoman of the second annual Monte Carlo benefit to raise money for research on strokes and brain tumors at the Montefiore Medical Center and the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx.
The evening, at the Andrews Farms Estate on Taconic Roadin Greenwich, Conn., begins with dinner at 6:30 P.M.
Gaming, cocktails and a silent auction with more than 140 entries, including a cruise through the Greek islands and jewelry from Cartier, will follow.
Bill Ford, president of the Ford Modeling Agency, and Margaret Hayes, executive director of the Fashion Group International, will be honored.
Tickets, $175 for dinner and gaming, or $100 for the cocktail reception and gaming only, which start at 9 P.M., from (718) 920-4328.
Henry Street at 100
FRIDAY -- The Henry Street Settlement is celebrating its 100th birthday with an evening of dining, dancing and gambling at the Union Club, 101 East 69th Street.
Cocktails and dinner at 7 P.M. will be followed by games of chance for prizes including a weekend in Monte Carlo and restaurant dinners in New York.
There will be dancing to the band Hart n' Soul.
Black tie.
Tickets, $175, for the evening, or $100 for dessert, dancing and gaming starting at 9 P.M., from (212) 766-9210.
Harlem Little Leaguers
SATURDAY -- Patrick Ewing of the New York Knicks is among the founding sponsors to be honored at the fifth-anniversary celebration of the Harlem Little League at the Sheraton Hotel and Towers.
The event will raise money for the league, which has more than 500 members on 34 teams.
The evening begins with cocktails at 7 P.M., followed by dinner and dancing to Ron Anderson and the Versatiles.
Black tie.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 926-2754 or (212) 666-6791.
Hearts and Voices for AIDS
SATURDAY -- Judy Bro, a cabaret singer, will perform at Eighty-Eight's, 228 West 10th Street between Bleecker and Hudson Streets, at a benefit for Hearts and Voices.
The proceeds of the show, a tribute to the Broadway composer and lyricist Frank Loesser, will go to the organization, which provides performances by cabaret, Off-Broadway and Broadway artists to AIDS patients in New York City hospitals.
Tickets, $15 (plus a two-drink minimum), from (212) 924-0088, or at the door.
Help for Haitian Children
SATURDAY -- A concert from 7 to 9 P.M. will raise money for the Friends of the Children of Lascahobas, Haiti.
Marie Brooks's Pan-Caribbean Young Dancers, Rara Machine and Jazz des Jeunes will perform at Wingate High School, 600 Kingston Avenue, Brooklyn.
The organization operates a children's nutrition center, provides money for education for children and teen-agers and hopes to build a hospital in the former town of its founder, Estelle Dubuisson.
Tickets, $12, from (718) 649-6846, or $15 at the door.


BUTTONED UP
If he were white, no one would question David Dinkins's cool demeanor, studied politeness, sartorial elegance, indirect speech and enjoyment of tennis.
It would simply be assumed that he was well bred -- a major plus for any politician seeking office.


Around Russia's Rim, a Fear of Events at the Center
BY the standards of wars that have already been fought or still rage -- on the periphery of the former Soviet empire, the standoff in Moscow has not been particularly impressive.
A few hundred gunmen inside, a few thousands troops outside, a few tussles with demonstrators, two policemen and a bystander killed in isolated incidents.
There has been nothing to compare, for example, with Georgia, where the unfortunate Eduard A. Shevardnadze, once Foreign Minister of the Soviet empire and now leader of his rapidly disintegrating native land -- barely escaped triumphant Abkhazian separatists in the blazing city of Sukhumi last week, only to have Georgian rebels led by the deposed president, Zviad Gamsakhurdia, take another Black Sea port.


Heather Cady, Michael Flynn
Heather Dodge Cady and Michael Sean Flynn, both lawyers, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Dr.
G.
Kenneth Carpenter officiated at the Union Baptist Church in Mystic, Conn.
Ms.
Cady is keeping her name.
She graduated from Brown University and received her law degree from New York University.
She will join the New York law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore as an associate in November.


Green Shall Return, Like It or Not
Dallas Green took over as the manager of the Mets last May with a reputation as a tough-talking disciplinarian with an intimate, and intuitive, knowledge of the game of baseball.
He could teach as well as demoralize, lead as well as lambaste, New York was told.
There would definitely be order and perhaps success, Green said.
The Mets have gone 44-78 under Green.
It is .360 baseball, by any measure an embarrassing rate of failure.
However one assigns blame or rationalizes results, Green has had no positive impact on the fortunes of the Mets.
It is a blunt conclusion, an unforgiving one.
And Green, a man who likes to say, "All I deal with are facts," does not shy away from it.


Connecticut Q&amp;A: Capt. John H. Wadsworth; Exploring Changes in the Environment
CAPT.
JOHN H. WADSWORTH, simply Captain John to all who meet him, commands a fleet of four sport fishing and nature cruising vessels that are moored in the Niantic River close to his base of operations in Waterford at the river's edge.
His explorations of the Connecticut River, of the Sound and of the Atlantic's waters beyond Connecticut shores create a tale of the modern day explorer who returns to port with revelations of Connecticut's natural environment.


Loni, Let's Talk About Your Hair
NAME: Mo Gaffney.
IDENTITY: 34-year-old talk show host and comedian.


Miniature Village
To the Editor: I read Roger Cohen's article "The Glories of France in Miniature" (July 4) with interest as I had not heard of the park.
In comparing France Miniature with the Madurodam miniature town in the Hague, the Netherlands, Mr.
Cohen refers to Madurodam as "an imaginary Dutch town."
I visited there in 1992 and quote from the brochure: "a marvelous replica of a typical Dutch town with all its charm and bustle, the trains and ships . . . . a lovely city center dating from the Middle Ages with historical buildings, castles and palaces, a newly built district with modern architecture."


Florida Slayings Spur New York On Crime
In view of the recent killings of tourists in Florida, New York City has decided to update its own crime prevention pamphlets, specifically for foreign visitors.
The Police Department's Crime Prevention Unit is preparing a first printing of 10,000 pamphlets advising tourists how to avoid becoming victims of crime in New York.


The 'Flaying' Of a Bickfords
To the Editor:
Your Streetscapes column on July 18 titled "The Flaying of a Midtown East Art Deco Oddity" points up the almost casual loss of part of New York's visual history in the "flaying" of the facade of one of the former Bickfords restaurants.
It also mentions yet another instance of the casual loss of a different form of New York's visual history.


Leah Ann Devlin, Philip De Caro
Leah Ann Devlin, a daughter of Paul J. Devlin Jr. of New York and Mary G. Devlin of Rye, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Philip Anthony De Caro, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas De Caro, also of Rye.
The Rev.
Lawrence Inzeo performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Resurrection.
Mrs.
De Caro, 27, is a senior account executive at Marquardt &amp; Roche, an advertising agency in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Skidmore College.
Her father is a private money manager in New York.
Her mother, a special-events coordinator, is also a tennis coach at the Rye Country Day School.


Data Bank/October 3, 1993


S. Jeanne Hall and Sherwin Kamin
S.
Jeanne Hall, a senior vice president at the United States Trust Company of New York, was married on Friday to Sherwin Kamin, a founding partner of the New York law firm of Kramer, Levin, Naftalis, Nessen, Kamin &amp; Frankel.
Acting Justice Burton S. Sherman of State Supreme Court in Manhattan officiated at the Lotos Club in Manhattan.
Ms.
Hall, who is keeping her name, is the head of the estate administration and trust settlement departments at U. S. Trust.
She graduated from Queens College and received a law degree from St.
John's University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert M. Hall of Hinsdale, Mass.


Hey Guys, What About Us?
To the Editor:
"Where the Dangers Aren't Make-Believe" (Sept. 26) illustrates how the "Good Ole Boys" network continues to control Hollywood.
Twenty-two men (no women) gathered to brave the Colorado.
The aim: male bonding, getting to know friends and enemies in the industry and nurturing personal relationships.
What about industry relationships and communication regardless of gender?


The Hopeful Future That Never Arrives
OVER the last several months, economic forecasters have arrived en masse at a somber conclusion: the American economy, with its daily reminders of hard times, won't show a noticeable improvement until next summer, at the very earliest, and perhaps much later.
Only last January, the economy seemed to be shaking off its funk.
"It seemed to many of us to have a nice rosy glow of health about it," said Lyle Gramley, chief economist at the Mortgage Bankers Association.
"And all of a sudden that nice rosy glow was gone, and I don't know why."
But as the forecasters are scaling back their optimism, they leave two issues unsettled.


On the Scent of Lawbreakers
AS a swarm of jet-lagged passengers from Alitalia Flight 600 out of Milan fought for their baggage recently at Kennedy International Airport in New York, one woman found herself with a new four-legged friend.
He was a peppy little beagle by the name of Bamboo, and he showed a keen professional interest in her carry-on bag.
"Excuse me, ma'am, any food in that bag?" asked Suzanne Koemm an Agriculture Department dog handler at the other end of Bamboo's green leash.
The passenger looked puzzled.
"Mangiare?" asked Ms.
Koemm, who is tall, slim and very serious about meat and vegetables when they happen to be in luggage.
"Frutta?" The passenger shrugged her shoulders sheepishly.
Ms.
Koemm began to search the bag.
Bamboo looked on smugly, already certain of the outcome.


Neighborhood Report: East New York; Hourly Rates Not Welcome
As construction workers put down the foundation for a two-story motel on Atlantic Avenue, residents are campaigning to have the work stopped.
The motel's hourly rates, they say, mean that it is sure to be frequented by prostitutes.
"East New York has other needs," said Sister Peggie Merritt, a member of East Brooklyn Congregations, a coalition of churches in the area.
"Our youths do not have a recreational center, our homeless do not have a facility for single-room occupancy and I would like to see things that would help build up our neighborhood in place of a motel."


IN SHORT/FOOTBALL
THE WHOLE TEN YARDS By Frank Gifford and Harry Waters. Random House, $22.


Protection Plans Are Eroding
THERE is a shrinking safety net under travelers who make payments to companies that later collapse.
Two major organizations in the travel industry are cutting back on consumer protection plans and a third is looking for alternatives.
Here are the recent developments:


Give New Moms a Break
To the Editor:
Regarding "Changing the Fortunes of the Medical Business" (Sept. 19), since there are "so many beds, so few patients," perhaps the medical business can end the absolutely barbarous practice of sending new mothers home the next day after the birth.


Encore for 'Ice Cream' Team
They are in their 60's now.
"She Loves Me," their once-dismissed, once-lost musical, which they wrote 30 years ago, is alive again in a much-praised revival, and they can scarcely believe their good fortune.
A photographer asks them to pose for a picture: Joe Masteroff, librettist; Sheldon Harnick, lyricist, and Jerry Bock, composer.
Suddenly, the three of them burst into song.
Arms around one another, they sing "Vanilla Ice Cream" from the show, boyishly, exuberantly, proudly.
It is, in and of itself, a musical theater moment.
On Thursday "She Loves Me" will have its second opening in less than a year.
This time, it will be at the Brooks Atkinson on Broadway, where it is now in previews.
The Roundabout Theater Company production has transferred almost intact.
The love story is still bittersweet: it is the 1930's, and two clerks in a Budapest parfumerie who disliked each other on sight discover that they have been romantic pen pals all along.
Boyd Gaines is George and Diane Fratantoni, replacing Judy Kuhn, is Amalia, with Louis Zorich as Maraczek, the store's owner.


He Done Her Wrong
To the Editor:
"Overblown" was the reaction of this Edith Wharton fan to the film adaptation of "Age of Innocence"  [ "In 'Age of Innocence,' Eternal Questions," Sept. 12 ] .
The extraordinary attention given this film even before its previews created the illusion that this would be a superior movie.


Wallenda Trumps Peteski In a Jamboree at the Wire
He missed by only a few inches, but he missed.
And so the great Peteski also missed the chance to extend his Canadian dominance south of the border yesterday when he ran third behind Wallenda and Saintly Prospector in a five-horse photo finish in the $750,000 Super Derby at Louisiana Downs.
As a result, five weeks before the Breeders' Cup series, the class of 3-year-old colts was still groping for a leader.
And just when it seemed ready to anoint Peteski, who swept the Triple Crown of Canada this past summer, the colt lost by a bob of the head.


Led by Private Sector, Free Trade Unites Colombia and Venezuela
Colombia's ties with Venezuela have been hailed as one of the most successful examples of economic integration between two developing countries.
While most free-trade pacts have been made possible through government initiative, Colombian and Venezuelan integration has been preempted by the private sector.


Melanie Derman, Stephen Hoenig
Dr.
Melanie Paige Derman, a resident in internal medicine, and Dr.
Stephen Hoenig, a resident in surgery, both at Beth Israel Hospital in Boston, are planning an April wedding, her parents, Dr.
Arnold and Harriet Derman of Metuchen, N.J., have announced.
The future bride graduated magna cum laude from Brown University and received her M.D. from the Albert Einstein School of Medicine.
Her father is the assistant chairman of the radiology department at the Raritan Bay Medical Center in Perth Amboy, N.J., and at the Bayshore Community Hospital in Holmdel, N.J.
Her mother, a partner in the law firm of Weiner, Hendler &amp; Derman in New Brunswick, N.J., is a Republican state assemblywoman.


Manager's Profile; Edward P. Owens
Fund: Vanguard Specialized Portfolio: Health Care, $540 million in assets.
Manager since 1984 inception. (Sponsor: The Vanguard Group, Valley Forge, Pa.)
Born: Sept. 27, 1946, Norfolk, Va.


Karen Estilo, John Owczarski
Dr.
Apolonia E. Estilo of Howard Beach, Queens, has announced the engagement of her daughter Karen Anne Marie Estilo to John William Owczarski, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
William A. Owczarski of Arlington, Va.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Estilo, 30, is a litigator for NBC in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College and received her law degree from New York University.
Her father, the late Dr.
Bernardo S. Estilo, was a thoracic surgeon at Coney Island Hospital in Brooklyn.
Her mother is an anesthesiologist at Kings County Hospital in Brooklyn.


CD's Are The Culprit
To the Editor:
Mr.
Rothstein never mentions what seems to me one main reason for the plight of classical music stations: the CD.
I no longer listen to such stations.
I see no point in sitting through commercials, which I hate, to hear good music, which I love.
I am blessed to live in a region that has a number of libraries that contain thousands of compact disks, available free on loan.
Baroque music, the classical period, romantic, avant-garde, whatever -- an amazing variety of great music, performed by the greatest performers in existence, all mine for a few weeks at a cost of literally nothing.


Sarah Robbins, Michael J. Mars
Sarah Ann Robbins, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Christopher Robbins of Southboro, Mass., was married yesterday to Michael John Mars, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. Mars of McLean, Va.
The Rev.
Helen M. Moore performed the Episcopal ceremony at Trinity Church in Boston.
Mrs.
Mars, 25, graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
She was until recently an assistant account executive at Lippe Taylor Public Relations and Marketing in New York.
Her father is the director of business development at Dove Associates, a management consulting firm in Boston.


Ms. Gootenberg, Mr. Alpert
Debra Jean Gootenberg, the daughter of Lorraine Gootenberg of New York, was married last evening to Daniel Chase Alpert, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
L.
Saul Alpert of Providence, R.I.
Rabbi Leslie Gutterman officiated at the St.
Regis in New York.
Mrs.
Alpert, 26, graduated from Tulane University.
Until recently, she was an account executive at Young &amp; Rubicam, the New York advertising agency.
Her mother is a real-estate broker at the William B. May Company in New York.


Not Like Dad


Innocent Blood: Beyond Grief to Solutions
ARTHUR P. MASSEY 4th was buried two weeks ago in one of those services marked as much by what could have been as the loss of what was.
Mr.
Massey, described by his family as a Nintendo fanatic with an effervescent smile, never had any trouble with the police or anybody else.
He was just about to start his final term at Manhattan Comprehensive High School.
It was three little words that got Mr.
Massey in big trouble.
He said, "Yo, step aside" to a young man as he left a house party in the Bronx, and the man took offense.
Mr.
Massey ended up in a fistfight with him and another man.
Then one of them shot him dead.
He was 18 years old.


Some Exhaust Fans Are Tricky to Install
INSTALLING an exhaust fan in a poorly ventilated bathroom, laundry or kitchen can help prevent indoor condensation and problems like mildew, peeling paint and damaged woodwork.
Mounting a fan on an outside wall may be reasonably easy, but mounting one in a ceiling can be difficult unless the ceiling is accessible from an attic.
That is because ceiling fans require separate and sometimes lengthy ducts to carry exhaust air outside.
In all cases, electrical wiring has also to be installed.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. Inc.)
Monday
Construction spending, Aug., pct. change
-0.5
0.8
Tuesday
Auto sales, late Sept., millions, annual rate
6.9
6.9
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
329
328
Consumer credit, August, change in billions
$5.16
$3
Friday
Unemployment rate, September
6.7
6.7
Nonfarm payroll, change in thousands
-39
150
This Week's Developments Monday -- A.F.L.-C.I.O. convention opens  Tuesday -- Conference Board conference  Thursday -- Bundesbank Council meeting  Friday -- Natural gas-powered vehicles depart on 18-day 'Clean Across America' tour


A Day Filled With Free Concerts
JAZZ and classical music lovers have a variety of free concerts to choose from this afternoon.
At 2 P.M. the jazz trumpeter Clark Terry plays at St.
Paul's Church National Historic Site in Mount Vernon, heading a combo of faculty players from the Mount Vernon Music Academy.
"Clark Terry is inspirational, a master with the gift of reaching young musicians," said Adina Salmansohn, the academy's dean.
"Everyone should hear this one-of-a-kind event, especially students." After the concert, listeners are invited to tour the restored Georgian-style church and its historic burial grounds.


Heather Rush, Cory Lefkowitz
Dr.
Robert and Rochelle Rush of West Orange, N.J., have announced December wedding plans for their daughter Heather Rush and Cory Lefkowitz, a son of Helen and Milton Lefkowitz of Brooklyn.
Ms.
Rush, 23, is a medical student at Albert Einstein College of Medicine.
She graduated summa cum laude from Yeshiva University.
Her father is the vice president of technical operations at Bio-Reference Laboratories in Elmwood Park, N.J.
Her mother teaches history at Elizabeth (N.J.) High School.


How Deep? About Yay
Plant bulbs at least three times as deep as the bulbs are tall.
Tulips can be planted a foot down, to avoid marauding mice and to encourage hearty blooms for more than one spring.
If you want a change from the good old grape hyacinth, Muscari botryoides, try M. b. album, a white form that has been in cultivation for more than 400 years.


The High Summer of an Illusion
THE WARBURGS The Twentieth-Century Odyssey of a Remarkable Jewish Family.
By Ron Chernow.
Illustrated. 820 pp.
New York: Random House. $30.


No Headline
He wrestles with every hot potato of the last 20 years in fundamental moral theology.
For me it is a moral masterpiece.
For others it may be a moral horror.
MSGR.
WILLIAM B. SMITH, of the new papal encyclical.  [ 26:5. ]


An Earthquake Brings Calamity in India
An earthquake more severe than India has seen in half a century thundered through the predawn hours in a remote agricultural area of central India Thursday.
"Only when the rubble is removed will we know who died," said a local official.
Early estimates ranged from 10,000 deaths to perhaps 30,000.
Entire villages were reduced to rubble, even as some neighboring hamlets remained untouched.
In one town of 15,000 people, Killari, thousands of bodies were thought to be buried under collapsed homes.


Topics of The Times; Why G.I.'s Eat Big Olives
Someday in America's future, a member of Congress may stand up and demand to know why the Pentagon buys so many Jumbo, Colossal and Super Colossal ripe olives.
This self-appointed watchdog may observe that there are other, less expensive grades.
The Pentagon is wasting money again, he or she will say.
The explanation, according to The Associated Press, is on page 83 of the House Appropriations Committee's report on this year's military money bill.
It says, straight out, "The committee directs the Defense Procurement Agency to increase its purchases of Jumbo, Colossal and Super Colossal ripe olives in future solicitations for ripe olive purchases."


A Private Issue
To the Sports Editor:
Why did Robert Lipsyte challenge Greg Louganis about his sexual orientation ("Louganis Approaches the Edge of the Stage, and Leaps," The Times, Sept. 19)?
Who cares?
Greg Louganis represented this country in Olympic competitions from 1976 to 1988, he is a brilliant athlete and has always presented himself as a gentleman.
His private life should not be drawn into the public domain.


Mutual Funds; Health Care: Loser With a Future?
SO far this year, the only losing group among domestic stock funds has been the health-and-biotechnology category.
All the other 15 stock fund categories tracked by Morningstar Inc., a research company in Chicago, have produced positive returns since January.
In the latest three months, the average domestic stock fund rose 5.3 percent, yielding a gain of 10.5 percent from January through September.


A Shift in Rules Guiding Growth Along the Water
WATERFRONT zoning is about to reach New York City's waterfront.
After decades in which shoreline development was guided by the same rules that cover the densest urban neighborhoods, the City Planning Commission has crafted zoning measures that are meant to open the land's edge.
Public space, including shoreline walkways with landscaped borders, would be required in certain large projects.
Building heights and widths would be limited, as would floor sizes.
Development rights could no longer be transferred upland from underwater property.
And suburban-style "big box" discount stores would be prohibited on piers.
"This is an unprecedented zoning text amendment that will, for the first time, put the waterfront into the Zoning Resolution," declared Richard L. Schaffer, the commission chairman, just before his colleagues voted in August to amend the resolution with 200 pages of new text.
What kind of precedent does the amendment offer?
Real estate interests maintain that the zoning would thoroughly dampen development by imposing too many extra costs on private builders.
Meanwhile, neighborhood leaders and environmental advocates say the zoning does not go far enough to preserve openness.
But the true test will not come until it is known exactly where along the 578-mile waterfront these new rules are to be applied -- and, of course, until the real-estate market recovers.
"The issue is, as we begin to come back in this town economically, does this inhibit the development of new sites on the waterfront?" asked Councilman Walter L. McCaffrey, Democrat of Queens, who heads the Council's zoning and franchises subcommittee.
Tomorrow, the subcommittee is to hold its second hearing on the subject.
The zoning amendment would be considered next by the Land Use Committee and then, later this month, by the full Council.
Legal challenges are almost sure to follow.
Questions have already been raised about the constitutionality of the public access and underwater zoning rules, as they might be construed as an unlawful taking of property.
Critics have also faulted the overall process, saying that the effects of the zoning measures cannot be adequately evaluated before planners pinpoint the sites.
"WE'RE horrified that no environmental impact statement was deemed necessary and believe it may be actionable," said William P. Bowser of the West Village Committee, speaking to the zoning subcommittee.
Several community boards have also called for a full environmental assessment.
However, the counsel to the City Planning Department, William Valletta, told the subcommittee that the new zoning tools "have not landed anywhere" yet.
"To say 'these are the places and these are the impacts' is just not possible," he said.
In the Comprehensive Waterfront Plan of 1992, city planners generally identified some 20 areas, now zoned for manufacturing, where they believe residential redevelopment would be appropriate.
These include large parcels in Flushing and Long Island City, Queens, and the Red Hook and Mill Basin sections of Brooklyn.
About 5 percent of the manufacturing districts on the waterfront might be rezoned residentially, said Marilyn Mammano, the director of zoning and urban design for the City Planning Department.
Other new rules -- those governing piers and platforms, for example -- would be in force citywide.
Under the new zoning, builders of large projects in medium- to high-density residential and commercial districts would have to set aside 15 to 20 percent of their property for the public, including shoreline esplanades 20 to 25 feet wide, with landscaped "buffer" areas between the public and private space.
Currently, there is no such requirement, although negotiations with developers of waterfront projects like Brighton by the Sea in Brooklyn have yielded even greater amounts of land set aside for the public.
To get people out to the esplanades through private property, connections would have to be run between the shoreline and public streets or parks at intervals no greater than 600 feet.
These walkways would be 12 to 30 feet wide and would be counted toward the overall public space requirement.
A former counsel to the City Planning Department, Norman Marcus, has criticized this approach, in his role as chairman of the New York County Lawyers' Association urban development and land use committee.
"There is a kind of dominant reliance on privately owned property as the vehicle for providing public access," he said.
"After 30 years of conflict and quarreling over plazas and the rights of owners versus the rights of the public, it seemed silly to be expanding this difficulty to such an important goal as public access to the waterfront."
Instead, the lawyers' group proposed that open space and connections be provided through public streets and public parks that were officially mapped as such and, therefore, were the city's responsibility.
Mr.
McCaffrey also noted "a legal issue in terms of takings." The Fifth Amendment prohibits taking private property for public use without just compensation.
But Mr.
Valletta cited the common-law doctrine that lands between high and low tides -- known as "wet sand" -- were held by the state in trust for the public's use for fishing and navigation.
That trust was not extinguished by private ownership, he said.
"Since the public trust is still there," he said, "can we say that the equivalent of the public's historic right to go down to 'wet sand' is, in modern terms, the requirement for public access along a walkway? Our zoning is built on the idea that that's an acceptable and appropriate modern substitute."
On land, building sizes would be regulated several ways by the new zoning.
In medium- to high-density residential districts, there would be height limits ranging from 150 to 390 feet (roughly 15 to 40 stories).
The upper floors could not be wider than 100 feet parallel to the shoreline and floor sizes would have a limit of 7,000 to 8,100 square feet.
The result would be smaller towers and more of them on the site.
The Real Estate Board of New York complained that more towers mean more elevator cores, elevators, fire stairs and building entrances.
That means higher construction costs, less floor space for apartments and more security problems.
THERE would also be fewer apartments with water views, which command premiums up to 20 percent in rental buildings and up to 50 percent in co-ops or condominiums, the Real Estate Board said.
"Manhattan market values may make up for the inherent economic penalties," the board said.
"However, rezoned industrial areas in Brooklyn, Queens, the Bronx and Staten Island are not likely to command rents to offset these costs."
Mr.
Schaffer said, "We believe these are buildable buildings with a substantial amount of flexibility." Planners point to the broad, wall-like expanse of Shore Towers in Astoria, Queens, as an example of what they do not want to happen again.
Something else they do not want to see again is a proposal like Trump City on the Hudson River, which would have used development rights from under water to generate up to 4.5 million square feet of floor space, for a total of 15.33 million square feet. (The project was later scaled down to 8.3 million square feet and renamed Riverside South.)
Trump City would have taken advantage of the fact that property between the bulkhead and pierhead lines has been recognized as part of the zoning lot.
Development rights from that property -- obviously unusable under water -- can be transferred to sites on land or piers, yielding much more building bulk than would ordinarily be permitted.
The new zoning would end the use of underwater property, beyond the bulkhead line, in the calculation of allowable density.
This, too, might be challenged as a taking.
The Real Estate Board has said the new rule "raises serious constitutional issues."
Mr.
Valletta, however, said the granting of development rights from underwater property was not a matter of law but rather an interpretation of the Zoning Resolution by the Buildings Department -- "a kind of bonus."
"We gave a little extra and we can clearly take it away," he said, "because the constitution protects property rights and this is not a property right."
On existing piers, building sizes would be strictly limited, unless a developer received a special permit.
As a matter of right, structures less than 200 feet long could rise only 40 feet.
Longer, shed-like buildings could rise only 30 feet.
And public space would be required all along the pier.
Developers could seek a special permit to build much larger buildings on piers.
"But given that the as-of-right standard has been significantly reduced," Ms.
Mammano said, "you have something to measure it against." It would seem unlikely, for instance, that planners would approve a structure 10 times higher than the stated limit.
Also on piers, planners have imposed a limit of 20,000 square feet on certain kinds of stores, including "warehouses that provide accessory retail sales areas."
"YOU couldn't have a 100,000- or 200,000-square-foot Rickel's," Ms.
Mammano told the subcommittee at its first hearing.
"Going to a Home Depot and loading up on two-by-four's is not a waterfront experience."
Mr.
McCaffrey asked, "How is that different from going to the South Street Seaport and shopping at Banana Republic?"
"There are no windows, there is no life on the street," Ms.
Mammano replied.
"At the South Street Seaport, when you go to Banana Republic, you don't just shop there. You have a drink. You sit down. You meander."
New piers and platforms are limited to parks, playgrounds or what planners call "water-dependent" uses, including docks, boatels, boat yards, launches, heliports, seaplane bases, sewage-disposal plants and marine-transfer stations for garbage.
By special permit, new piers can be converted to "waterfront-enhancing" uses like hotels, motels, restaurants, theaters, arenas, boat showrooms, skating rinks, tennis courts and golf courses -- provided that the original use had ended at least two years earlier.
While critics suspect that this is a loophole through which commercial development can be slipped on to new piers, Ms.
Mammano said: "Who is going to go out and get a Corps of Engineers permit, financing for a water-dependent use, open it, close it for two years, then come in for a special permit? And all you can get is a waterfront-enhancing use, which does not include residential or offices. We thought the downside risk was minimal."
However, Borough President Ruth W. Messinger of Manhattan told the subcommittee, through an aide, that she opposed any rules that would "give city sanction to as-of-right development of new piers or platforms" or "offer a special permit for converting these uses to other more questionable uses."
The vice president of the New York City Audubon Society, Leslie T. Sharpe, urged the city to allow new piers only where there was no practicable alternative.
"Activities that are 'enhanced' by a water-based location, such as an ice-skating rink and a golf driving range are not a proper use of the waterfront," she told the subcommittee.


Habitats/A Doll's House; Overcoming a Dingy Past
THERE is a reason the hot-pink geraniums in the blue window boxes look so lush in early fall.
They're not real.


A Way With Rats
B.
F.
SKINNER A Life.
By Daniel W. Bjork.
Illustrated. 298 pp.
New York: Basic Books. $25.


E. S. Fowlkes, J. G. Moon
Elizabeth Spencer Fowlkes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
George A. Fowlkes of New York, was married yesterday to James Graham Moon, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Derek J. Moon of London.
The Rev.
John D. Wing performed the ceremony at St.
Paul's Episcopal Church in Nantucket, Mass.
Mrs.
Moon is a caterer in New York and Nantucket.
She graduated from Denison University and trained at Peter Kump's New York Cooking School.
Her father, a real estate investor in New York, is the president of the Episcopal Church Foundation and a trustee of the Episcopal Diocese of New York.


Alexander Gralnick, 80, Founder of a Private Psychiatric Hospital
Dr.
Alexander Gralnick, the founder and psychiatrist in chief of High Point Hospital in Port Chester, N.Y., died on Thursday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 80 and lived in Port Chester and West Palm Beach, Fla.
The cause was complications of heart-bypass surgery, his family said.


Judge Turns Down Barnes
A Federal judge in Charleston, W.Va., ruled that RANDY BARNES, the world record-holder in the shot-put, is not entitled to any damages over his two-year suspension from international competition for being charged with steroid use.
United States District Judge JOHN COPENHAVER Jr. dismissed Barnes's lawsuit seeking punitive damages from the International Amateur Athletics Federation, U.S.
Track &amp; Field and U.S.
Track &amp; Field's West Virginia chapter.
The I.A.A.F. is the world governing body for track and field.


Neighborhood Report: Lower Manhattan; A Campaign To Save a Bull
Fans of "Charging Bull," an outdoor sculpture in Bowling Green, are campaigning to keep the statue from being rustled off to Nevada.
"People are crazy about the bull. It captured their imagination. And we have to keep it," said Henry J. Stern, the former Parks Commissioner, who is working to keep the bull in town.


FISHING WITH PRESIDENTS
Raines's article on the civilized sport of fly-fishing might have mentioned the one President devoted to the sport: Chester Alan Arthur.
It is a shame that he couldn't have fished with Arthur in a no-kill stretch.
DON WIENER Federated Chester Alan Arthur Associations of America Andes, N.Y.


Mary Charles, M. M. Haznedar
Mary Sharon Charles, a clinical coordinator of the inpatient schizophrenia research unit at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
M.
Mehmet Haznedar, a psychiatrist at the hospital.
The Rev.
Richard D. Leonard officiated at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.
Mrs.
Haznedar, a registered nurse, graduated from Adelphi University and received a master's degree in health services management from the New School of Social Research.
She is a daughter of Joann N. Charles of Boulder, Colo., and the late Michael P. Charles.


Rangers Leave Bourque Exposed to Waiver Draft
The National Hockey League has announced the list of players available in today's waiver draft.
Now comes the hard part for the Rangers, Islanders and Devils, each of whom are hoping not to lose a player they would prefer to keep.
A new N.H.L. rule makes it possible for a team to lose three players in the draft -- up from one.
Each team was permitted to protect 18 skaters and two goalies.


THE LOOK OF THE NINETIES
Most of the ladies looked as if they were wearing Halloween costumes.
It seemed to me that the feature was conceived by people who hated their mothers.
PAULINE SEGAL New York, N.Y.


Proposing a Manhattan Stadium Is a Risky Play for Cuomo and His Team
In their single-minded crusade to keep the Yankees from moving to New Jersey, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and his aides may have undercut their primary goal: persuading George Steinbrenner 3d not to abandon his team's home and history in the Bronx.
But if they overplayed their hand by publicly discussing plans for a new stadium in mid-Manhattan, it was because they believed the risk was too great to do otherwise.


The Doughnut Dilemma
To the Editor:
I could not agree more with the high value of multicultural training highlighted in "When a Deal Can Turn on a Turn of Phrase" (Sept. 12).


Viewpoints; Don't Sell Thick Diapers in Tokyo
AS the world turns into one big marketplace, American companies can learn a lesson from one of capitalism's darlings -- Procter &amp; Gamble.
The maker of Tide and Crest has put its famous products on shelves around the globe, despite the inevitable surprises and miscues of cross-cultural selling.
These stories record some of those experiences, but they also reveal something else, not unique to Procter &amp; Gamble: cultural arrogance.
In the new world order, it's a failing other companies may want to avoid -- or correct.


Yale University Inaugurates President


Stamp Collection Sold for Record $9.5 Million
What was widely regarded as the premier collection of classic 19th-century American stamps has been broken up and sold for $9.5 million by a Japanese businessman.
Christie's, the New York auction house that conducted the sale, said it was the highest single sale for such a collection.
Before the sale, which took place on Tuesday and Wednesday, Christie's had valued the collection at $9 million to $12 million.


Former Cult Member Offers His Opinion
As a former cult member, I read with great interest the article on the Lenz cult on June 20  [ "Mentor to Some, Cult Leader to Others" ] .
It is similar to the one I was in for over 35 years.
In your effort to be fair and unbiased, you brought out the thoughts and opinions of the cult leader's supporters.
I feel these ideas are really not theirs but of their charismatic leader's impressed on them.
The power of mind control over these people was so complete that they became co-conspirators of their own victimization.
It took me over 35 years to realize that I had been so victimized.
Up until then I would have been considered a supporting member.


Holding Court in Bombing Trial
It did not take long in the World Trade Center bombing trial for courtroom observers to discover quite a lot about Kevin T. Duffy, the seasoned, 70-year-old trial judge who is presiding with a kind of folksy authoritarianism over one of the most closely watched cases in New York's history.
He has told anecdotes about how his sister was baptized with the wrong name, about how he takes the No. 6 train to work in the morning, about his Irish-born parents, about his cousin on Staten Island who had a horse and the fact that his wife, who is also a judge, has check-cashing privileges at all of the junk shops on nearby Church Street.


On L.I., Using Politics To Fight Breast Cancer
Last fall, Karen Miller, an interior designer who survived breast cancer, placed a sign in her health club and an advertisement in a weekly newspaper, inviting her neighbors into a new political movement spawned by an age-old disease.
She was uncertain how much response, if any, she would get to her modest appeal -- until the paper came out.
"I made the mistake of including my home number in the ad," she recalled, laughing.
"Don't ask! Hundreds of people on my machine! Hundreds!"


Market Spirit May Survive In Polish City
When Deputy Mayor Ewa Bonczak-Kucharczyk leaves City Hall, she sees a gleaming silvery roof on an old house and scaffolding around the turrets of another, signs of the growing commercial bustle in this rundown eastern city.
Just down the road, the whine of construction equipment can be heard at the site of a bank headquarters.
On the city's outskirts, apartment buildings with gables and portals are painted in cheerful pastels instead of the old Communist gray.


K. L. Segalas, J. P. Devlin
Katherine Lacy Segalas, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Hercules A. Segalas of Morristown, N.J., was married yesterday to Joseph Philip Devlin, the son of Joseph T. Devlin of Boston and the late Mary L. Devlin.
The Rev.
Thomas M. Richard, a Congregational minister, officiated at the First Congregational Church in Nantucket, Mass.
The Rev.
John J. Mandile, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Devlin, a graduate of St.
Lawrence University, is a marketing and advertising consultant in Boston.
Her father is a managing director in investment banking at Paine Webber Inc., the New York securities brokerage.
Her grandfather Lacy Donnell Wharton was an editor of The Reader's Digest.


A Romp for Princeton As Elias Leads Way
Having been beaten by Holy Cross in their last three meetings, Princeton had a score to settle with the Crusaders today.
And the Tigers did so with a vengeance, scoring on their first six possessions en route to a 38-0 rout before a crowd of 7,520 at Palmer Stadium.
The victory was particularly satisfying for Princeton (3-0) since it was actually the Tigers' first triumph over Holy Cross (1-3) since 1916.
In the subsequent 72 years, the teams did not play.
And since 1988, when the series resumed, it was all Holy Cross.
Until today.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Barry Benepe's tenacity has produced 20 Greenmarkets for the city -- and for himself, a fair share of critics.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  This personal trainer won't build your biceps, but he will teach you to spar -- with computer technology.


Is There Logic to 'Legalaid'?
To the Editor:
The article suggests that bar admission should be linked to an agreement to provide services to the poor without any compensation.
It tries to link this requirement to what is being imposed on doctors but makes some serious errors in fact.


Woodstock Magic Lies in the Field
To the Editor:
I read with interest "The Woodstock War" (Sept. 5).
However, there is a piece of the story missing.
More than 24 years after the music festival, the site remains the same!
Not commercialized, not spoiled and not destroyed by greedy people.
The promoters of the upcoming anniversary festivals can move them to Saugerties or the actual town of Woodstock or any place they choose and they can call it what they like, but they cannot take the magic out of the fields of Bethel!


BASEBALL: 103 and Counting: N.L. West Goes Down to Wire; Braves, Pendleton Trounce Rockies
The Atlanta Braves have known for some time now that it would probably take at least 100 victories to win the National League West.
What they still do not know is if at the end of the 162-game regular season, and after perhaps as many as 104 victories, they will indeed be division champions.
For Atlanta, winner of its 103d victory today in a lopsided 10-1 belting of the Colorado Rockies, is but one of two teams in the National League West with that amazing victory total.
The Braves' equally determined rival, the San Francisco Giants, also won their 103d game today, defeating the Dodgers, 5-3, in Los Angeles.


Novels for the Computer
To the Editor:
I was pleased that Robert Coover appreciated my "amusing graphics" for "King of Space." I would have been more gratified had he cited me by name.


SEPT. 26-OCT. 2: Tarnished Image; The Voters Turn Against Holtzman
Ever since, as a freshman member of Congress, she gained national prominence as a crusading member of the House Judiciary Committee during its Watergate investigation, Elizabeth Holtzman has never been one to go with the drift.
In eight years in Congress, eight as Brooklyn District Attorney, and two failed Senate campaigns, she was known for fierce integrity, withering intelligence and energy to carry her where charm could not.


Pamela P. Abel And Max Reynal
Dr. and Mrs.
Ronald M. Abel of Essex Fells, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Pamela Press Abel to William Andrew Reynal, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Eric Y. Reynal of Upper Slaughter, Gloucestershire, England.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Abel, 27, is an associate producer for NBC News in New York.
She graduated from Colgate University and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
Her father is the chief of cardio-thoracic surgery at St.
Michael's Medical Center in Newark.


Henry Ringling North, 83, Dies; Owner Who Modernized Circus
Henry Ringling North, a former owner and manager of the Ringling Bros. and Barnum &amp; Bailey Circus founded by his uncles, died yesterday at a hospital in Switzerland.
He was 83 and lived in Begnins, near Geneva.
He died after a long illness, said his lawyer, Richard Cunningham.


Novels for the Computer
To the Editor:
Robert Coover's perceptive and exciting survey of hypertexts may nonetheless have misled readers by suggesting that fiction in electronic form is necessarily created from the post-modernist esthetic of indeterminacy, which privileges confusion over lucid structure.


The World on a Strap
722 MILES The Building of the Subways and How They Transformed New York.
By Clifton Hood.
Illustrated. 336 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.


Riot in Moscow Amid New Calls For Compromise
Militant supporters of the Parliament, which has been banned by President Boris N. Yeltsin, clashed with riot police officers in the center of Moscow today while envoys of the warring sides bargained late into the night over conditions for ending their armed standoff at the Parliament building.
Reports from the talks, held under the auspices of the Russian Orthodox Patriarch at his headquarters in the Danilov Monastery, were sketchy.
But a senior Church official said an agreement calling for a mutual stand-down could be reached soon between representatives of Mr.
Yeltsin and the Parliament.


How Press Conferences Can Replace Trials
To the Editor:
Perhaps Frank Maco, state's attorney in Litchfield, Conn., who told a press conference that he had declined to prosecute Woody Allen on sexual molestation charges despite evidence (news article, Sept. 25), has stumbled on a useful new legal category: "innocent, but presumed guilty."


Malcolm Smith Jr., Wendy Costikyan
Wendy Warren Costikyan, a principal in New York of the management consulting firm of Egon Zehnder International, was married yesterday to Malcolm Edward Smith Jr., a real estate development consultant in Washington.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard officiated at the Unitarian Church of All Souls in New York.
The Rev.
Marston Price, an Episcopal priest, took part in the ceremony.
Ms.
Costikyan, 42, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Colorado College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Chicago.
She is a daughter of Granger and Margaret Costikyan of York Harbor, Me.
Her father is a partner in Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Company in New York and was formerly a chairman of the First Bank System in Minneapolis.


Foreign Policy, Left Unclear
What is the Clinton Administration really trying to tell the American people about its foreign policy intentions?
First, a series of high-profile speeches dutifully affirms the importance of continued U.S. leadership and international engagement.
Then a series of real-world policy decisions signals an unmistakable scaling back of Washington's commitments to participate in actual international peacekeeping operations, starting with Somalia and Bosnia.


Is There Logic to 'Legalaid'?
To the Editor:
As a lawyer, I applaud the proposal that lawyers should be required to participate in a "Legalaid" program by which they would provide legal care for the needy at reduced rates paid by the Government ("Health Reform? How About Lawyers," Viewpoints, Sept. 26).


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Jeanne Lourdes de Guardiola; Scholar Realizes Dream: Trip to Asia
WITH a strong focus that is a mark of her success, and in order not to be distracted while taking an ancient Greek history examination last March, Jeanne Lourdes de Guardiola ignored the letter waiting in her college mailbox that would say whether she was chosen as a prestigious Luce Scholar.
It was only after finishing the exam, at Bryn Mawr College in Pennsylvania, where she was majoring in archeology, that Ms. de Guardiola retrieved the letter, which bore wonderful news.


Remembrance of Flings Past


How-to Books On Living Well And Being Good
I like a book with an ambitious title.
"How to Live," by Arnold Bennett, may be in short supply in secondhand bookstores, so a substitute recommendation -- one that's actually available in new-book stores -- is in order.


A Disease Called 'The Great Imitator'
LYME disease was named after the Connecticut town where it was identified in 1975, said Dr.
Leonard H. Sigal, the chief of the division of rheumatology at the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in New Brunswick.
But, he said, Lyme disease had already been known in Europe for more than 100 years.
It is now being diagnosed in the United States with more than 90 percent of the reported cases occurring in New York, New Jersey, Connecticut, Rhode Island, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin and Minnesota.


THE LOOK OF THE NINETIES
Get real.
Clothes for us, at a decent price, are hard to find. (Frankly, I don't think the industry expected us to live this long).
Just look at our bodies: they sag, they spread, they squish.
It's enough to go, as I do, into the sporting goods store and buy a giant T-shirt to wear with fake pearls.
SUSAN BROWN Coral Gables, Fla.


Sex and Power
To the Editor:
Time for a reality check  [ Letters, Sept. 12 ] .
A "sexually liberated" woman does not go to bed with a "power" in the art world to get publicity for her husband the artist.
If anything, she would go to bed with a "power" in the art world to get some power and prestige for herself the artist.


Is ESPN2 Reaching for the Young or Just Reaching Too Far?
Warning: All opinions, observations and potentially nitpicky, snide comments in this article about Friday's debut of ESPN2 are suspect.
The 36-year-old author is two years too old to share the tastes and attention span of ESPN2's target demographic of men and women 18 to 34.
IS SILENCE HIP? -- From launch at 7:30 P.M. to 7:46, all is silent on SportsNight, the Friday-Saturday-Sunday (and soon to be Monday) 7:30-10:30 show.
Neither ESPN nor my cable company take the blame.
Is this silence some kind of irreverent, teenage "raving" thing?
Are the 34-plusses being tested for their hearing?
Images slide by: Chris Berman in a white judge's wig.
ESPN2 star wiseacre Keith Olbermann in Halloween jail duds, hounded by hounds.
Dick Vitale deservedly behind bars.
Olbermann in a leather jacket and zany print shirt.
Rock 'em, Sock 'em robots.


You Can Never Be Too Thin, or Bulb-Rich
OCTOBER is the best time to plant bulbs.
The ground is soft from the fall rains, and the air is cool enough for a flannel shirt.
You go out and plant a hundred bulbs of Muscari botryoides -- the species grape hyacinth, which smells like plums -- under the magnolia tree.
You picture how beautiful that carpet of cobalt blue will look beneath the big pinky-white saucers of the magnolia.
But wait.
Maybe the muscari, which bloom in early April, will be too early for the saucer magnolia.
You try to remember just when the magnolia bloomed, and can't.


Lori D. Wood, Parker A. Weil
Lori Darling Wood, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
W.
Barrett Wood of Harrington Park, N.J., was married last evening to Parker Anders Weil, the son of Sandra M. Weil of Northbrook, Ill., and Larrie A. Weil of Dallas.
The Rev.
Charles Wiessner, a minister of the Reformed Church in America, officiated at the Pearl River (N.Y.) Hilton.
Rabbi Jerry Heller took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Weil, 26, is a sales associate in Chicago in the fixed-income department of Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
She and her husband graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, she cum laude.
She received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.
Her father is the government-relations manager at Exxon Research and Engineering in Florham Park, N.J.
Her mother, Sue Ward, is a real estate broker at Noah-Andrew Frank &amp; Company in Harrington Park.


A New Season Promises Adventure
IT looks like the Connecticut theater season started before it started, and with a thunderclap.
One hopes that the boldness and success of two early openers provided a foretaste of thrilling things and inspired in theatergoers a sense of discovery.
Could the season have had a grander inauguration than "The Madness of George III"?
That the Rich Forum in Stamford sold standing room tickets during the two-week American premiere of a witty English play with a great performance by Nigel Hawthorne shows that people go for class.


After 3 Mini-Tests, Giants Have a Major One
These are the teams the Giants have beaten:
*The Chicago Bears.
They are a long way from the days of Mike Ditka screaming for the Refrigerator to go over the top.
*The Tampa Bay Buccaneers.
Does the new health-care plan provide coverage for the eyes of Bucs fans who have to watch that monstrosity?


First Person; A Feminism That Speaks For Itself
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON appeared before the House Ways and Means Committee last week to testify about the health care plan she drafted, saying she was there as "a mother, a wife, a daughter, a sister, a woman." Feminist was not a term she used, but that hasn't kept her from becoming feminism's first mainstream icon: a powerful, smart woman with mass-market appeal.
She was, of course, a powerful, smart woman a year ago.
Back then, her husband's Presidential campaign advisers seemed worried that these attributes had limited appeal.
But after a week in which Mrs.
Clinton appeared before one Congressional committee after another, delivering carefully articulated answers to vexing questions about the cost and practice of medicine, even Congressional Republicans -- whose party convention last year stigmatized her as a radical, antifamily feminist -- complimented her on her grasp of the debate and her service to the country.


Dykstra Is Like a Modern Miracle
Lenny Dykstra, who would be a logical choice for the National League most valuable player award if Barry Bonds were not playing Superman, is on the verge of accomplishing one of the rarest feats in baseball history.
He is about to become the first player in 30 years, the first National League player in 35 years and only the fifth player ever to lead a league in hits and walks.
Dykstra, entering yesterday's games, had 194 hits to 190 for Mark Grace of Chicago and 127 walks to 123 for Bonds.
He thus was poised to join two predecessors in the Philadelphia outfield, Richie Ashburn (1958) and Billy Hamilton (1891), plus Carl Yastrzemski of Boston (1963) and Rogers Hornsby of St.
Louis (1924).


Timman Goes Astray On His Home Turf
THE first game of the International Chess Federation championship match on Sept. 6 in Zwolle, the Netherlands, was a calamity for the grandmaster Jan Timman.
Although he played an opening variation that he invented five years ago, he quickly went astray.
He then put up a struggle only to commit more errors in an end game and hand a victory to Anatoly Karpov of Russia, the former titleholder.
In the Caro-Kann, 7 Qe2 creates the threat of 8 Nf7!
Kf7 9 Qe6 Kg6 10 Bd3 Kh5 11 Qh3mate.
After 7 . . .
Nb6 8 Bd3, Black cannot take a pawn with 8 . . .
Qd4 because 9 N1f3 Qg4 10 Nf7! ruptures the pawn position.


Neighborhood Report: Washington Heights; From Armory to Homeless Shelter to Social Center
For more than a decade it has been a blot on the map, a symbol of the crisis of homelessness and the dangers of large, uncontrolled shelters.
But after more than a year of negotiations, the Fort Washington Armory will soon become another type of model -- one for providing housing and community services on city property.
The armory, on Fort Washington Avenue between 168th and 169th Streets, housed as many as 1,200 homeless men in the late 1980's.
It will be converted into a community center, with a tower built on its west end that will accommodate 200 formerly homeless and low- and middle-income families, according to plans recently announced by Mayor David N. Dinkins.


Nicole Abbatecola, Grant Babyak
Nicole Abbatecola, a daughter of Edward and Anne Abbatecola of Bronxville, N.Y. was married there yesterday to Grant Richard Babyak, a son of Richard and Jeanne Babyak of Southampton, Mass.
The Rev.
Francis J. Stinner, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Joseph's Church.
Ms.
Abbatecola, 27, is keeping her name.
She is an assistant brand manager with Reckitt &amp; Colman Inc., a consumer-products marketing company in Wayne, N.J.
She graduated from Cornell University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is a guidance counselor at Mount Vernon (N.Y.) High School.
Her mother is the director of guidance at Harrison (N.Y.) High School.


Too Legit to Quit
WITH all the cool assurance that his street moniker suggests, Point Zero leaned into a pale, mute patch of wall high over a busy Bronx neighborhood recently and carefully guided a hissing can of Krylon neon pink spray paint over bricks and mortar until they began to speak to anyone with eyes.
Letters rapidly took form, like those brilliantly hued flowers seen blooming in time-lapse photography.
Each was drawn in a ribbon of color, painstakingly modeled, shaded and blended by a steady hand that moved with the studied confidence of a conductor's.


Ms. Lewis, Mr. Abbatemarco
Drs.
Melvin Lewis and Dorothy Otnow Lewis of New Haven have announced the engagement of their daughter, Gillian Lewis, to Luciano Abbatemarco, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Donato Abbatemarco of West Hartford, Conn.
A November wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lewis, 27, graduated from Sarah Lawrence College.
She and her fiance teach emotionally disturbed children at Newington (Conn.) Children's Hospital.
Her father is a professor of pediatrics and psychiatry at the Yale University Child Study Center, where her mother is a clinical professor of psychiatry.
The bride's mother is also a professor of psychiatry at the New York University School of Medicine.


2 Agents Offer Tours of Laos
Wings of the World and Absolute Asia are offering several tours of Laos, which recently relaxed its tourism restrictions and now allows 5,000 visitors a year, up from 4,200 in 1992.
Wings of the World offers a seven-day tour for $2,130 a person in double occupancy that includes air fare from Bangkok, English-speaking guides, all meals and accommodations.


Cece Conrad, John M. Teitler
Catherine Porter Conrad, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harrison W. Conrad Jr. of Darien, Conn., was married there yesterday to John Michael Teitler, a son of Elizabeth E. Mueller of Scarsdale, N.Y., and Michael F. Teitler of New York.
The Rev.
Anne Kimball performed the ceremony at St.
Luke's Episcopal Church.
The bride, 27, is known as Cece.
She is an account director at the advertising firm of D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is a vice president of J. P. Morgan &amp; Company in New York.


Buttoning Every Vote
IT'S the latest twist on an old tradition: the custom-tailored campaign button.
In this year's mayoral race, it may be the ultimate emblem of the retail politics of post-melting-pot New York.
While campaigns are increasingly waged with connect-the-dot attacks in the pixels of a television screen, these laminated lapel pins are a humble but pointed reminder that every vote counts.
They also seem to say a lot about how divided politicians think the city's voters are, even as they go about trying to unite them behind their candidacies.
They come in five or six tongues, from "MIRA! Yo Estoy Con DINKINS" ("Look! I'm With Dinkins") to "Rudy Giuliani for Mayor" in Russian, Romanian and Greek.
They're in all colors: green, orange and white for the Irish; red, black and yellow for the Germans; red, green and white for the Italians.
Depending on the target audience, others bear the pink triangle for gay voters, the Star of David, the Puerto Rican flag or the biological symbol for woman.


Elizabeth Stamato, John B. Giessner
Elizabeth Stamato, a daughter of Linda Stamato of Morristown, N.J., and the late Frank G. Stamato Jr., was married yesterday to Lieut.
Comdr.
John B. Giessner, a son of Edna and George Giessner of Cherry Hill, N.J.
The Rev.
Martin Rauscher, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at Assumption Church in Morristown.
Mrs.
Giessner graduated cum laude from Tufts University and received a master's degree in mathematics education from Harvard University.
She was until recently a mathematics teacher at Largo (Md.) High School.


Gallic Inspired
CHANTERELLE ***  (212) 966-6960; 2 Harrison Street, at Hudson Street; $$$$; all major credit cards


How Free Can Teachers' Speech Be?
A PHYSICS teacher at the Bronx High School of Science may lose his job because of his activities in an organization for pedophiles, which school district officials say make him unfit to teach.
But more is at stake than the career of Peter Melzer, a leader of the North American Man-Boy Love Association.
The organization is described by a spokesman as a "self-help group for pedophiles tormented by societal conditions" who want to "educate the public at large to the benevolent nature of relationships between men and boys."


Future Shock


High School Football Report
P.S.A.L.
RECORD BREAKER: Mike Reilly threw for 85 yards and 2 scores as SHEEPSHEAD BAY (3-0) cruised past LAFAYETTE (1-2), 21-8.
Reilly's scoring strikes of 15 yards to James Viclle and 36 yards to Kwesi Daniels gave him a season total of 5, which breaks a 1983 school record by Mike Walker.


Q and A
William Morris
Q.
I am interested in William Morris and the Arts and Crafts movement in England.
Do you know of any tours that are devoted to his work? -- Janet Johnson, New York, N.Y.


China's Fix for Runaway Economy Is Falling Short
Just a few weeks after China's economic czar, Zhu Rongji, opened his 16-point austerity program this summer, Asian and Western financiers were congratulating him on his early success in reining in China's runaway economy.
He had reimposed some central authority over China's bounding expansion by canceling scores of ill-conceived projects to pave over rice paddies with casinos and office towers and by calling in loans that were feeding a speculative frenzy in everything from condos to jetliners.


Israel's Right Wing in the Wilderness
FROM his spare seventh-floor office here, Ariel Sharon can see a thin gray line in the distance that is the Mediterranean.
"The way things are going," the old general and Likud Party elder said, grimly joking, "I'm afraid that's where the Jews of Israel will be pushed."
Actually, if any back is to the sea, it is that of Israel's right wing, dominated by Likud and its young American-style leader, Benjamin Netanyahu.
The right is convinced that Israel has put itself in mortal peril by accepting the legitimacy of the Palestine Liberation Organization and agreeing to Palestinian self-rule in the occupied Gaza Strip and West Bank.
But it has yet to figure out how to respond effectively to this dramatic new situation, which caught it unawares and underlined how out of touch it is despite having run the Government for 15 years, until displaced last year by the Labor Party and its leader, Yitzhak Rabin.


Allow Travel to Cuba
To the Editor:
"Dial 1-800-Fidel" by Diana Lady Dougan (Op-Ed, Sept. 25) hails the United States lifting of restrictions on phone service to Cuba.
But more important than phone-to-phone ties are people-to-people ties.
The United States Government still retains restrictions on travel to Cuba, severely limiting dialogue with the Cuban people and also curtailing the civil rights of United States citizens.
The United States is the only Western democracy that makes travel a crime!


Video Chip to Be Introduced
Laying a crucial chip along the digital highway, C-Cube Microsystems of Palo Alto, Calif., will introduce a microprocessor on Monday that can compress and decompress digital video in real time.
Such a chip can compress a videotape or a broadcast as it is played; currently, it takes up to 10 hours to compress a 2-hour movie.
Real-time compression and decompression are important to the delivery of 500-channel cable systems, which have been proposed by companies like Tele-Communications Inc.
In addition, such technology will enable delivery of video on demand, interactive media and other services not yet widely available.


From I.B.M., Fast and Powerful New Personal Computers
I.B.M. is introducing a family of powerful personal computers today that are intended for the home market and equipped with features ranging from ultra-fast chips to CD-ROM players in some models.
The new offerings by I.B.M, the largest maker of personal computers, are a recognition that even when customers buy computers at Wal-Mart or Sears for the den or the bedroom, they want powerful machines.


India Doesn't Have to Go the Way of Yugoslavia
To the Editor:
"Hindu Rage Against Muslims Transforming Indian Politics" (front page, Sept. 17) appears just at a time when a partition plan for Bosnia and Herzegovina is in the news.
I cannot help read in the juxtaposition warnings and portents and evils imminent.
The more so since independent India was loosely modeled on the lines of the former Yugoslavia -- as a peaceful socialist mosaic of religions and ethnic identities.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Naked bodies. Oh-my-goodness words. They attract plenty of attention, but can they hold it?
IN a new advertisement for Guess jeans, a shirtless man lies near a woman wearing panties and an open blouse that just covers her breasts.
Calvin Klein presents a couple on the beach in horizontal embrace to sell his Escape perfume and a woman naked from head to thigh on a couch to sell Obsession for men.
A clothing store called Louis, Boston uses three fashionably dressed young people standing behind the words, "Wasp. Jew. Gay."
As if life is not confrontational enough, a growing number of print advertisements are slapping people across their sensitivities.
So much skin!
And what, pray tell, might this line from a Joop jeans advertisement mean?
"In the uterus of love, we are all blind cavefish." Forget what it means.
More jarring is the word "uterus" in capital letters three-eighths of an inch high helping to sell blue jeans.


NORTHEAST DIVISION
Winning the Stanley Cup earned the Montreal Canadiens only grudging respect.
Aside from goalie Patrick Roy, they have little in the way of marquee names, unless you count Jacques Demers, the coach.
With Pittsburgh transferring to this division -- the former Adams -- the competition will be even tougher.
Leadership wears well on Kirk Muller, in the prime of his career.
Fellow Montreal forwards John LeClair, Vincent Damphousse and Gilbert Dionne may be approaching their best years and Brian Bellows still has some scoring punch left.
A young defense anchored by Mathieu Schneider will probably get better.
Mike Keane, a right wing, is an inspiring role player but, like most of his teammates, he is of average size.
For this haughty organization and its demanding fans, anything less than major success will give Demers more chest pains.


Stephanie Kanter, William Weisberg
Stephanie Gail Kanter, a daughter of Fanchon and Donald Kanter of Candlewood Lake, Conn., was married yesterday to William Martin Weisberg, a son of the late Rhona and Morris Weisberg.
Rabbi Thomas Weiner performed the ceremony at the Beekman Tower Hotel in New York.
Ms.
Kanter, 32, is a vice president and broker at the Corcoran Group Inc., a residential real estate company in New York.
She graduated from the University of Maryland.
Her father is an attending physician at Stamford (Conn.) Hospital and teaches internal medicine at New York Medical College.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Chang Proves He Is a Man for All Seasons  Michael Chang won his fourth singles title of the year, beating Jonas Svensson of Sweden, 6-0, 6-4, in the Malaysia Salem Open championship in Kuala Lumpur.
It was the first time in Chang's career that he has won four singles tournaments in a year.
He previously won at Jakarta, Indonesia, in January, Osaka, Japan, in March and Cincinnati in August.
He was seeded second and is ranked eighth in the world.
Against Svensson, Chang faced little resistance in the first set, breaking the Swede three times in winning the set in 31 minutes.
In the second set, Svensson came back strong after Chang broke his serve in the first game.
They were tied, 4-4, after Svensson broke Chang in the sixth game.
But Svensson failed to hold his serve in the ninth game, and Chang won the set in 66 minutes. (AP) Edberg Is Beaten by Stich in Swiss Final: Second-seeded Michael Stich of Germany defeated top-seeded Stefan Edberg of Sweden, 6-4, 6-7 (5-7), 6-3, 6-2, yesterday to win the Swiss Indoors tournament in Basel, Switzerland.
Stich, who beat Edberg a week ago in Germany's Davis Cup victory over Sweden, began feeling confident when the two-time Wimbledon champion appeared to slow in the third set. (AP)


A Bit Too Little, A Tad Too Early For the Giants
The Giants will look at the game film from this one and wince.
Their defense couldn't have played better.
It held the Buffalo Bills' offense to just one field goal entering the fourth quarter, but in the end the Giants found themselves on the wrong side of the score.
Should have, would have, could have.
All those things apply to this game for the Giants, but only the 17-14 loss really matters.
If anything, the 3-1 Giants probably proved they belong in the echelon of good teams.
Entering this game there were questions about the legitimacy of their 3-0 record because the caliber of some of the teams they had played wasn't exceptionally high.
But by holding Buffalo -- one of the best home teams in the National Football League -- to just one offensive touchdown and generally dominating the game from start to finish, the Giants proved that their 3-0 record was no fluke.


Dodgers Deal Giants A Long-Owed Payback
History reversed itself today.
Oct. 3, for 42 years, has always been a day when Giants bludgeoned Dodgers, but this afternoon the Dodgers gored them back.
The Giants lost the pennant, the Giants lost the pennant.


I.R.A. Welcomes Ulster Plan; Describes It as Basis for Peace
In a move expected to add impetus to a new plan for peace in Northern Ireland, the Irish Republican Army said today that it welcomed the proposal because "it could provide the basis for peace."
The statement was the first indication of approval by the outlawed group since the plan was announced nine days ago by Gerry Adams, the president of Sinn Fein, the I.R.A.'s political wing, and John Hume, a member of the British and European Parliaments and head of the Social Democratic Labor Party.


Review/Film Festival; 'The Night,' a Memoir of Growing Up in Syria
Mohammed Malas's difficult autobiographical film "The Night" has the distinction of being the first Syrian movie to appear in the New York Film Festival.
Set in the late 1930's and 40's, it portrays a rustic tribal society struggling to become a nation without any compelling nationalistic agenda other than the expulsion of enemies who range from European colonials to Zionist settlers in Palestine.
Until Syria achieved independence in 1946, the country was a mandated territory administered by France under a League of Nations agreement.
After the fall of the Vichy Government at the end of World War II, the British arrived and installed a civilian regime that was quickly overthrown by the first in a succession of unstable military governments.
Unless you have some knowledge of this period of Middle Eastern history, the film, whose time sense is abrupt and difficult to follow, is almost impenetrable.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11 MOSCOW STANDOFF TURNS VIOLENT
Thousands of opponents of President Boris N. Yeltsin took up arms in Moscow to break his blockade of the Parliament building, and after a tense standoff overnight, the President ordered elite military units to drive the rebel legislators out of the building.
A1


Salinas Offers Plan to Aid Mexican Economy
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari today announced a complex plan to raise Mexican wages and bolster the nation's economy.
His proposals address United States concerns about American jobs displaced by cheap Mexican labor and lay the groundwork for the 1994 presidential election campaign.
At a ceremony in Los Pinos, the Mexican White House, Mr.
Salinas said the complex package of economic measures would allow Mexico to "harvest and use the advantages" it earned in five years of fiscal discipline.
In that time, inflation has been trimmed to a single-digit annual pace and Mexico's foreign debt has been substantially reduced.


SHOWDOWN IN MOSCOW: The Overview; YELTSIN SENDS TROOPS TO OUST ARMED FOES FROM PARLIAMENT; FIERCE BATTLE RAGES IN CAPITAL
President Boris N. Yeltsin ordered tanks and armored personnel carriers early today to oust armed rebels from their heavily fortified Parliament center, and heavy gunfire echoed through the city as the final showdown opened between the President and his unyielding Communist and nationalist foes.
The attack followed a day of pitched battles in the Russian capital on Sunday between thousands of Communist and nationalist opponents of the President who broke the 11-day blockade of the Parliament and attempted to seize the Government broadcasting center.
Mr.
Yeltsin declared a state of emergency in the capital.


Oct. 3, 1993, Becomes a Day For Lasorda to File Away
Tommy Lasorda asked Bobby Thomson to autograph a baseball this morning and then used it as a prop.
"He wrote 'Oct. 3, 1951,' on the ball," Lasorda said, "So I told the guys about it."


CHRONICLE
SPIKE LEE, the 36-year-old director of such films as "Malcolm X," "Jungle Fever" and "Do the Right Thing," was married on Saturday in Manhattan.
Mr.
Lee and TANYA LYNETTE LEWIS , a Washington lawyer, were married in Riverside Church in Manhattan.
STEVIE WONDER and the Boys Choir of Harlem provided some of the music at the ceremony, The Associated Press reported.
Among those in attendance were AHMAD RASHAD , the sports analyst; his wife, PHYLICIA RASHAD ,the actress; BILL COSBY , who played Ms.
Rashad's husband on "The Cosby Show"; OSSIE DAVIS , the actor, and JOHN SINGLETON the director.


David M. Spain, 80, Civil Rights Worker And a Pathologist
Dr.
David M. Spain, a New York pathologist and civil rights advocate whose autopsies provided evidence in the slayings of three civil rights workers in Mississippi in 1964, died on Saturday in a nursing home in New Rochelle, N.Y.
He was 80 and was a longtime Manhattan resident.
He had long suffered from Alzheimer's disease, said his daughter, Dr. Julie Spain.


5 G.I.'s ARE KILLED AS SOMALIS DOWN 2 U.S. HELICOPTERS
At least five American soldiers were killed and several were wounded today when a Somali militia shot down two American helicopters during United Nations military operations in Mogadishu, Pentagon officials said.
About 20 members of a faction led by a fugitive Somali fighter, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, were taken into custody during the United Nations operation, including a high-ranking associate of the militia leader, the Pentagon said.


Margaret Mann, Ted Berenblum
Margaret Alice Mann, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Robert Mann Jr. of Mamaroneck, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Ted Allen Berenblum, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Berenblum of Greenwich, Conn.
Rabbi Daniel S. Wolk officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Berenblum is an associate production manager at Mott's U.S.A., the food company in Stamford, Conn.
She and her husband graduated from Yale University, and she received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.


Treasury Sales This Week Are Confined to Bill Auctions
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week is confined to today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
According to traders, at the close of the New York cash market on Friday the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 2.90 percent and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.01 percent.


BOSNIAN PRESIDENT IS TO ADDRESS U.N.
President Alija Izetbegovic, the Muslim leader of the Bosnian Government, will address the General Assembly this week, and advisers are pressing him to use the opportunity to propose a territorial compromise with the Serbs.
The official aim of President Izetbegovic's trip is to explain why the Muslim-led Bosnian Parliament last week rejected the latest version of a peace plan that would split the country into three ethnic states.


INSIDE
A Referendum on Mubarak
Egyptians will vote today on a new term for their President.
But they differ on whether the election means more democracy or less.
Page A8.
Nafta Ignites Labor Passions
Labor leaders meeting in San Francisco say no issue has stirred passions as the North American Free Trade Agreement has.
Page A14.
Morality Play in Texas Town
A Texas town is divided over pregnant cheerleaders who were kicked off the squad, and one who was reinstated after an abortion.
Page A12.


The Face-Off in Moscow: 14 Days of Racked Nerves
SEPT. 21 -- President Boris N. Yeltsin dissolves Parliament and calls new elections for December.
Lawmakers vote to impeach him and appoint Vice President Aleksandr V. Rutskoi as Acting President.
Anti-Yeltsin demonstrators barricade themselves inside Parliament building.
SEPT. 22 -- Military and police forces stick with Yeltsin.
Downtown crowds cheer the President.
Lawmakers' calls for a nationwide strike go unheeded.


Abroad at Home; Voices For Humanity
In this century "this terrible century," Hannah Arendt called it -- the world has experienced inhumanity on an unprecedented scale.
Hitler and Stalin, Mao and Pol Pot knew no limits in the pursuit of doctrine or power.
Against such monstrous savagery, what can individuals do?
Resistance must seem hopeless.
But sometimes decency and courage find a voice, and make a difference.


Beaumon Newhall Tribute
A memorial tribute to Beaumon Newhall, a historian of photography who died on Feb. 26, is to be held on Wednesday at 11 A.M. in the Roy and Niuta Titus Theater 1 at the Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street, Manhattan.


Ruth Pomerance, Rafael Prieto
Ruth Pomerance, a vice president in charge of the New York office of the Lee Rich Company, a Los Angeles-based feature film and television production company, was married in New York yesterday to Rafael Prieto, a special agent of the United States Secret Service in New York.
Justice Seymour Schwartz of State Supreme Court in Manhattan officiated at the Lotos Club.
Ms.
Pomerance, who is keeping her name, graduated from New York University.
She is a daughter of Iris K. Feldman of New York and the late Dr.
Alan Pomerance.


SHOWDOWN IN MOSCOW: Washington; Clinton, Reaffirming Support for Yeltsin, Blames Rutskoi's Faction for the Violence
President Clinton today blamed opponents of Boris N. Yeltsin for the violence in Moscow and vowed that the United States would not waver in its backing for the Russian President as he sought to restore order.
A senior American official described events in Moscow as "a very, very serious crisis." But as the 13-day-old standoff lurched into the streets, Mr.
Clinton made clear he had no intention of lessening his support for Mr.
Yeltsin.


Ruth Bratspis and Jerry Marzulli
Ruth Bratspis was married yesterday to Jerry Marzulli.
Judith Wank, a leader of the New York Ethical Culture Society, officiated at Ristorante Briscola in New York.
The bride, 49, is an herbal food consultant based in New York and a director of Sunrider International Inc., a manufacturer of herbal foods in Torrance, Calif.
She is a daughter of the late Martin and Sadie Youngman.


Volunteers, Not Government, Help Indians Dig Out of Rubble
A pile of rocks and thatch are all that remain of Krishna Bai Mani's home.
But she and her family survived India's worst earthquake in 50 years and, amid the devastation, have even had enough to eat.
"Yes," she smiled, "they gave me something. They gave me milk. They gave me bread, plantains, rice. They gave me as much as I wanted, enough to fill my stomach."


Review/Television; Methods of Travel For the Trip to the Grave
"Death: The Trip of a Lifetime" is an antic travelogue with pretensions.
The first hour of this four-hour documentary offers cremations in India, fancy coffins in Ghana, glimpses of the Night of the Dead in Mexico, fourth-graders talking about death in a Seattle school, clips from horror movies and other sights.
Whether this sort of tour amounts to something more than colorful pictures from here and there depends on what the guide brings to it.
Lamentably, Greg Palmer, described in the press release as "award-winning broadcaster, playwright and film maker," seems unable to decide what if anything he has in mind besides playing to the camera.


Patents
BRUCE A. LEHMAN, the Assistant Secretary of Commerce and the head of the Patent and Trademark Office, is talking tough as his office prepares for the opening meeting tomorrow of bilateral talks with Japan on intellectual property issues.
"We have very serious problems in the patent area that on the surface are not discriminatory," Mr.
Lehman said in an interview last week.


Frederick Gutheim Is Dead at 85; Expert on Planning and a Writer
Frederick Gutheim, a regional and urban planner who was a writer and a consultant in his field, died on Saturday at the Washington Hospital Center in the District of Columbia.
He was 85 and lived in Mitchellville, Md.
The cause was complications of diabetes, his family said.


Ballet Theater Appointment
Ross Stretton has been appointed assistant director of American Ballet Theater.
Mr.
Stretton, whose appointment is effective immediately, is a former lead dancer with the company.
Since his retirement from the stage in 1990, he has been a rehearsal director and assistant to the directors of Ballet Theater.
He joined the company as a guest artist in 1980 after dancing with the Joffrey Ballet and the Australian Ballet, and was made a principal dancer in 1983.


Correction Officer Is Killed While Off Duty
An off-duty correction officer acting as "a good Samaritan" was shot and killed early yesterday when he tried to break up a fight at a Bronx social club, the authorities said.
He was the third off-duty New York City correction officer to be fatally shot this year.
The victim, Bruce Mayo, 27, a correction officer for six years, was unarmed when he was shot once in the head by an unidentified man outside Ray's Social Club at 2140 East Tremont Avenue in the Parkchester section shortly before 4 A.M., said a Correction Department spokesman, Vito Turso.


Attacking Florio on Taxes
Candidate: Christine Todd Whitman Producer: The Murphy Pintak Gautier Agency.
Washington.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Tuesday about the conversion of van Gogh's former house in Auvers-sur-Oise, France, into a restaurant misidentified a painting of his from which decanters and glasses were copied.
The title is "Absinthe," not "The Absinthe Drinkers."


Swirling Skirts Decorate Parade on Staten Island


Review/Opera; Season Premiere Of 'Tosca' At the Met
"Tosca" returned to the Metropolitan Opera on Saturday afternoon.
Puccini's larger-and-simpler-than-life melodrama finds a comfortable home in this bigger-than-necessary opera house.
And indeed, any successful "Tosca" is a matter of scale, a process by which day-to-day human responses are escalated to dimensions far beyond the ordinary.
The extraordinary success of Saturday's performance lay largely in how well these proportions were calibrated, how compellingly true unrealistic human behavior set in unrealistic surroundings could be made to seem.
Singing as well as I have heard him sing, Placido Domingo found grandeur with impregnable dignity.
His Cavaradossi occupied fully the space this production provides it.
Maria Guleghina in the title role had the necessary physical glamour and emotional extravagance.
The voice has reserves of power and a dark glow.
Only the upper notes were tested; one heard a few signs of weariness by Act III.


CHRONICLE
MUHAMMAD ALI is seeking donations to help Iraqi children injured in the Persian Gulf war.
The former heavyweight boxing champion attracted about 200 people to a $50-a-plate charity dinner on Saturday in Richmond, The Associated Press reported.
Mr.
Ali, 51, reminded his audience that he had been to Iran and Iraq, and that he knew of "the tragedies and hardships that Iraqi children face daily and have seen the suffering first-hand."


Political Memo; Senators Find Scandal's Tar Leaves Indelible Stain
Nearly three years ago, when five Senators were consumed by one of the most potent financial scandals to hit Capitol Hill, conventional wisdom held that the luckiest of the bunch were Senators Donald W. Riegle Jr. of Michigan and Dennis DeConcini of Arizona.
The other three had re-election campaigns looming in 1992.
Mr.
Riegle and Mr.
DeConcini, both Democrats, would not face the voters again until 1994 -- plenty of time for political wounds to heal.


Unions Gird for War Over Trade Pact
Leaders of American labor unions, who are here to set goals for the next two years, say that nothing -- not health care, not the long erosion of blue-collar wages, not even the Reagan and Bush Presidencies -- has stirred worker passions as has the proposed North American Free Trade Agreement.
The prospect of deregulated trade with Mexico so angers some unions that they are vowing to take the unusual step of making the vote of a member of Congress on the agreement a single-issue test of loyalty to labor.
The unions say they will use their money and skills to drive from office those who support the agreement.


Profiles of the Jurors
After three weeks of jury-selection, a panel of eight women and four men, all of them Christian, was selected last week to hear the case of four Muslims charged with bombing the World Trade Center last Feb. 26.
Opening arguments begin today in Manhattan Federal Court before Judge Kevin Thomas Duffy.
The jurors, including six alternates, are anonymous, identified by number only for their privacy and security.
Here is some of the information given by the 12 main jurors during the selection process: Seat: 1 (foreman) Race/Sex: Black woman Religion: Lutheran Residence: Westchester County Occupation: Telecommunications Education: College Other: Served on criminal jury in Queens cross-burning case, defendanr found guilty.
Seat: 6 Race/Sex: White man Religion: Christian Residence: Rockland County Occupation: Heavy-equiptment operator Education: High School Other: Member of National Rifle Association, gets along with Muslims in neighborhood Seat: 7 Race/Sex: Black woman Religion: Baptist Residence: Manhattan Occupation: Retired postal worker Education: Not available Other: Son murdered in 1978; killer sentenced to 6 to 13 years.


Businessman Details Case Involving Commerce Chief
Suddenly, Ly Thanh Binh has found an audience.
For seven months, the small-time businessman has been spinning a wild tale of international intrigue, telling reporters and the Federal Bureau of Investigation that Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown sought a bribe from the Vietnamese Government in return for his help in lifting the trade embargo against Vietnam.


Ginger Untrif, Richard Rhodes
Ginger Untrif, the president of Allspice Productions Inc., a media and software production company in Madison, Conn., was married yesterday to Richard Rhodes, the Pulitzer-Prize winning author.
Judge Deborah Holcomb of the Probate Court of Essex, Conn., officiated at the couple's home in Madison.
Mrs.
Rhodes, 37, graduated from the University of Missouri.
She is a daughter of Beverly and Stephen Untrif of Pleasant Hill, Mo.
Her father, now retired, was a police sergeant in Kansas City, Mo.


SHOWDOWN IN MOSCOW: The Scene; Despite the Violence, Muscovites Go Shopping
As anti-Yeltsin demonstrators marched on the television headquarters on Sunday, Lidiya Naumovna watched in quiet disbelief.
"My heart is pounding," the 52-year-old engineer said as opponents of President Boris N. Yeltsin moved along the Garden Ring road.
"Something really horrible is happening."


Books of The Times; Guilty Consciences in Old Vienna
Henry James's Midnight Song  By Carol De Chellis Hill
Illustrated. 445 pages. Poseidon Press. $23.
Beneath everything else in Carol De Chellis Hill's extravagantly imagined new novel, "Henry James's Midnight Song," there lies an old-fashioned murder mystery.
In turn-of-the-century Vienna, someone has been murdering women, seemingly at random, dismembering their corpses, hiding the parts around the city and sending notes to the police: "Where oh where is Gertrude Van de Vere? Her hand is in the sandbox and her toes are over there." Special Inspector Maurice Cheval LeBlanc has been called back from a vacation in Paris to investigate the crimes.


SHOWDOWN IN MOSCOW: The Background; Amid Confusion, Russians Keep Heads Down
For months now, as Moscow's political warriors have been locked in an increasingly vicious battle for power, each side has accused the other of pushing the country to civil war.
Until Sunday, the threat always seemed idle, even in the days since President Boris N. Yeltsin disbanded Parliament and ringed its headquarters with troops.
Like a deadly delayed reaction, the violence that swept Moscow on Sunday had been a long time in building.
But even as armed mobs were breaking police lines, storming government buildings, and brandishing the red hammer-and-sickle, news of what was happening spread slowly.


PACIFIC DIVISION
So Wayne Gretzky wasn't serious about retiring after all.
And his back is healthy.
And he turns 33 years old in January.
So how much longer will he play?
Probably longer than Jari Kurri, who is already 33 and fading, and longer than Tomas Sandstrom, who just turned 29 but seems to get seriously injured at least once a year.
Strange as it sounds, Los Angeles is one Stanley Cup finalist that might be no better than a .500 team that struggles to make the playoffs in the league's worst division.
On the positive side, the aging of key forwards is balanced by a good, young defense, with Rob Blake now supported by Darryl Sydor and Aleksei Zhitnik.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Construction Spending . . .
August Tuesday  10-Day Auto Sales  Wednesday None  Thursday  Weekly Jobless Claims  Consumer Borrowing . . .
August  Friday Employment . . .
September


Market Place; For Rally's shareholders, the disappointments keep coming.
RALLY'S HAMBURGERS INC. has long been known as America's fastest growing restaurant chain.
But last week, its shareholders probably knew it better as one of America's worst investments.
Shares in the chain of double-drive-through restaurants collapsed more than 20 percent on Thursday, falling as much as $3.125, before eventually closing at $11.875 in over-the-counter trading.
The tumble continued on Friday, with Rally's shares losing another 87.5 cents, closing at $11 a share, just pennies above the company's 52-week low.


CENTRAL DIVISION
Almost 20,000 customers a game aren't enough for the Detroit Red Wings.
Their owner, Mike Ilitch, wants a bigger arena and a Stanley Cup championship while Steve Yzerman is still in his prime.
With the cash flow from his fan base, Ilitch is willing and able to hire high-salaried role players like Paul Coffey and a high-salaried coach like Scotty Bowman, if only to look at their championship rings.
Despite a wealth of talent, the Wings always seem to stumble, and last season's first-round exit from the playoffs was most embarrassing.
Part of the blame goes to the goalie, Tim Cheveldae, whose team loses its poise and confidence too easily whenever he falters.
Bowman, in Pittsburgh last spring, showed that even one of the greats in league history can be outcoached, the way he was by Al Arbour of the Islanders.
For all his talent and a strong supporting cast, Yzerman needs a championship to move, in some eyes, from second to first tier among superstar centers, alongside Wayne Gretzky and Mario Lemieux.


Caryn Klein, Joseph Cardieri
Caryn Klein, a daughter of Joan Klein of Brooklyn and the late Bernard Klein, was married yesterday to Joseph Cardieri, a son of Vincent and Mary Cardieri, also of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Samuel Morgenstern, a minister of the Universal Harmony Foundation, an interfaith group, officiated at Tavern on the Green in New York.
The bride, 27, is the educational director of the Special Sprouts Therapeutic Preschool in Brooklyn.
She graduated from Brooklyn College, from which she also received a master's degree in education.


Accounts
*
American Cyanamid Co., Wayne, N.J., to Dudnyk Advertising &amp; Public Relations, Horsham, Pa., to handle its professional pest-control-products account, previously divided among various agencies.
Dudnyk already handles advertising for the chemical company's specialty products department.
Billings were not disclosed.


India Doesn't Have to Go the Way of Yugoslavia; For All, a State of Mind
To the Editor:
"Hindu Rage Against Muslims Transforming Indian Politics" (front page, Sept. 17) is not as distressing as it may seem.
While some of the fringe Hindu extremist groups, such as the Shiv Sena and Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh can pose a threat to the security of Muslims in India, the Bharatiya Janata Party does not pose such a threat.
Bharatiya Janata may be a Hindu party, but most of the moderate leaders in the party such as L. K. Advani, A. B. Vajpayee, M. R. Malkani and Jaswant Singh, subscribe to a Hindu philosophy that is basically secular and tolerant.


Black Architect Gave Form to Duke Campus
To the Editor:
No mention is made in the controversy over Duke University's efforts to add black faculty members (front page, Sept. 19) that much of the Duke campus was designed by a black architect, Julian Francis Abele.


Trying to Guess Economy's Pace
The wide range of estimates for how much nonfarm payroll jobs increased last month signal that the bond market could be surprised by the report due on Friday from the Labor Department.
But even the high-side estimates of 200,000 new jobs do not represent a significant jump in the pace of economic growth.
And the low-end estimates of about 75,000 would seem to assure that growth is still sluggish.


Corrections
An obituary on Sept. 18 about Willie Mosconi, the great pocket billiards player, misidentified the state in which he made a record run of 526 balls in exhibition play in 1954.
It was Springfield, Ohio, not Springfield, Ill.


The Murky Mix of Race, Competence and Politics
WHO was that man huddling with President Clinton in a midtown Manhattan hotel anteroom last week moments before the President mounted the dais and delivered remarks that, he acknowledged, "I'm going to get in a lot of trouble for saying"?
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo recalled of his conversation with Mr.
Clinton that "he asked me how the race was going -- strike that, how the election was going.


Guy Douvier, 65, Dies; A Fashion Designer
Guy Douvier, a Paris couturier who had worked in New York and was known for popular and reasonably priced designs, died on Sept. 7 in Paris, The Times of London reported last week.
He was 65.
He suffered a heart attack, the Guy Laroche fashion house announced.


World Economies


S.I. Paper Calls For Voting Yes On Secession
In a break from tradition, Staten Island's daily newspaper ran a full, front-page editorial yesterday, urging residents to vote yes on a proposal that could be the first step toward the borough's secession from New York City.
The Sunday issue of The Staten Island Advance, with language reminiscent of the Declaration of Independence, voiced support for the island's breakaway and ticked off reasons it believed such a step was critical to the future of New York's smallest borough.


Sarah Miller, Samuel Tarlin
Sarah Sheafe Miller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
David P. Miller of Darlington, Md., was married yesterday to Samuel Gordon Tarlin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Lloyd D. Tarlin of Wellesley, Mass.
Howard Jay Lamson, a civil marriage officiant, performed the ceremony at the Milton (Mass.) Hoosic Club, a country club.


Film Society to Honor Robert Altman at Gala
Robert Altman, whose latest film, "Short Cuts," opened the New York Film Festival on Friday, is to be honored by the Film Society of Lincoln Center at its next annual gala tribute, on April 18.
Mr.
Altman's credits include "M*A*S*H," "Nashville," "McCabe and Mrs. Miller" and "The Player."


No-Huddle Offense Means a No-Rest Defense
Bills and Giants, New York style, an in-state affair and repeat of Super Bowl XXV.
Bills win this time, by 17-14.
Both teams are 3-1, but are they heading in the same directions?


New Health Plan, Old Abortion Fight
Helen Alvare, an employee of the United States Catholic Conference, which has supported universal health care coverage since 1919, is an unlikely enemy of President Clinton's health care plan.
Yet she has taken to the streets to organize opposition for one reason: abortion.
The Clinton plan has only a single clause that calls for "pregnancy-related services," but its meaning has prompted just the emotional stampede the Administration hoped to avoid, and it has made enemies of people like Mrs.
Alvare who otherwise would have counted themselves among the plan's staunchest supporters.


The Braves Have 104 Reasons to Celebrate
So 104 victories turns out to be enough.
Enough to win the National League West, that is, a privilege that proved to be so elusive it took the full season to resolve.
But the Atlanta Braves got their answer at last today, winning for the 104th time and then watching as the San Francisco Giants were halted at 103.


Changing at the Top: London's Musical Life Has Some New Leaders
This is a city of tradition and continuity, but the autumn of 1993 is shaping up as a time of sometimes smooth, occasionally bumpy transition in London's classical-music life.
There is an entirely new administrative and artistic team at the English National Opera; a new opera director at the Royal Opera, Covent Garden, and new "principals," or directors, at both the Royal Academy of Music and the Royal College of Music.
The English National Opera is London's domestic company, devoted to British operas and artists and to foreign operas sung in English.
During the go-go 1980's, the E.N.O., as it is known, rode high, buoyed by a newly affluent young public and critically acclaimed for its innovative stagings.
The company was run by Peter Jonas as general director, Mark Elder as music director and David Pountney as director of productions, and a triumphant troika they made.


Where House Numbers Are Secret, and at Issue
SHHHHHH.
There's a secret in Alpine.
It's so closely guarded that even residents of this affluent Bergen County borough cannot get access to the information: their real house numbers.
The numbers are written on a tax map, which is rolled up in the desk of the Chief of Police, who is under orders from the Borough Council to keep it under wraps.


Ruling Due in Death Of Man in Police Car
The New York City Medical Examiner's Office is expected to rule today on the cause of death of a homeless man who died Saturday night in police custody.
The man, who was not identified, became unconscious during a three-block ride in a police car to the 10th Precinct station house in Manhattan, said Lieut.
Thomas Naroney of the 10th Precinct.


Essay; Destroying Confidence
Last week, as a U.S.-sponsored "donors conference" pledged billions to develop Gaza and the West Bank, Arab states and the P.L.O. rejected the Clinton plea to end the boycott designed to stunt the growth of Israel.
The Arab economic war not only denies Arab markets to Israelis, but -- in its secondary boycott -- has effectively frightened all but a tiny percentage of the world's thousand largest companies from investing or locating in Israel.
And not just in oil-dependent Japan: Ask your favorite global bank if it has a branch in Tel Aviv -- you'll be directed to Cairo or Beirut.


Lisa J. Taub, David E. Kling
Lisa Jane Taub, a daughter of Dr.
John Taub and Martha Taub of Wayland, Mass., was married yesterday to David Eric Kling, a son of Dr.
Arthur Kling and Rosalyn Kling of Los Angeles.
Rabbi Lawrence Kushner performed the ceremony at Congregation Beth El in Sudbury, Mass.
Mrs.
Kling is a graduate of Skidmore College and received a master's degree in human resource counseling from Northeastern University.
She is an assistant in the training and development office of Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
Her father is a pediatrician with the Harvard Community Health Plan in Wellesley, Mass.
Her mother is the president of Adventure and Leisure Travel in Wayland.


METRO DIGEST
AIDS TESTING GROWS COMMON ON CAMPUS Ten or 20 years ago, contraception and the prevention of treatable sexually transmitted diseases were the biggest issues facing sexually active students.
Now, confronting AIDS has become the latest rite of passage, and more and more college students are rolling up their sleeves to take an AIDS test.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY FOR DINKINS, SIGNS OF WEAKENED SUPPORT In a mayoral contest that most experts say is now too close to call, one sure bet is that most black votes will go to David N. Dinkins.
But many black ministers, politicians and neighborhood leaders contend that the Mayor's support among black voters is neither as monolithic nor as enthusiastic as it once was, suggesting that more black people than usual might decide not to vote at all.
A1.


MORE ON RUSSIA
The Unheard-Of Happens
Muscovites, lulled by the belief that their leaders would avoid bloodshed, were slow to believe the news of armed clashes in their capital and most were sitting it out.
Page A11.
Clinton Backs Yeltsin
President Clinton blamed opponents of Boris Yeltsin for the violence and said he had "bent over backward" to avoid resorting to force.
Page A11.
Elite Military Units Called Up
Elite troops were called to restore order, and columns of armored personnel carriers were reported moving toward Moscow.
Page A10.


In Trenton, Echoes of Ali-Frazier As Two Campaign Titans Clash
It was perhaps the second most awkward handshake of 1993.
Except that for these enemies, two of the hottest guns in American politics, there was no reconciliation.
James Carville, the Clinton campaign architect who is eager to crown his winning streak with the re-election of Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey, was holding court Saturday afternoon in the lobby bar of the Hyatt Regency Hotel near here.


V. R. Colville, R. J. Nierenberg
Valerie Rose Colville, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Barney Colville of Riverdale, the Bronx, was married yesterday to Dr.
Richard Jeffrey Nierenberg, a son of Dr.
Marvin Nierenberg of Encino, Calif., and Janet Stone of Palm Springs, Calif.
Rabbi Stephen Franklin officiated at the Biddle Mansion in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Nierenberg, a graduate of Williams College, received a master's degree in geology from the University of Wisconsin.
He is a vice president of Barclays Bank in New York.


Accous Journal; Highway Hits a Roadblock: France's Last 12 Bears
With their mighty walls stretching from the Atlantic to the Mediterranean, the Pyrenees hold some of Western Europe's last wild spaces.
Royal eagles and great Egyptian vultures dip along glaciers and waterfalls.
And amid the rangy pine forests the last few bears in France are fighting for survival.
A new truck route linking France and Spain threatens to come thundering through the Aspe Valley, one of the region's most peaceful and spectacular gorges.
The traffic will divide the habitat of the bears and, experts believe, hasten their extinction.
Planners had expected protests over disturbing the valley's medieval villages and polluting the scenery with concrete, noise and car exhausts.
But they had not counted on the power of the legendary brown bear.


Upper Deck Shakes Up Trading-Card Industry
When the Upper Deck Company emerged from nowhere in 1989 with an expensive, premium-quality baseball card that made the other companies' products look like 1950's throwbacks, it jolted a complacent industry accustomed to producing traditional cardboard pictures of ballplayers.
"They're the pulse of the hobby," said Doug Kale, editor of Sports Card Trader, a publication whose readers named Upper Deck the card of the year.


Knicks Get Forward Bonner
The Knicks have reached agreement with Anthony Bonner, a 6-foot-8-inch, free-agent forward.
Bonner, recently released by the Sacramento Kings, averaged 14.5 points and 6.5 rebounds last season as a part-time starter at both forward positions.
The Kings wanted to keep Bonner, but they had to release him to make room under the salary cap for Bobby Hurley, their first-round draft pick, who signed last month.


Gregory McManus, Christina Pappas
Christina Lee Pappas, a daughter of George and Marina Pappas of Garden City, L.I., was married yesterday to Gregory Dale McManus, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph P. McManus of Walpole, Mass.
The Rev.
Nicholas Magoulias performed the ceremony at the Greek Orthodox Cathedral of St.
Paul in Hempstead, L.I.
Mrs.
McManus, 25, and her husband, 28, work at Smith Barney Shearson Inc. in New York, where she is a liaison in the government bond trading area and he is second vice president in corporate bond trading.


Fans Produced the Biggest Numbers From '93 Season
Contrary to the wishes of the San Francisco Giants, the 25th season of division play in the major leagues came to a close yesterday.
If the owners and the players' union ever get around to agreeing to the proposed three-division alignment and expanded playoffs, this season will have been the last played under the two-division format.
The new system would not necessarily preclude the type of race the Giants and the Atlanta Braves provided.
The loser of a two-team fight for a division championship would not necessarily be the wild-card winner because it might lose out to a team with a better record from another division.
That would make the division race as meaningful as this season's National League West thriller.


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about a law that limits foreign tobacco in American cigarettes misstated the amount to be raised by a new tariff on imported tobacco.
The tariff would raise about $29 million over five years, not $29 billion.


Final Preparations at Columbia for a New Leader


Polish Pride Takes Over Fifth Avenue


Exorcising McCarran-Walter's Ghost
Palestinians and Israelis are groping toward peace.
But U.S. immigration officials are still treating some Palestinian immigrants with suspicion and seeking to deport them for their ideological beliefs alone.
In the wake of the recent rapprochement in the Middle East, about 70 prominent law professors have now urged Attorney General Janet Reno to rethink a backward policy.
In 1987 two Palestinian immigrants were arrested at gunpoint in Los Angeles.
They were taken into custody by the Immigration and Naturalization Service and detained in maximum security for three weeks.
Eventually they were released from jail, but their case is still pending.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are among those expected this week:
Alladdin Knowledge Systems Ltd., Tel Aviv, an initial public offering of 1.125 million shares.
Oscar Gruss.


Judith F. Wolf, Laurence Kurzner
Judith Frohman Wolf, a daughter of Austin K. Wolf of Fairfield, Conn., and the late Beverly S. Wolf, was married yesterday to Laurence David Kurzner, the son of Wilma E. Kurzner of New York, and the late Dr.
Martin M. Kurzner.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbi Marjorie Slome at the Americas Society Mansion in New York.
Mrs.
Kurzner is a senior marketing manager for the DAIS Group, a financial-research consulting firm in New York.
She graduated from Lake Forest College.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Drama (Jets), Highlights (Jets), Anguish (Jets)
The Jets-Eagles game turned out to be a combination Wild West shootout and barroom brawl that spills out into the dark, back alley.
It was football as directed by Sam Peckinpah.
It was as difficult to keep up with the scoring as it is to keep track of the body count of the director's movies.
When the dust settled, the Eagles (4-0), who overcame a 21-0 second-quarter deficit, walked away with 35-30 victory before a crowd of 72,593 at Giants Stadium.
The Jets (2-2) left with a measure of respect for standing toe-to-toe and slugging it out with the best team in the National Football Conference East, but a bad feeling for losing a game they should have won.
There were so many twists and turns, and they happened so quickly, that immediately after the game some Jets players still weren't sure exactly what they had witnessed.


Miss Criscuolo, Mr. Croen
Caroline A. Criscuolo, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Criscuolo of Buffalo, was married yesterday in New York to David M. Croen, a son of Lawrence Croen of Scarsdale, N.Y., and the late Belle-Janet Croen.
Rabbi Peter Rubenstein officiated at the Pierre.
Mrs.
Croen is the manager of the cultural affairs and libraries task force for the New York City Office of Management and Budget.
She graduated from Canisius College and received a master's degree in arts administration from New York University, where she is a lecturer on financial management in the arts.


Glavine Just Wins, Like It or Not
To some, it might have been the ultimate compliment.
To Tom Glavine, what he read on the morning of the day of his most important game of the season was simply more of the same.
Glavine said he read a descriptive phrase saying that all he did was win.
It meant, the pitcher said, that he didn't strike out people, that he didn't win earned run average titles, that he had only one Cy Young Award instead of two or three.
It was a backhanded compliment, he was convinced.
But it was one he tucked away in his back pocket then went about proving to be true.


Fighting Corruption; A 'Blue Wall of Reluctance' Emerges In Testimony to Panel on Police Graft
When a corruption scandal rocked the 77th Precinct in Brooklyn in 1986, Benjamin Ward, then Police Commissioner, responded as commissioners usually did, transferring or demoting 27 supervisors.
The public demanded no less.
The action was known as "rolling heads" and the theory was simple: make the punishment so severe that in the future supervisors would ferret out and eliminate corruption at the first hint of trouble, if only out of fear for their jobs.


Exiled From Pittsburgh, Brister Banishes the Jets
Bubby Brister had an idea of what he was supposed to do when he suddenly became the Eagles' starting quarterback today.
After all, the Eagles let him watch Randall Cunningham in practice.


Susan B. Taman, Eric T. Levy
Susan Beth Taman, the daughter of Arlene and Joel Taman of Hartsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Eric Todd Levy, a son of Gail and Alan Levy of Lake Katrine, N.Y.
Rabbi Peter Rubinstein officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
Mrs.
Levy, a graduate of Cornell University, is a registered dietitian at the New York University Medical Center.


Kidnappings Linked to Fall Of Big Gang
A series of violent kidnappings by Chinatown street criminals in recent weeks appears to be a brutal side effect of turmoil within the Fuk Ching, the gang most deeply involved in smuggling illegal immigrants from China, experts on Asian organized crime and law-enforcement officials say.
After the arrests of the gang's leaders in a Federal crackdown in late August, a leadership vacuum has allowed independent groups in the Fujianese community to take over criminal activities once controlled by the Fuk Ching, the officials say.


Celebrated Birth Aside, Teen-Ager Is Typical Now
In her jeans, floppy rugby shirt and overpriced running shoes, Louise Brown looks like a typical teen-ager.
Her parents complain that she likes "loud music and stupid clothes" and much prefers the company of friends to "us old codgers."
But if life in the Brown household in Bristol, England, is rather routine, the world's memory of Louise is anything but.
Her birth 15 years ago made headlines around the globe as a turning point in human reproduction and gave new hope to countless infertile couples.


College Couples Are Now Asking For AIDS Tests
Elizabeth Rockett, a New York University senior, has gone to the health center on the bustling campus for the usual rites of passage for a modern female student, like getting birth control pills and gynecological care.
Then, two weeks ago, she called there for something that reflects her generation's new approach to sex and mortality: a referral for an AIDS test.
"I had to work up my courage," Ms.
Rockett said of her decision to have the blood test, which detects antibodies to H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
It was a relief but not a surprise to learn that her test was negative.
Her fiance had already tested negative. 'Something You Should Know'
"It seemed like something you should know," said Ms.
Rockett, 24, a politics major who plans to marry in December.
"I would just hate for them two years later to say, 'You're pregnant and you have H.I.V.' Do you want to enter a marriage like that?"


Kelly Calls for Tighter Entry Criteria for Police Officers
Calling the unashamed demeanor of corrupt officers before the Mollen Commission "shocking," New York City's top police official said yesterday that standards for acceptance into the police department might have to be tightened and corruption be addressed more vigorously in the Police Academy curriculum for those who get in.
Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly also praised as a "hero" a field internal affairs investigator who had testified that his supervisors had given him little support in pursuing corruption.
The hearings go into their second week today at 9:30 A.M. at the City Bar Association.


As Egypt Votes on Mubarak, He Faces Rising Peril
Egyptians, at least some of them, will trudge to voting booths on Monday to take part in a referendum that President Hosni Mubarak hopes will bolster his legitimacy and hold at bay critics who call for democratic reforms.
But to many Egyptians, the referendum signals an end to hopes that Mr.
Mubarak will institute real democratic reform.
Many say they believe that political renewal may come only at the point of a gun, as it has in the past.


Apple Business System
In one of the first indications that Apple Computer Inc. is moving in the direction of separating its software and hardware businesses, the company is planning to introduce an advanced version of its System 7 operating system Monday that will include features for corporate and small-business users.
The new version, called System 7 Pro, will add functions to the standard Macintosh software, including built-in electronic mail that permits users to send messages that include animation, graphics and sound.
System 7 Pro is priced at $149.


No Headline
Today the fate of Russia and the fate of our children is being decided.
The forces of civil war will not suceed.
We will triumph. -- PRESIDENT BORIS N. YELTSIN  [ A10:5. ]


Pregnant Students Prompt Moral Debate
As a pink and crimson sky slowly faded along the horizon, the stadium lights came up over the Texas prairie in La Grange on Friday night and the visiting Fighting Bobcats of Hempstead High charged onto the grass.
But three varsity cheerleaders were not there to greet them, because they had been ordered by the school board to stay off the field.
They are all pregnant.
Whispers and arguments also swirled around another Hempstead girl, the fourth of the school's 15 cheerleaders to be discovered pregnant this fall.
She had an abortion and with no medical reason to prevent her from resuming cheerleading, school officials allowed her back on the squad.


Dance in Review
Nai-Ni Chen Dance  Company  St. Mark's Church
Water seemed to flow through the three new works that the Nai-Ni Chen Dance Company presented on Thursday night.
This water, of course, was purely metaphorical.
The only thirst it could have slaked was a craving for art.
Yet the presence of water was strongly felt, for the dances rippled along with liquid movements.


Dance in Review
Guimond Dance Associates and Mary Seidman and Dancers  Merce Cunningham Studio
A very long program presented by the Guimond Dance Associates and Mary Seidman and Dancers swung dishearteningly from blandness to melodrama and back again on Saturday night.


South Raises Stakes in Fight for Jobs
Last week it was Mercedes-Benz going to Alabama.
Last year it was BMW in South Carolina.
Before that it was Saturn in Tennessee and Toyota in Kentucky.
Increasingly, in large ways and small, manufacturing in the United States has a Southern accent.


Review/Rock; Piano Man at the Garden (With Supporting Cast)
Watching the sold-out house at Madison Square Garden lustily singing along with Billy Joel in hit after hit on Saturday evening, one saw a normally impersonal concert arena transformed into the world's largest piano bar.
The mass sing-along, which was unprompted by the star, began in the show's seventh number, "Allentown," and picked up energy with "Scenes From an Italian Restaurant," a wordy song whose length and complexity didn't faze an audience that seemed to know every syllable and accent.


Aspin to Decide Fate of Admiral This Week
As senior Pentagon officials met to review disciplinary action against Navy admirals who attended a convention of naval aviators, Defense Secretary Les Aspin said today that he would announce the fate of the Navy's top officer, Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, on Monday or Tuesday.
Navy Secretary John H. Dalton has asked for Admiral Kelso's removal as Chief of Naval Operations for what he described as a failure to show proper leadership at the 1991 Tailhook Association convention in Las Vegas, Nev., where 83 women were assaulted.
Mr.
Dalton also wants to discipline 12 other admirals and Marine generals who attended the gathering.


An Accident, a Mistaken Identity and a Family's Confusion
For much of this summer, after Hanif Abdus-Sabr, a counselor at the University of Buffalo, failed to show up for work, his family searched for him.
Told that he might have been the person run over by a trailer at a street festival, they called the county morgue several times, but were told, they said, that his body was not there.
Several weeks ago, family members learned that local authorities had Mr.
Abdus-Sabr's remains all along, misidentified as those of someone who was in fact still alive and ultimately cremated as a body that no one wanted.


Review/Pop; A Voyage Through the Decades With Paul Simon as the Guide
Paul Simon has come a long way since he and Art Garfunkel dissolved their duo in 1970.
So far, in fact, that it has become nearly impossible to look back.
The selling point for Mr.
Simon's monthlong engagement at the Paramount, modestly titled "The Concert Event of a Lifetime" and charging up to $100 a ticket, is the latest reunion of Simon and Garfunkel, performing their 1960's hits.
But on Friday night, the Simon and Garfunkel songs were the only ones that begged for the perceptual haze of nostalgia.
Luckily, they were only part of a three-hour show that confirmed Mr.
Simon's inspiration and ingenuity.
Mr.
Garfunkel turned out to be just one of a large supporting cast of Mr.
Simon's collaborators and fellow singers, including Ladysmith Black Mambazo, the Mighty Clouds of Joy, Phoebe Snow and a remarkable band of American, African and Brazilian musicians.
Steve Martin also turned up, with a comedy cameo that laid to rest the sweetly dated "59th Street Bridge Song (Feelin' Groovy)."


Yankees Now Have the Time Off for Regret or Rejoicing
Their most unattractive month will be remembered more than any other.
Their most disturbing stretch of play will be displayed before them over and over when the Yankee season is reviewed.
Five stellar months, one awful month and one disappointing feeling left lingering.
While the Yankees sorted through their lockers yesterday after their 2-1 victory over the Tigers and tried to decide whether to discard the T-shirts and batting gloves, the ritual was symbolic.
When they return to their off-season homes, the Yankee players must decide whether to discard their September memories, or the images that came before then.


Michele Schipani, James Jeffery
Michele Victoria Baruch Schipani, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Ralph M. Baruch of Stanfordville, N.Y., was married yesterday to James Peter Jeffery, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Perry M. Jeffery of Southbury, Conn.
The Rev.
Louis Gioia, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Metropolitan Club in New York.
Cantor Herbert Strauss took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Jeffery is an account supervisor at Grey Advertising in New York.
She graduated from Sweet Briar College and received a master's degree in international communications and law from American University.
Her father founded Viacom International, the New York communications concern, to which he is now a consultant.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Rangers Are Busy Team in the Waiver Market
The Rangers were the busiest team yesterday in the National Hockey League's garage sale, formally known as the waiver draft.
They were involved in three of the six moves, losing two players, Paul Broten and John McIntyre, and picking up one, Mike Hudson.
Neither the Islanders nor the Devils made any changes in the draft, which is designed to strengthen weaker clubs.


Dividend Meetings


CHRONICLE
She has been admired as one of the great stars of the screen for almost three decades, but now it seems LIV ULLMANN is giving up acting to become a director and screenwriter.
"This is not really a switch," she said in a phone interview from Boston the other day as she worked on her screenplay adaptation of "Kristin Lavransdatter," a novel by Sigrid Undset, the Nobel Prize-winning author.
She is set to direct the film, which she describes as "a love story written with the blood and experience of a mature woman." It is to be produced by Norsk Films in Norway in May.


Not an Endorsement
To the Editor:
A graphic accompanying a Sept. 27 analysis of the budget views of the New York City mayoral candidates lists me as a person whose views have influenced Rudolph W. Giuliani.


A Focus on Home, Hearth and Profit
As the magazine industry grimly continues to struggle through a recession that refuses to recede, Jack D. Rehm, the chairman, president and chief executive of the Meredith Corporation, is thinking positively.
His demeanor is in keeping with the typically cheerful spirit of the Des Moines-based company, best known for publishing two magazine industry giants: Better Homes and Gardens, with a circulation of 7.6 million, and The Ladies' Home Journal, with 5.1 million.
In addition, Meredith publishes more than a dozen home-and-hearth magazines like Country Home, Country America, Midwest Living, Traditional Home and American Patchwork and Quilting.


Bridge
Making an "impossible" contract often requires help from the defense as well as skillful declarer play.
On the diagramed deal, played in a money game at the Town Club, at 9 East 86th Street, the South cards were held by Judi Radin, a three-time world champion, and she arrived in a decidedly shaky four-spade contract after West had opening the bidding.
Since the bidding indicated that North must have some ruffing power, a trump lead would have been a good choice.
Instead West led the ace and another club, hoping for a ruff in that suit.
The queen won the second trick, and East of course preserved the jack.


'93 Phils Forged in Ashes of '92
When the Phillies assembled for spring training in 1992 in Clearwater, Fla., they represented the sum total of a four-and-a-half-year effort by General Manager Lee Thomas to firmly put in the foundation of a championship team.
But when a pitch in the first inning of the first game of the regular season found and shattered the styloid bone in Lenny Dykstra's left arm, Thomas's grand plan began to cruelly come apart.


Bills Pointing Fingers, at Themselves
At 6 feet 7 inches, with thick strawberry blond hair, Pete Metzelaars could be the king of the lifeguards.
Instead, he is a 33-year-old journeyman tight end for the Buffalo Bills, living proof that pro football players can come from colleges as small as Wabash.
And living proof that pro football players can point fingers at themselves when things do not go well.
As it turned out, Metzelaars's 8-yard touchdown catch from Jim Kelly in the fourth quarter gave the Bills a 17-14 victory tonight over the Giants.
But as good as Metzelaars felt about that, he felt frustrated by the Bills' sputtering offense.


Policing the Police
Cover-ups.
Botched investigations.
Beatings of the innocent.
The "blue wall of silence." Witnesses before the Mollen Commission on police corruption last week painted a terrifying picture of a see-no-evil, hear-no-evil culture in the New York City Police Department that ostracizes whistle-blowers and protects rogue cops.
If the witnesses can be believed, nothing worked to thwart corruption.
Honest cops were ignored, the Internal Affairs Division protected the department's reputation, the brass was disinterested.
A former police officer, Bernard Cawley, an admitted renegade, beat up suspects and innocent bystanders.
Wasn't he afraid of being arrested, a commission counsel asked.
"Who's going to catch us? We're the police. We're in charge," came the chilling answer.


Clinton Offers Domestic Cures To Californians
President Clinton took his entire domestic agenda on the road today, using a rally and televised question-and-answer session to peddle his health care plan, urge the passage of gun-control legislation and promote a trade agreement that he promised would create, not cost, jobs.
Along the way, Mr.
Clinton also pledged that he would appoint to the Federal bench only judges who would uphold the law allowing abortions, even if they are on record as being personally opposed to it.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; With two days remaining to complete cable deals, broadcast stations try to avoid a disappearing act.
IT won't be a television Armageddon, but the outcome of the battle over the dimly understood issue of retransmission consent is still likely to produce confusion, frustration and probably some outrage for television viewers starting Wednesday.
No one in the television industry knows for sure what is going to happen that day, the deadline for cable television operators to satisfy the owners of broadcast stations with some form of compensation in exchange for the right to keep offering the stations on cable systems.


Braves Win N.L. West


Disappointed Black Voters Could Damage Dinkins's Bid
In a mayoral contest that most experts say is now too close to call, one sure bet is that most black votes will go to David N. Dinkins.
But many black ministers, politicians and neighborhood leaders contend that the Mayor's support among black voters is neither as monolithic nor as enthusiastic as it once was, suggesting that more black people than usual might decide not to vote at all.
To be sure, recent opinion polls show the Mayor drawing support from about 90 percent of black people.
It is not considered likely that black Democrats would switch to vote for Rudolph W. Giuliani.
But some who have informally canvassed black voters suggest there is nonetheless disappointment with Mr.
Dinkins and his nearly four years in office.


With Strike Ended at Post, Job Applications Readied
After months of turmoil, The New York Post begins a new lease on life under the stern golden hand of Rupert Murdoch today, starting with the assembling of a new editorial and business staff to replace members of the Newspaper Guild of New York, whose strike fell apart last week.
At the request of the defeated guild's leadership, John Cardinal O'Connor appealed to Mr.
Murdoch yesterday to be fair to 287 guild members -- reporters, editors and advertising and circulation staff -- who lost their jobs in the climactic confrontation, and may or may not be rehired.


Jennifer Lish, Frederic Schwartz
Jennifer Dawn Lish, a research assistant professor of psychology at the University of Pennsylvania, and Dr.
Frederic Henry Schwartz, an internist with the American Health Care Groups of Pennsylvania, in Philadelphia, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Max Hausen officiated at the Willows in Villanova, Pa.
The bride, 35, is a daughter of Gordon Lish of New York and Frances F. Lish of Burlingame, Calif.
A graduate of Brown University, she received a Ph.D. in clinical psychology from New York University.
Her father is a novelist and an editor at Alfred A. Knopf, the New York publishing house.
Her mother is a retired social worker.


Stephanie Herman, Richard W. Singer
Stephanie Adeline Herman, a daughter of the late Charles and Charlotte Herman, was married yesterday to Richard Warren Singer, a son of Arnold and Rita Singer of New York.
Rabbi Shiara Milgram officiated at the Chapel in the Woods in White Plains.
Mrs.
Singer, who created and teaches Muscle-Ballet in Palo Alto, Calif., a dance-related workout, was a principal dancer with the Ballet Zurich Opernhaus and the Ballet du Grand Theatre de Geneve of Switzerland.
Her parents were real estate brokers in New York.


Largest Publicly Held Hospital Chain Is Planned
Richard L. Scott, a 40-year-old Texas lawyer who started a small Sun Belt hospital group five years ago by buying a pair of down-at-the-heels hospitals in El Paso, emerged yesterday as the head of the world's largest investor-owned hospital group.
Mr.
Scott's Columbia Healthcare Corporation and the HCA-Hospital Corporation of America announced on Saturday that they had agreed to merge in a tax-free exchange of shares.
It would be the seventh-largest merger in any American industry since 1981.


Gangs in Sarajevo Worry Diplomats
Outside the main surgical clinic at Kosevo Hospital, and along the corridor to the intensive care unit, men wearing steel helmets and carrying rifles and bazookas stand guard 24 hours a day.
Nobody passes without their consent.
Sometimes, even surgeons are turned back.
The men with guns are protecting a patient shot through the heart a week ago, a man who has received the kind of attention accorded to none of the thousands of wounded people who passed through here during Sarajevo's 18 months under siege.
He has been attended by the city's top doctors, and powerful military and Government officials have visited his bedside.


Janice E. Cohen, Jeffrey Beckmen
Janice Ellen Cohen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard S. Cohen of Martinsville, N.J., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Thomas Beckmen, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Thomas Beckmen of Pacific Palisades, Calif.
Rabbi Arnold Gluck performed the ceremony at the Fiddler's Elbow Country Club in Bedminster, N.J.
Mrs.
Beckmen, 27, is an associate in merchant banking at the Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
She graduated from Duke University, from which she and her husband also received M.B.A. degrees.


Eva Normann, Charles Fishman
Eva Martina Normann, the daughter of Inge Normann of New Windsor, N.Y., and the late Walter J. Normann, was married yesterday to Charles Lee Fishman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard H. Fishman of Hartsdale, N.Y.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbi Amiel Wohl at Temple Israel of New Rochelle, N.Y.
Mrs.
Fishman, 30, is an account executive in New York for Cable and Wireless Communications, a long distance telephone company.


Braves Won't Let Phils Spoil Party, for Now
The Braves know what the goal is.
They know what the impediments are -- guys named Dykstra, Daulton, Hollins and Kruk.
But most of the Braves spent more time in their champagne-soaked clubhouse celebrating their third consecutive National League West championship tonight than they they did worrying about the National League East champion Philadelphia Phillies.


Gay Parents: Living in Fear
When it comes to preserving the two-parent family, some judges are pretty picky.
In Virginia, a judge recently took a child from two parents who loved him and placed him with his single grandmother.
In Oklahoma last week an appeals court judge upheld a ruling that took two girls away from another such family.
The reason?
In both cases, the parents were the same gender.
In the Florida case, the judge said the mother's relationship with her female partner was immoral.
In the Oklahoma case, the judge cited "expert" testimony from a previous case that the child of such a family "might encounter future prejudice by a disapproving society."


Argentine President's Party Leads in Vote for Congress
The Peronist Party of President Carlos Saul Menem seemed headed for victory in mid-term Congressional elections today and the winner over the opposition Radical Party in Buenos Aires, its traditional stronghold.
With more than half of the polling stations reporting, early results showed the Peronists leading in the capital, 33.1 percent to 29.5 percent.
Nationally, as expected, the Peronists won about 40 percent of the votes, compared with 33 percent for the Radicals, according to early returns.


Annette Giacometti, Sculptor's Model, 70
Annette Giacometti, who often modeled for her husband, the Swiss sculptor Alberto Giacometti, died on Sept. 19 in Paris, the British newspaper The Independent reported last week.
She was 70.
Her death was announced by the Alberto and Annette Giacometti Association, which did not disclose the cause.


Art World Is Not Amused by Critique
The art world, which is more accustomed to complaining about being ignored by the media than being attacked by it, is still smarting from an unusually biting segment aired two weeks ago on the CBS news magazine "60 Minutes." Entitled "Yes . . . but Is It Art?" the segment, which featured Morley Safer, questioned the very premises of abstract art.
It began with Mr.
Safer quoting P. T. Barnum's legendary statement about a sucker being born every minute.
Mr.
Safer went on to say that most contemporary art was "worthless junk" given value only by the "hype" of critics, auction houses and dealers committed to misleading the public.
As talk of the segment spread through the art world, the furor only grew.
Museum curators, dealers, auction-house experts and collectors are scrambling to get their hands on a tape of the show.


Corrections
A report in the Chronicle column on Sept. 7 about the 1993 Hugo Awards misspelled the name of the author of the book "A Fire in the Deep," which shared top honors with "Doomsday Book" by Connie Willis, for achievement in science fiction and fantasy.
He is Vernor Vinge.


Reactions Are Wary as Dinkins Goes After Jewish Voters
Mayor David N. Dinkins courted the Jewish voters who are crucial to his re-election yesterday, evoking blacks' and Jews' shared history of struggle against discrimination.
But his reception was mixed, ranging from friendly to wary to hostile.
In a speech at Temple Shaaray Tefila at 79th Street and Second Avenue, Mr.
Dinkins took responsibility for the slow police response to the 1991 unrest in Crown Heights, called the stabbing of a rabbinical student there "a lynching" and issued an all-purpose plea for forgiveness "for what has been done wrong."


Clintons' Money Guru Fancies Little Stocks
In the world of money management, there are clients who are big and hand over billions to invest.
And there are clients who are glitzy -- Hollywood stars, for instance.
But there is probably no more prestigious client than the President of the United States.
Bill Clinton's family, one of modest means as Presidential families go, has chosen Joseph C. McNay of Boston, a Yale- and Wharton-educated money manager who is perhaps best known for taking aggressive positions with small and medium growth stocks.
He has made big money for institutional clients that include Wellesley College, Princeton University and the Winthrop Rockefeller Foundation of Little Rock.
Yogurt and Other Couture
Now he will be managing the President's portfolio, which consists of a few mutual and money market funds, and the larger account of Hillary Rodham Clinton, a more diversified portfolio that includes shares in Wal-Mart, TCBY Enterprises and Liz Claiborne.
The President's portfolio is worth less than $125,000; Mrs.
Clinton's is valued somewhere between $500,000 and $1 million.
The Clintons have a maximum of $75,000 invested on behalf of their daughter, Chelsea.


A Season When Quick Trips Aren't; Autumn in New York: Trying to Get There With No Detour
When horn-honking, engine-revving, cut-'em-off-at-every-opportunity New York drivers look back on September 1993, what comes to mind almost sounds like a tin-eared rewrite of a song from the musical "The Fantasticks": Try to remember the kind of September when traffic flowed smoothly and roads were not under construction.
Mark Kulewicz tried to remember that far back, but could not.


Season Is History, So Is Stottlemyre
Mel Stottlemyre, the Mets' pitching coach for the last 10 years, always has viewed the season's final day as awkward.
"You wonder who will be back and who won't," he said.
This morning, he walked into the Mets' clubhouse at Joe Robbie Stadium to find himself one of the victims.
The Mets not only fired Stottlemyre, they also reassigned their bench coach, Darrell Johnson, to a scouting role and asked waivers on two players -- third baseman Chico Walker and outfielder Cedric Landrum.


Allen Goes It Alone With a 94-Yard Return
Huffing and puffing in the middle of a criss-crossing-the-field interception run that would become a 94-yard touchdown but was still 40 yards from the Jets' goal line, the Eagles' Eric Allen was counting opponents today.
"Where was the Jets' tight end?" he asked himself as he carried the ball.
And then, all of a sudden, he heard the voice of teammate Ben Smith.


Ohio State Surprise Team at Top of Ranking
Ohio State -- not Florida State or Miami -- is ranked first in The New York Times's first computer rankings of the college football season.
The Buckeyes, unbeaten in four games, were 51-3 victors over Northwestern on Saturday.


Style Editor Is Appointed For The Times Magazine
Holly Brubach, a fashion writer for The New Yorker, has been appointed style editor of The New York Times Magazine, effective next year.
Ms.
Brubach, who is 39, succeeds Carrie Donovan, who has held the position since 1977.
Ms.
Donovan, 65, will retire from regular duties, but will remain as a consultant producing the twice-yearly Fashions of The Times sections and participating in other projects.


2 Questions for the Yankees
The Yankees ended their season triumphantly when Mike Stanley ripped a run-scoring single off Tom Bolton in the bottom of the ninth inning to score pinch-runner Spike Owen and vault them to a 2-1 decision over the Tigers at Yankee Stadium.
"That," said Manager Buck Showalter, "is the way the season should end."


Ana Hernandez, Clifford Nelson
Ana J. Hernandez, a daughter of Emelia Celarie of Freeport, L.I., was married yesterday to Clifford S. Nelson, a son of Vita and Lester Nelson of Harrison, N.Y.
The ceremony was performed by Rabbi Stephen Klein at Le Chateau in South Salem, N.Y.
Mrs.
Nelson is a legal assistant at the New York law firm of Chadbourne &amp; Parke.
She graduated from Skidmore College, as did her husband.
Her mother is a retired nurse who operated a medical clinic in Rosario de la Paz, El Salvador.


Food Store Owners Who Keep Cats Are Breaking the Law
To the Editor:
It is a violation of the New York City Code for food establishments to keep animals.
This includes retail food stores, delicatessens, grocery stores that make sandwiches or have salad bars, and restaurants.
And yet many of these stores keep cats as mousers with the full knowledge that they are breaking the law.


The Jolt That Tourist Deaths Produce
To the Editor:
I applaud "A Murderous Double Standard" (editorial, Sept. 23), which decries our unwillingness to confront the violence in our inner cities until it spills out, as in the murder of foreign tourists.
I can't imagine that if suburban schoolchildren lived in daily fear of death or maiming by crossfire from semiautomatics, we would not find the commitment and resources to end this horror.


Alexander Gralnick, Founder of Hospital And Psychiatrist, 80
Dr.
Alexander Gralnick, the founder and psychiatrist in chief of High Point Hospital in Port Chester, N.Y., died on Thursday at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 80 and lived in Port Chester and West Palm Beach, Fla.
The cause was complications of heart-bypass surgery, his family said.


Florida State Is Just One Of the Worries for Miami
The annual Armageddon between Florida State and Miami, scheduled on Saturday at Tallahassee, now has the extra seasoning of a quarterback controversy.
Disappointed by an offense that has sputtered, if not gasped, this season, Miami Coach Dennis Erickson lost his patience last Saturday and replaced his No. 1 quarterback, Frank Costa, with his No. 2, Ryan Collins.


Foreign Stocks Proved Wise Choice in Quarter
Foreign stock prices posted impressive gains in the third quarter, aided by falling European interest rates and dynamic growth in a number of the Pacific Rim's smaller economies.
The improvement on foreign equity markets stood in contrast to what took place at home, where market averages, sloshing around at record highs, managed only a marginal increase.


'Sin' Taxes
While increases in "sin taxes" on alcohol and cigarettes have raised revenue in the region in the past five years, officials in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut predict that declining consumption means this form of taxation will eventually reach the point of diminishing returns.
States have long relied on such levies as politically painless: Cigarette taxes have almost quadrupled in New York in the last ten years and excise taxes on beverages have risen steadily in the region.
President Clinton has said he wants to raise the Federal tax on cigarettes to help pay for his overhaul of the health care system.


ATLANTIC DIVISION
Even if their Paramount parent wasn't the object of a Wall Street bidding war, this would be a season of transition for the Rangers.
With Mike Keenan as coach, the roster may eventually evolve from its current mixture of styles into a united bunch of board bangers who initiate contact first and chase pucks later.
Keenan's better teams put gloves in faces and play three-hour games.
Adam Graves should fit in well.
The young Mark Messier of the 1980's would have, too; the older Mark Messier of today may or may not.
The Keenan-Messier mixture could create a chemical reaction, with good or bad results.
Another strong personality is Mike Gartner, the new president of the Players Association.


Jacalyn Levine, Andrew Blume
Jacalyn Ruth Levine, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanley P. Levine of West Newton, Mass., was married yesterday to Andrew Charles Blume, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Ralph S. Blume of New York.
The Rev.
Thomas F. Pike, an Episcopal priest, and Rabbi Burt A. Siegel jointly officiated at the Vale, a historic house in Waltham, Mass.
Mrs.
Blume graduated from Bennington College and received a master's degree in library science from Simmons College.
She was until recently the assistant manager of the gift shop at the Harvard University Art Museums in Cambridge, Mass.


Dance in Review
'Thicker Than Water'  Stephan Koplowitz and Company Bessie Schonberg Theater
Stephan Koplowitz's "Thicker Than Water," presented on Thursday night, is about a family so ordinary that one is immediately suspicious.
Will Simon, the father, turn out to be a child molester and his daughter, Melissa the victim?
Will the son, Matthew, step out of a closet as a proud young gay man midway through the piece, and will his mother, Audrey, be revealed as a soul-crippling harridan?


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; These Jets Earned More Than a Loss
FOR the Jets, it was a mid-term exam.
Unlike other years, they didn't flunk.
But they didn't make the honor roll either.
Give them a B, as in Boomer, as in brilliant and as in beastly.
"If we don't have two late turnovers in their red zone, that's at least two field goals, and we win going away," Boomer Esiason was saying now.
"But we let them back in it when I throw two interceptions. No excuse for that. Two horrible interceptions."


Viacom Is Said to Seek Help From Nynex on Bid
In seeking a partner to help increase its bid for Paramount Communications, Viacom Inc. has zeroed in on the Nynex Corporation, the company that owns New York Telephone and New England Telephone, according to two executives with knowledge of the discussions.
Spokesmen for Viacom and Nynex declined to comment.
Throughout last week, Viacom's chairman, Sumner M. Redstone, said he was talking with telephone and cable companies about minority investments in Viacom to give his company a cash infusion.
That would allow Viacom to bolster its bid for Paramount without increasing its debt load.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
President Salinas of Mexico announced a complex plan to raise pay and bolster his nation's economy.
His proposals address concerns in the United States that Americans will be displaced by cheaper Mexican labor.  [ Page D1. ]


Dance in Review
'Blue's Yellow Shadow'  Irene Hultman Performance Space 122
It soon became clear that "Blue's Yellow Shadow," which Irene Hultman presented on Friday night, was an inventive work for three fine dancers: Chrysa Parkinson, Michael Whaites and Ms.
Hultman.


Consolidation at Ross Roy
The Ross Roy Group said on Friday that it would rename itself Ross Roy Communications Inc. and consolidate all of its operating units into one organization.
"I want to compete on the outside, not on the inside," said Peter Mills, Ross Roy's chairman and chief executive in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., adding, "There has been a bit too much internal focus on profit centers here."


F.C.C.'s Temporary Chief Proves More Than a Fill-In
Many others might have felt resentful or even insulted.
But at the age of 79, James H. Quello had few illusions about the terms on which he took over the Federal Communications Commission in February.
He would be a caretaker, running the agency only until President Clinton nominated a permanent chairman.
Even though Mr.
Quello is a Democrat and had served as a commissioner for 19 years, it was clear the White House wanted someone younger.


Dance in Review
Elinor Coleman Dance  Ensemble  Dia Center for the Arts
Elinor Coleman is a choreographer out of touch with her material, to judge by a program presented by the Elinor Coleman Dance Ensemble on Friday night.


How to Put Single Payer in Clinton Health Plan; More Loss of Privacy
To the Editor:
Once we have universal health care, who will have access to our medical files?
Only the Government?
Only the Government and our present employer?
Or anyone who has the means?
The medical history for ourselves and our families will become part of the great information data base without our control or consent.
Your credit history is easily accessed today.
Tomorrow a stranger will know when you had your last flu shot and more.
JAMES .
SCHAFER  Salem, Ore., Sept. 23, 1993


Logitek Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


U.N. IS EXTENDING FORCE IN CROATIA
After winning strong backing from the United States and its major allies in his successful showdown with the Russian Parliament, President Boris N. Yeltsin today abruptly dropped his opposition to an American-backed plan to put more pressure on President Slobodan Milosevic of Serbia to end the civil war in Croatia.
As a result, the Security Council voted unanimously today to extend for six more months the mandate for the 22,000 United Nations peacekeeping forces deployed in Croatia, Bosnia and Herzegovina and Macedonia.
But the Council said it was unlikely to relax the trade embargo against Serbia and Montenegro, the remaining republics in the Yugoslav Federation, until they persuade Croatia's ethnic Serbs to make peace with the Croatian Government in Zagreb.


Observer; They Ought to Bottle It
I like New York in fall.
How about you?
Set to a Gershwin tune, the words are running through my mind as the car plunges wildly up Hudson Street.
I love driving up Hudson Street.
It's urban rodeo.
An immense asphalt wave hits the front end.
Only the seat belt keeps me from flying through the roof.


Too Rich a Soil: Scientists Find the Flaw That Undid the Biosphere
THE major flaw in the $150 million Biosphere 2 project has been discovered by a leading geochemist and his student, raising questions of whether the venture in the Arizona desert will be corrected in the interest of serious science or will be doomed to repeated cycles of failure in the years ahead.
In theory, the experiment is to last 100 years.
A mysterious decline in oxygen during the two-year trial run of the project endangered the lives of crew members and forced its leaders to inject huge amounts of oxygen, spoiling the idea of a self-contained ecosystem that was supposedly a way to learn about living in space.


A Prima Ballerina Follows the Path Of 2 Creators of Modern Dance
Natalia Makarova said farewell to dance in 1989 in a performance at the Kirov Ballet in what was then Leningrad, the company and the city in which she became a prima ballerina.
Since then, she has acted in Britain and in Russia and appeared with her 15-year-old son, Andrusha, in a television documentary on great train routes.
But tonight, as part of an opening-night gala that begins the Martha Graham Dance Company's two-week season at City Center, Miss Makarova returns to the dance stage in a decided novelty.
She will dance "The Incense," a solo created by Ruth St.
Denis in 1906, in which a woman becomes the incense that she burns.
Two days before her performance, Miss Makarova put the finishing touches on the solo in an hour of intense and probing rehearsal.
Her sari costume was unavailable, so she put on a black leotard and practice skirt with a colored scarf tied at her waist.
"I have a whole library of scarves," she said gaily in her colorfully accented English.
"I should open a store." Haunted by a Certain Swan
Someone handed her a tin mixing bowl that was close to the shape she would hold in performance.
Then she began to move, watched intently by Peggy Lyman, a former Graham dancer who performed the solo in 1985.
What emerged was not St.
Denis, Graham or Miss Lyman, but a figure of mysterious passion and simplicity.


Enviromint Holdings Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Puzzle in Somalia: the U.S. Goal
The ill-fated raid on a stronghold of the faction leader Mohammed Farah Aidid casts the United States more than ever in the role of combatant in Somalia, raising doubts about its stated strategy to shift the focus to a political solution for the country.
Faced in recent weeks with mounting Congresssional opposition to the presence of American troops in Somalia, Administration officials said last week that the United States was moving away from the purely military goal of capturing and punishing General Aidid.
Last month, Secretary of State Warren Christopher delivered a paper to Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali of the United Nations detailing initiatives that would concentrate instead on political reconciliation.


Court to Consider Repeal of Stock Plan Loophole
Accepting a case that is likely to touch a nerve with many taxpayers this year, the Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether the retroactive repeal by Congress of a tax loophole in 1987 was so unfair as to violate the constitutional due process rights of taxpayers who had relied on the provision.
The budget package that Congress passed two months ago raised income tax rates retroactively to the beginning of the year.
Congress has often made retroactive changes in the tax code, and the Supreme Court has generally upheld the changes against constitutional challenge.


Denis J. McMahon, 85, I.R.S. District Director
Denis J. McMahon, a retired Internal Revenue Service official in Manhattan, died on Saturday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center.
He was 85 and lived in Manhattan.
He suffered a long illness, his family said.


Ferrofluidics Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


SHOWDOWN IN MOSCOW: Recap; The Clock Runs Out For Revolt In Moscow
5:20 A.M.
Monday: (10:20 P.M. Sunday, Eastern time) Troops loyal to President Boris N. Yeltsin are deployed around the Kremlin and the Defense Ministry general staff building.
Fighting dies down at the headquarters of Russian television, and the building remains in the hands of pro-Yeltsin forces.
6:45: Yeltsin representatives hold bitter talks with envoys from Parliament as troops enter Moscow.
The meeting ends without agreement.


Napco Security Systems Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Year to June 30


Man Admits Molesting 28 Children While a Priest
James R. Porter pleaded guilty today to sexually molesting 28 children while he was a Roman Catholic priest in the 1960's.
The case has brought national attention to the problem of pedophilia in the clergy.
A group of men and women who said they were abused by Mr.
Porter when they were children watched in Bristol County Superior Court in New Bedford, about 50 miles south of Boston, as he pleaded guilty to 41 counts of sexual molestation.


A Promotion At Times Unit
The New York Times Company announced yesterday that Elden A. Hale Jr. had been appointed to the new position of executive vice president for programming and development for The New York Times Broadcasting Group.
Mr.
Hale, 46, is currently president and general manager of WNEP-TV, a television station owned by the Times Company that serves the Wilkes-Barre and Scranton area of Pennsylvania.


Analogic Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Corrections
The Votes in Congress chart in the Metro Report on Sunday misstated the positions of the senators from Connecticut, New Jersey and New York on an amendment regarding abortions.
Senators who voted for the amendment supported an unsuccessful effort to allow the Federal Government to pay for abortions for most poor women.
The five Democratic senators from the three states voted in favor of the measure, not against it.
The only Republican senator from the area, Alfonse M. D'Amato of New York, voted against it, not in favor.


Classical Music in Review
New Jersey Symphony Orchestra  Count Basie Theater
At the last minute, the opening concert series of the New Jersey Symphony's 71st season became something more: the beginning of Zdenek Macal's tenure as the orchestra's music director.
The Czechoslovak-born Mr.
Macal, who also leads the Milwaukee Symphony and has been the New Jersey's artistic adviser since Hugh Wolff's departure last year, assumed his expanded responsibilities on Wednesday.


Lawyers Make Closing Arguments in Case of Strangled Youth
Only the inconsistent, sometimes contradictory statements of three juveniles who confessed to murder can tie James P. Wanger to the strangling death of a friend, his lawyer argued today in his closing statement.
The lawyer, Anthony J. Pope Jr., said that no physical evidence linked his client, who is now 19, to the Feb.  16, 1992, killing of Robert A. Solimine Jr.
The police never found the weapon, a garrote fashioned from an electrical cord and shoelaces, Mr.
Pope said.
Nor did Mr.
Wanger have mud on his sneakers, like the mud on the sneakers of the other three juveniles, which were matched to prints found near the slaying scene at a Clifton school parking lot.


Florio: Attacking Whitman's Credibility
Candidate: Jim Florio Producer: Grunwald, Eskew, Donilon. Washington.


Advantage Health Corp.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Cable Car Beverage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Alwin Nikolais Is Paid Tribute For His Life and His Many Arts
Alwin Nikolais, who devised his own dazzling form of multi-media dance, was honored last evening in a memorial program at the Sylvia and Danny Kaye Playhouse at Hunter College.
Through words and slide projections, Mr.
Nikolais, who died on May 8 at the age of 82, was remembered as a dancer, choreographer, teacher, designer and composer of electronic music.
For more than an hour, Murray Louis, the choreographer who was Mr.
Nikolais's artistic collaborator and companion, showed slides and commented on them.
His presentation began with portraits of Mr.
Nikolais's German-born mother and Russian-born father, and the bakery they ran in Southington, Conn.
Baby pictures of Mr.
Nikolais gave way to glimpses of him as a young dancer.
Peering at one of them, Mr.
Louis remarked: "Look at that flexed toe. Isn't it wonderful?"


Wedding Information Network Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Casablanca Journal; World's Tallest Minaret, but Short on Popularity
When Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel made a brief stop here in September, he was whisked off to visit a new seafront mosque that expresses what some see as the gargantuan self-obsession of King Hassan II, and the Moroccan ruler's wary attempts to trace a path of reform for the country he has ruled for three decades.
For some, the King Hassan II mosque is the work of a supreme megalomaniac.
For others, it is a supreme expression of devotion to Allah.
But however it is interpreted, the mosque was clearly designed so it cannot be ignored.


Royals Drop a Coach
The Kansas City Royals' pitching coach, GUY HANSEN, who clashed with Manager HAL McRAE, was dismissed yesterday.
BRUCE KISON, who had been bullpen coach, was named pitching coach. (AP)


Marino's Fast Start Drops Redskins to 1-3
The starkest difference tonight between the Miami Dolphins and Washington Redskins was at quarterback.
Miami's Dan Marino was starting his 144th consecutive game and has Hall of Fame credentials.
Washington's Cary Conklin was making just his second professional start, and it was one he would not finish.
The Redskins' plight was exacerbated by the conspicuous lack of a pass rush, with their best pass rusher, Charles Mann, out two to six weeks with arthroscopic surgery performed on his left knee yesterday.


Ways to Make Learning Feel More Like a Game
ONE reason adults who are also parents come up with for buying a home computer is that it will give their children advantages at school and in their computer-dominated futures.
Their children, by and large, want to play games.


Georgia Bonded Fibers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Harlyn Products Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Classical Music in Review
Orchestra of St. Luke's  Avery Fisher Hall
One of the happier sights of the new musical season so far was that of Roger Norrington conducting the Orchestra of St.
Luke's on Wednesday evening, looking fit, vigorous and sassy, however his battle with cancer may fare at the moment.
Mr.
Norrington has yet to make a sustained impact on the musical life of New York, but his provocative presence is always welcome.


English-Born Auto Planner Will Be New Ford Chairman
Alexander J. Trotman, an English-born car and truck planner who spent most of his career with the Ford Motor Company overseas, will become chairman and chief executive on Nov. 1, replacing Harold A. Poling, who is retiring, Mr.
Poling announced today.
Mr.
Trotman, now president and chief operating officer of Ford's worldwide automotive group, will also hold the post of president of the company, which is now unoccupied.


Spinnaker Software Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Rangers on Solid Ice Now, Asserts Messier
When Mark Messier looked around the Rangers' locker room last October, he didn't get this sensation.
There was no togetherness then, little camaraderie, an absence of team spirit that struck him, even if he hesitated to voice the words at the time.
"I don't really know how to explain it," said Messier, the Rangers' captain.
"There's just such a great feeling on the team this year as opposed to last year. This year, everybody is pulling for each other. There is something more gratifying about it. We have this group of guys, and they're all committed. I'm really looking forward to starting the season."


Wordstar International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Inventronics Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


COLLEGE SOCCER REPORT
Hartwick College
Despite only one appearance all season by their best player, Matt Kmosko, who has a knee injury, the Warriors from Oneonta in upstate New York are back on the national scene for the first time since their last National Collegiate Athletic Association appearance four years ago, when they lost in the first round.
Coached by Jimmy Lennox, who led Hartwick to the national title in 1977 in his second year on the job, the Warriors have had some tough times in recent years after five Final Four appearances from 1976 through 1985.


TPEX Exploration reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Nynex Aid For Viacom In Its Bid
Adding to his growing war chest, Viacom's chairman, Sumner M. Redstone, announced yesterday that the Nynex Corporation had agreed to invest $1.2 billion in his entertainment company to give him additional ammunition to increase his $7.4 billion bid for Paramount Communications Inc. -- and possibly top a competing offer from QVC Network Inc.
Though Paramount has technically agreed to merge with Viacom, the deal is in jeopardy as long as QVC, a home shopping service that would like to get into the motion picture business, has the more attractive offer on the table.


A Snapshot of the Continent's Flora, Invaders and All
BECAUSE of the sheer immensity of the task, botanists have long been thwarted in their attempt to compile a full listing of North America's floral riches.
But a start has at last been made with the publication this week of the first two volumes of a work that aims to describe all of the 20,000 wild plant species in the United States and Canada.
The work, "Flora of North America North of Mexico," describes the startling inroads made by foreign invaders, which now comprise one-fifth to one-third of all North American plant species.
Many of these "exotic" plants spread so easily that along with native weeds, which account for 5 to 10 percent of species, their physical extent is proportionally greater than their species numbers.
And because exotics and native weeds include some of the showiest and most conspicuous species, their visual impact eclipses that of other plants in many parts of the region.


Triton Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


International Microcomputer Software Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Vestaur Securities Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Triton Energy Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


How to Put Single Payer in Clinton Health Plan
To the Editor:
It seems to me, as a physician in a small group private practice for 20 years, that there might be a compromise position between the advocates of a Canadian-style single-payer system and the Clinton Administration's idea of managed competition.


Moving a Mountain to Widen a Parkway


McEnroe Passes on Davis Cup Captaincy
Just a week ago, John McEnroe described himself as the best candidate to replace Tom Gorman as captain of the United States Davis Cup team.
But yesterday, just a week before the United States Tennis Association was expected to name its selection for the coveted position, McEnroe, citing "personal considerations," abruptly removed himself from contention.
The U.S.T.A. president, J. Howard (Bumpy) Frazer, who recently insisted that he was not apprehensive about considering the volatile 34-year-old New Yorker for the post, received news of McEnroe's change of heart yesterday in a phone call and fax from a Los Angeles publicist.


INSIDE
House Minority Leader Plans to Step Down
Representative Robert H. Michel, the House Republican leader, announced that he would retire next year, a decision that could clear the way for the more confrontational style personified by Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia.
Page A24.
Corruption Files Kept Secret
Some corruption charges against New York police officials were kept from prosecutors, in violation of policy, a commission was told.
Page B1.
Poverty in U.S.
Rises Again
The Census Bureau reported that the number of poor people grew three times as fast as the overall population in the last year.
Page A20.
Nynex Joins Paramount Bid
Nynex, the phone company, will invest $1.2 billion in Viacom, providing more money for Viacom's battle with QVC to acquire Paramount.
Page D1.


Lemieux Uncertain
MARIO LEMIEUX has stepped up his off-ice rehabilitation program following back surgery but his return to the Pittsburgh Penguins' lineup remains uncertain.
Lemieux has skated only once since undergoing arthroscopic surgery -- his second back operation in four years -- in July.
He has not said when he will skate again.


American League Championship Matchups
ON THE MOUND Jack McDowell, Alex Fernandez, Wilson Alvarez and Jason Bere were not supposed to resemble the celebrated quartet that starts for the Atlanta Braves, but they have quickly become the strongest rotation in the American League.
McDowell is a 20-game winner for the second successive season, Fernandez blossomed into an 18-game winner and the youngest pair, Alvarez and Bere, have been hotter than the other two in the past seven weeks, winning 14 and losing none of their last 15 starts combined.
All four are power pitchers, with Bere, a 22-year-old rookie, registering the best strikeout ratio.
Bere was a 36th- round draft pick in 1990, and was not a starter in his first minor league season.
He has developed rapidly, compiling a 2.19 e.r.a. since the all-star break.
The development of Bere and Alvarez have relegated Tim Belcher and Kirk McCaskill, two veteran starters, to relief roles.
Roberto Hernandez has been an effective closing relief pitcher, gaining 38 saves in 43 chances.
In the field As much as they like to run, the Blue Jays have to be wary of Ron Karkovice, who has thrown out 48 of 96 would-be basestealers.
"You can never steal on Karkovice," Sparky Anderson, the Detroit manager, said.
"The only chance you have is if a pitcher allows you a chance and the White Sox usually don't allow you a chance. McDowell is the only one you can take a chance on. Karkovice is the best receiver in either league."
The catcher is the first cog in the smooth defense the White Sox boast up the middle.
Shortstop Ozzie Guillen and second baseman Joey Cora form a good double-play combination and provide good coverage in the middle of the infield.
Lance Johnson covers a lot of ground in center field.
Robin Ventura is one of the best defensive third basemen in the league.
Frank Thomas, the regular first baseman, very likely will be the d.h.
His replacement, Dan Pasqua is better defensively.
At the plate The series could come down to one simple development: Will Frank Thomas have a healthy left arm to swing at Toronto pitches, or will he continue to have the problem that plagued him in his final couple of weeks?
Thomas injured his left triceps trying to catch a foul ball Sept. 19 and slumped badly afterward.
Sitting out five games before playing Sunday, the big first baseman hit no home runs in his last 15 games and drove in two runs in his last 11.
If he is healthy and hitting like the player who batted .316, socked 41 home runs and knocked in 128 runs, the Blue Jays won't let him hit.
That is, they most likely will pitch around him.
"For me, I wouldn't let Frank Thomas get close to a fastball," said the general manager of an American League team not in the playoff.
"Walk him. The Blue Jays' pitchers have to pitch around him. You can't let Thomas beat you."
If the Blue Jays employ that strategy, Robin Ventura (22 home runs, 93 r.b.i.) becomes the key run producer.
If Thomas is the d.h.
George Bell or Bo Jackson won't be.
But neither has hit against Toronto this season (Bell .065, Jackson .048, so that may not be much of a loss).
Tim Raines, the leadoff batter, and Lance Johnson are .300 hitters.
Off the bench Manager Gene Lamont probably will use his bench more than the Blue Jays, but probably not much more.
He has spelled Tim Raines in left with Bo Jackson, and he has started Dan Pasqua in right for Ellis Burks.
Craig Grebeck also gets an occasional infield start.
George Bell, if he is not the designated hitter; Jackson, Pasqua, Warren Newson and Ivan Calderon could hit for someone if the situation calls for it.
Steve Sax is the invisible man.
Blue Jays: On the mound The pitcher who should have been the Blue Jays' best this season pitched in New York instead.
They let Jimmy Key leave as a free agent, and their starting rotation suffered.
Dave Stewart, a veteran of 14 post-season starts with Oakland, has received the assignment of leading the staff, not just because of his experience but because of his recent run of effective pitching.
After struggling to an 8-8 record, he reeled off four consecutive victories.
Juan Guzman (14-3) hasn't lost since July 20.
He has won 7 of his 13 starts since, and the Blue Jays have won three others.
Pat Hentgen, in his first year in the starting rotation, was the team's No. 1 winner with a 19-9 record but, like the other starters, had a high earned run average, 3.87.
Guzman finished at 3.99, Stewart at 4.44 and Todd Stottlemyre (the staff enigma with an 11-12 record) at 4.84.
Jack Morris can't pitch because of a torn elbow ligament, but he couldn't have helped, based on his 7-12, 6.19 e.r.a.
Duane Ward, with 45 saves, has done as well as Tom Henke, his predecessor, ever did as the closer, but no one stepped in to take Ward's spot as as the setup reliever to the closer.
In the field Pat Borders is no Ron Karkovice--he's borderline, a general manager said, jokingly or otherwise--but the Blue Jays' pitchers do a better job than most holding runners on.
The rest of the defense doesn't have to apologize to anyone.
Roberto Alomar is as good a second baseman as there is, and Devon White has the same standing among center fielders Rickey Henderson, snatch catch and all, catches everything on the left field side of center that White doesn't get.
In other words, the Blue Jays are well covered on grass (Comiskey Park) and on artificial turf (SkyDome).
Tony Fernandez, who revived after the Mets traded him back to Toronto, doesn't have the range at shortstop he did in his first seven years with the Blue Jays, but he gets around well enough.
Ed Sprague, in his first year as the third baseman, can be vulnerable, having committed 17 errors this season.
At the plate To beat the Blue Jays, Sparky Anderson says, the White Sox must stop Rickey Henderson and Paul Molitor.
"They don't have to stop the other guys," Anderson said.
"If Henderson and Molitor have good series, they're going to make monsters out of the others. You have to contain them, and I haven't seen anyone contain Molitor all season."
Molitor, who replaced Dave Winfield, he of the World Series-winning hit, outdid Winfield during the season, batting .332, hitting 22 home runs and driving in 111 runs.
During one late-season month, Aug. 15 to Sept. 15, the designated hitter batted .405 and knocked in 27 runs in 28 games.
Henderson, on the other hand, batted only .216 after joining Toronto, highly uncharacteristic for a player who always has played extremely well upon going to a new team.
"This is national attention for him," Anderson said.
"I'm scared of guys who respond to national attention and he does."
The "other guys" Anderson refered to include Roberto Alomar (.323), Joe Carter (33 homers, 120 r.b.i.) and John Olerud, whose .402 average of July 31 dropped to .363 because he batted only .290 since then.
Not to be overlooked are Devon White (.272), Tony Fernandez (.304) and Ed Sprague (73 r.b.i.).
Off the bench With the lineup he has, Manager Cito Gaston doesn't have much need for a bench.
Who would he hit for?
That's why the Blue Jays don't need the kind of pinch-hitters they used to have, people like Pat Tabler and Rance Mulliniks.
Turner Ward was the team's busiest pinch-hitter during the season, and he batted six times.
No one had more than one hit as a pinch-hittter.
Nor does Gaston have any need to substitute defensively.
What the Blue Jays show at the start of a game is pretty much what they'll still be showing at the end.
Pitching--edge to White Sox; Defense-edge to White Sox; Hitting-edge to Blue Jays; Bench--no edge


CHRONICLE
And then there's GRETA LOELL, one of those people behind the scenes who without writing a word, commissioning an article or editing a single sentence help make the wheels of publishing turn.
Until Friday, when she retired, Mrs.
Loell was the receptionist who also ran the switchboard at The Nation magazine, a job she had held for 22 years.


A Take-Out Lunch at the New Prospect Park Wildlife Center


Dinkins or Giuliani? Voters Equally Unimpressed
Four weeks before Election Day, the race between Mayor David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani remains a tossup.
Fewer than half of voters trust either candidate to deal with New York City's problems and nearly half are concerned that each might make serious mistakes, according to the latest New York Times / WCBS-TV News poll.
In a bitter rematch between two well-known contenders, the electorate is strikingly unenthusiastic about both.
Just 38 percent of voters expressed a favorable opinion of the Democratic Mayor, while a scant 31 percent had a favorable view of his Republican-Liberal challenger.
About as many voters viewed each candidate unfavorably as viewed him favorably.


Crusader Remains
In 1179, Saladin, the Sultan of Egypt and Syria, led his troops in an attack against the Crusaders' largest fortress.
In late August, the Muslim forces overran the fortress in Jerusalem, killing about 800 of its 1,500 defenders.
For centuries, the soldiers' remains lay hidden in the ruins.
Now a team of Israeli archeologists has reported finding a skeleton that appears to be one of the fortress's defenders.
They believe that this will prove to be the first documented discovery of a Crusader soldier at an archeological site.


Keycorp-Society Deal Is Merger of Equals
Some mergers are initiated by high-priced investment bankers or well-connected lawyers, but the bank merger announced yesterday between Keycorp of Albany and the Society Corporation of Cleveland -- the biggest in two years -- was set in motion by a horse in Wyoming.
After Victor J. Riley, Jr. the 62-year-old chairman of Keycorp, was thrown from the aforesaid horse two months ago and broke his hip, he spent his recuperation mulling over the future of his bank.
From his home in Albany, he called Robert W. Gillespie, Society's chairman, and the two of them quickly worked out the outlines of a merger deal that would create roughly the nation's 10th-biggest banking company, with $58 billion in assets spread across the northern section of the United States.


Louis Fugazy, 76, Retired Executive Of Travel Business
Louis V. Fugazy, a retired vice chairman of Fugazy International, parent organization of the travel, limousine and parking companies, died on Sunday at New Rochelle Hospital in New York.
He was 76.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Market Place; Which companies will suffer if tourists steer clear of Florida?
INVESTORS reacted to a spate of recent attacks on tourists in Florida by temporarily punishing the shares of the Walt Disney Company, on the assumption that some vacationers would stay away from Disney's theme parks in Florida.
In the weeks since, other companies with ties to the state's $30 billion-a-year tourist business have braced for a similar backlash.
Because the fall is generally a slack period for Florida attractions, there is little evidence yet that the number of annual visitors, about 40 million, will decline.
Even so, tourism officials and some amusement park operators expect the blizzard of negative publicity over the 10 visitors who have been killed in Florida since last October will curtail visits by 15 to 30 percent this winter and possibly hurt bookings thereafter.


Defeated New York Post Workers Reapply for Jobs


Nestor Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to June 30


SHOWDOWN IN MOSCOW: Outside Moscow; Provinces Report Calm, but Yeltsin Supporters Call for Stiff Changes in Their Areas
Across Russia, all eyes were on the confrontation in Moscow today.
A sampling of reports tonight from some of the 88 regions that make up the Russian federation indicated that the violence had not spread beyond the capital.
"Everyone has been watching television and listening to the radio all day just to understand what is happening in Moscow," said Stanislav E. Bogomolov, the editor on the news desk at Uralsky Rabochi, a newspaper in Yekaterinburg, an industrial city in the Ural Mountains that is also President Boris N. Yeltsin's hometown.
"It is absolutely calm here."


Upjohn Selects Kobs &amp; Draft
The Upjohn Company said it had moved the account for its Rogaine prescription hair-loss treatment from one Saatchi &amp; Saatchi agency to another, leaving Klemtner Advertising in New York after eight years for Kobs &amp; Draft in New York, which specializes in direct-response advertising.
Ellen Miller, executive director of sales and marketing of the Upjohn dermatology division in Kalamazoo, Mich., confirmed a report of the move in The DeLay Letter, a direct marketing industry newsletter.
She said that as the brand evolved, direct marketing had become more important, adding, "We felt it necessary to bring in greater expertise in this area."


3 Premieres in 3 Nights For City Opera's 50th
On the stage of the New York State Theater one recent afternoon, an enormous photograph of Marilyn Monroe in the nude was projected on Venetian blinds.
The singers, walking through the staging of Ezra Laderman's new opera "Marilyn" for the first time, paid the picture no notice; they were caught up in a discussion with Jerome Sirlin, the director, about where they were supposed to stand.
Out in the house, technicians at computer consoles kept track of lighting cues, and Mr.
Laderman made a list of points to clarify with Mr.
Sirlin after the rehearsal.
While the "Marilyn" crew was in the house, Joseph Colaneri, the New York City Opera's chorus master, was in a basement rehearsal studio leading his singers through the rhythmic thickets of Hugo Weisgall's "Esther," with the composer sitting quietly to his left.
And if not for the vagaries of scheduling, there might have been a third composer in the house as well: Lukas Foss, whose "Griffelkin" had its first stage rehearsals later in the week.


Woes at VW Cross the Czech Border
If Volkswagen A.G. has had anything to cheer about this year, it has been the performance of its Skoda automobile plant in the Czech Republic, where sales and profits have been growing as the German auto maker invests in bringing the old Communist-run operation up to Western standards.
But now, VW's woes have spread to this country as well, raising questions about the plans for Skoda by Europe's biggest auto maker.
Last month, Volkswagen abruptly canceled plans to borrow $860 million to help finance the modernization of Skoda's car factory, in Mlada Boleslav, 30 miles northeast of here.


Dep Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Penobscot Shoe Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27


Microtek Medical Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Community Psychiatric Centers reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Regarding Taylor and Hampton, Giants Ponder X-Rays and O's
Injuries probably influence careers more than any other factor in professional football.
For Giants running back Rodney Hampton, a strained left ankle could sideline him for Sunday's game against the Washington Redskins.
But for Giants linebacker Lawrence Taylor, age and a nasty hamstring injury may force him, at least for the near future, into a role he's not used to: part-time player.
With the 34-year-old Taylor, the Giants find themselves in a difficult position.
On one hand, they want to both respect and honor the dignity of a warrior who would try and play if every bone in his body was broken.
On the other, they want to make plays and win games, going with the idea that younger players like Corey Miller and Jessie Armstead are better than an aging veteran who is ailing.


BUSINESS DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  MAYORAL RACE IS A TOSSUP Four weeks before Election Day, the race between Mayor David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani remains a tossup.
Fewer than half of voters trust either candidate to deal with New York City's problems and nearly half are concerned that each might make serious mistakes, according to the latest New York Times / WCBS-TV News poll.
A1.
NO LESS SCHOOL FUNDS FOR POOR School districts serving poor students in New York City get about the same government resources as middle-class districts in the city, even before special state aid for the poor is counted, according to a study of school budgets.
B3.


Ameron Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Harding Associates (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Cara Operations reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 12


No Headline
"This alarming and tragic night taught us much. We did not prepare for war, we thought we could negotiate and save peace in the capital." -- PRESIDENT BORIS N. YELTSIN  [ A16:1. ]


Fatal Drug Trial Raises Questions About 'Informed Consent'
THE deaths of 5 of 15 participants in a drug trial at the National Institutes of Health over the last few months have focused attention on the process by which patients come to participate in studies testing the safety and efficacy of new therapies.
What seemed, after an uneventful pilot study, to be a safe and promising drug for hepatitis B turned out to have fatal complications.
In addition to those who died, two participants survived only after having liver transplants.
The remaining eight are unaffected so far.
The deaths made the trial the most catastrophic human experiment in many years.
Now it may become the subject of a Congressional hearing.


Patterns
Once More, Moschino
It's been years since he's had a runway show, and Franco Moschino makes no secret of his dislike of them.
Each time, he says it's the last.
So his 10-year retrospective show on Sunday, coinciding with a museum exhibition of his work, had a doubled, dewy-eyed impact on its audience.


Devils Send Two To Minor Leagues
Two days before they open their season against Tampa Bay at home tomorrow night, the Devils yesterday assigned Jimmy Dowd and David Emma, two promising young centers, to their top affiliate in the minor leagues, the Albany River Rats of the American Hockey League.


Great Country Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Parking Rules
Alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City on Thursday and Friday for the Jewish holidays of Shemini Atzereth and Simhath Torah.
Other regulations remain in effect.


A New Auditor For Leslie Fay
The Leslie Fay Companies, an apparel retailer that has been involved in an accounting scandal, said yesterday that it had named Michael Brown director of internal audit.
Mr.
Brown will be responsible for overseeing Leslie Fay's internal auditing, reporting to the president and chief operating officer, Michael Babcock.


Review/Television; Testing the System for Testing the Blood Supply
Rest easy.
Tonight's "Dateline NBC" report on the risk of getting AIDS from a blood transfusion is not contaminated by the sort of impurities that caused a bloodletting at the network.
No explosive devices or staged dramatics.
Instead, it displays in quite pure form the techniques that make the television news magazine an impure child of journalism.
The argument is that blood from the American Red Cross and other major suppliers around the country has not been adequately tested for H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.
Stone Phillips, who does the interviewing, reiterates reassurances that "the vast majority of blood transfusions are perfectly safe," but his report focuses on two patients who were infected and on findings by the Food and Drug Administration of testing and labeling violations.


For Home, Color Printer That Is Hard to Beat
CANON COMPUTER SYSTEMS INC.'s new BJC-600 color inkjet printer, which was introduced yesterday, offers impressive print quality and ease of use at a relatively low price.
It warrants serious consideration by people who have been thinking about getting a plain-paper color printer, but who have turned green at the high cost and low quality of most color models on the market.
The BJC-600, which works with computers that use Windows software, appears to offer the best print quality in its price range, which is expected to be less than $650 when the $719 list price is discounted in the stores.


Egypt Votes in Referendum On Third Term for Mubarak
Egyptians voted today in a referendum that is widely expected to hand President Hosni Mubarak a third six-year term.
Police stepped up security to prevent attacks by Muslim militants who have mounted a violent campaign to topple the Government and replace it with a strict Islamic state.
Voting, which was light at polling stations in Cairo, passed without incident.


Galarraga Hailed
Venezuelan sports dailies celebrated ANDRES GALARRAGA's National League batting championship with articles and photos on their front pages.
"Viva el Rey!" ("Long Live the King!") exclaimed El Nacionalo's headline.


Sound Advice Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Classical Music in Review
Beaux-Arts Trio  Metropolitan Museum of Art
We know the Beaux-Arts Trio more for its thoughtful examinations of existing repertory than for its adventures into the unexplored.
But at the center of its program on Friday night -- one that started with early Beethoven and ended with late Schubert -- was a jaunty new piece by David N. Baker called "Roots II."


Theologian Installed as 18th President of Columbia
George E. Rupp was inaugurated yesterday as the 18th president of Columbia University and spoke soberly about the challenges facing a major research university in lean times.
Addressing an audience of 2,300, many among them academicians wearing gowns splashed with the colors of the rainbow, Mr.
Rupp, 51, received a ceremonial copy of Columbia's 239-year-old charter and keys in an open-air pageant at the Morningside Heights campus.


Capital Associates Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Natural Earth Technologies Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to June 30


Casino &amp; Credit Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


In Russia, Disorder to Democracy?
The world exhaled in relief when Boris Yeltsin's hard-line opponents ended a 13-day standoff and, hands over heads, shuffled down the steps of Russia's Parliament building to surrender.
Yet Mr.
Yeltsin's dramatic victory is merely a prelude to a more complex task: to fashion a genuinely democratic coalition that includes not only his reformist allies but his nonviolent critics, who question the course he is charting.
Only then can he permanently outflank the unrepentant Communists and nationalists who may again try to bring him down.
Only then can he give real meaning to December's parliamentary elections.
Only then can he free himself from the army that sprang to his rescue.
Only then can he shore up the fragile foundations of democratic order and justify the resolute support he has received from Washington and the world.


Treasury Prices Little Changed
Treasury prices and yields were little changed yesterday with light volume and cautious trading ahead of the release of September employment data on Friday.
The end to the fighting in Moscow seemed to have little impact in the bond market or other financial markets because, some analysts said, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia seemed to be in control despite the bloodshed.


Irving Blumberg, 86, Mental Health Worker
Irving Blumberg, an advocate for the mentally ill who helped found the World Association for Psychosocial Rehabilitation, died last Thursday at St.
Luke's Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 86.
The cause was heart failure, said his daughter, Jean Ross.


FAB Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Argentine Ruling Party Wins, Fueling President's Re-election Bid
Grateful for their role in bringing stability to the country's economy, Argentines gave Congressional candidates of President Carlos Saul Menem's Peronist Party a overwhelming victory in nationwide elections on Sunday.
The victory gives Mr.
Menem a big push toward winning approval for a change in the Constitution that would allow him to run for re-election.
But it falls short of giving the Peronists the two-thirds majority in Congress that is needed to change the Constitution.


Poverty in U.S. Grew Faster Than Population Last Year
Despite the end of the recession, the number of poor people in the United States increased last year by 1.2 million, to 36.9 million, increasing three times as fast as the overall population, the Census Bureau reported today.
The number of poor people was higher than in any year since 1962, when John F. Kennedy was President.
In that year, of course, the nation's population was much smaller, and the poor accounted for a larger proportion of the total population: 21 percent in 1962, as against 14.5 percent last year.


Classical Music in Review
New York Madrigal Singers  Church of Notre Dame 114th Street at Morningside Drive Morningside Heights
Salamone Rossi, a composer who flourished in Mantua at the turn of the 17th century, is best known today for "Hashirim Asher L'Shlomo," a volume of Hebrew psalms and Jewish liturgical poetry, set in the early Italian Baroque style usually associated with strongly Catholic courts.
Selections from "Hashirim" have been recorded and turn up on choral programs every now and then, yet Rossi's far more copious contributions to the secular repertory are rarely given a hearing.


Eastern Environmental reports earnings for Year to June 30


Maryland Federal Bancorp Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


How to Put Single Payer in Clinton Health Plan; Magnetic Medical File
To the Editor:
President Clinton was brilliant in holding up a credit card as an illustration of how our new medical care system would work (front page, Sept. 23).
A Federal seal, two stars and bold colors.
Unfortunately, he showed America the wrong side of the card.


Little Switzerland Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Nautica Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


The Last Gasp Of Russia's Communists
Now begins the arduous task of reconciling the Russian nation and building a democratic state on the rubble of Communism.
The prospects for success look better than at any time since the abdication of Czar Nicholas II in March 1917.
Unless President Boris Yeltsin repeats previous mistakes and seeks compromises with his defeated enemies, who interpret readiness to compromise as weakness, we are unlikely ever again to see a resurgence of a militant antidemocratic opposition.
The events of the past two days are probably the last outbreak of violent counterrevolution in Russia.


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association
DENVER NUGGETS -- Announced the retirement of Scott Hastings, forward, who will work for the team in community relations and as a broadcaster.
LOS ANGELES LAKERS -- Re-signed Tony Smith, guard.


OIS Optical Imaging Systems Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to June 30


U.S. Reports Sharp Increase In Drug-Caused Emergencies
Federal health officials in Washington yesterday reported sharp increases in the number of medical emergencies resulting from drug use.
They said the numbers underscored the need for more rehabilitation programs and more effective prevention efforts.
While casual drug use has continued to decline, heavy users of cocaine, heroin and marijuana have been streaming into hospital emergency rooms in unprecedented numbers, the officials said.


Accounts
*
Kraft Jacobs Suchard, Zurich, to Young &amp; Rubicam Europe, London, to handle the advertising for the European expansion of its Daim brand of Freia Marabou chocolate, previously divided among various local agencies.
Y.&amp; R. already handles other Kraft Jacobs brands like Twist.
Billings were estimated at $15 million.


Swoopes Shoots Over a Language Barrier in Italy
Amid the chaos, she looked right at home.
Photographers snapped shots as they would with a celebrity model.
Autograph seekers approached in a steady stream.
Organizers wanted her here and there, please.
Everyone was saying, "Sheryl, would you mind . . . "


Prosecutors Describe 'Horror' As Trial in Towers Blast Opens
The deadly bombing that rocked the World Trade Center last winter echoed in a Federal courtroom in Manhattan yesterday, as the trial of four men accused as Muslim terrorists opened with the chief prosecutor seeking to recreate "the horror of the victims."
Conceding that the case against the four -- Mohammed A. Salameh, Nidal A. Ayyad, Mahmud Abouhalima and Ahmad M. Ajaj -- was largely based on what could be dry circumstantial and forensic evidence, the prosecution sought to paint indelible pictures of the suffering produced by the blast.


Conservative Is Joining G.O.P. Race for Governor
Herbert London, the New York University professor who ran as the Conservative Party candidate for governor in 1990 and nearly finished second, announced his candidacy today for the 1994 Republican and Conservative gubernatorial nominations.
Mr.
London kicked off his campaign at an Albany news conference, where he showed both his conservatism and his glibness.
He called for supply-side tax cuts, deep reductions in Medicaid and welfare payments, containment of the "homosexual agenda" and a school system in which children will not "spend more time putting condoms on cucumbers than solving quadratic equations."


United Foods Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Morgan's Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 17


Construction Spending Falls by 1.1%
Construction spending fell in August for the first time in four months despite increased outlays for single-family homes, the Commerce Department said today.
"Weakness in nonresidential construction continued to weigh down total construction outlays for August," Bruce Steinberg, an economist with Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, said.


Colony Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Alpine Meadows reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Clinton Sending Reinforcements After Heavy Losses in Somalia
President Clinton ordered several hundred fresh United States troops to Somalia today, plus heavy tanks, armored personnel carriers, helicopters and gunships, in the aftermath of heavy American losses in a United Nations military operation in Mogadishu on Sunday.
The latest Pentagon tally indicated that at least 12 American soldiers had been killed and 78 wounded.
Several others were reported missing and may be captives of the forces of Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, the fugitive Somali faction leader.
That made Sunday by far the costliest day for the United States since American forces arrived in Somalia almost 10 months ago.


Clinton Defends Trade Pact To Skeptical A.F.L.-C.I.O.
Taking his effort on behalf of a North American Free Trade Agreement to perhaps the unfriendliest audience he could find, President Clinton assured labor leaders today that the pact would not cost American jobs.
Mr.
Clinton told 915 delegates at convention of the American Federation of Labor and Congress of Industrial Organizations that he was arguing on behalf of the trade agreement, "not so you'll agree with me, but so you will know what I want you to know, which is that I would never knowingly do anything to cost an American a job."


How to Put Single Payer in Clinton Health Plan; The Rot at the Top
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 23 front-page review of President Clinton as a performer should earn your reporter a transfer to the drama desk.
The young President is trying to provide moral leadership and deserves support, not sniping.
The health care needs of Americans might have been better served by raising a question raised in the Republican reply: Why are the fruits of our worldwide leadership in medicine available only to the very few?


SHOWDOWN IN MOSCOW: U.S. Reaction; Clinton Is 'Foursquare' Behind Yeltsin But Expects Russian Elections Soon
The Clinton Administration reiterated its support today for President Boris N. Yeltsin but urged him to use free elections to mend the bitter divisions in Russia now that he has crushed the parliamentary rebellion that challenged his reforms.
President Clinton defended as both legitimate and necessary the attack that swept anti-Yeltsin opponents from their base inside the Russian Parliament building.
Mr.
Clinton said the Russian leader had "no other alternative but to try and restore order."


Koch and Jackson Trade Barbs in TV Debate
It started with a handshake.
Next was a declaration from former Mayor Edward I. Koch that he and the Rev.
Jesse Jackson, after all of their past disputes, were actually "old friends."
And then came the debate, over the volatile issue of race in the mayoral contest between the incumbent, David N. Dinkins, and the challenger, Rudolph W. Giuliani.


3DO Chosen by U S West for Interactive TV Trial
The 3DO Company said today that it had been selected to provide the technology that will attach to home television sets for an interactive television trial by U S West Communications next year in Omaha.
3DO's technology will be built into set-top terminals to enable viewers to obtain such services as playing two-way video games, ordering movies on demand, interacting with educational and informational programming, and shopping from the television screen.


Americare International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Graf Out 3 Weeks After Foot Surgery
STEFFI GRAF, the world's top-ranked women's player, will be out of action for the rest of the month after surgery yesterday in Essen, Germany, to remove bone fragments from her right foot.
Graf will miss tournaments in Zurich and Brighton, England, because of the injury, which has bothered her for months.


Reeds Jewelers Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Investcorp Ready to Buy Music Stores
Investcorp, the Bahrain investment group that owns Saks Fifth Avenue and Gucci, said yesterday that it had reached a definitive agreement to buy Camelot Music Inc., the nation's third-largest retailer of recorded music.
The price for the 365-store chain was not disclosed, but speculation in trade publications was that bidding had exceeded $350 million, which was confirmed by an investment banker close to Investcorp, who spoke on the condition of anonymity.


Panel Is Told of a File on Police Graft Within Internal Affairs
The Internal Affairs Division of New York City's Police Department kept a secret file of allegations of corruption against its own officers, top police officials and their relatives, according to testimony yesterday before a commission investigating police corruption.
Contrary to standard department policy, information about those investigations was not passed along to prosecutors, the commission was told.
In other testimony yesterday, a former police official who headed the division told the Mollen Commission that a pervasive fear of negative publicity and a lack of logistical support stymied efforts to ferret out corrupt police officers.


Archeologists Wonder at a City That Survived the Maya Collapse
ARCHEOLOGISTS struggling to understand how and why the classic Maya civilization collapsed so catastrophically in the ninth century A.D. keep turning up evidence that complicates their task.
Among the ruins of grand cities suddenly abandoned they are finding some others in the Central American lowlands that not only survived but prospered long after.
Such a place was Xunantunich (pronounced Shoo-NAN-too-NEECH).
New discoveries, announced last week by the University of California at Los Angeles, show that this classic Maya city survived the spreading chaos and remained a bustling center of art, religion and culture for another 150 to 200 years after what had until recently been considered a virtually total decline.


'The Cave' Is Subject Of Whitney Program
A program of excerpts from "The Cave," a documentary music-video theater work, and a discussion with its creators, Steve Reich and Beryl Korot, is to take place tonight, tomorrow, Friday and Saturday at 7 P.M. at the Film/Video Gallery of the Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
David A. Ross, the director of the Whitney Museum, is to moderate the discussion.
The program is part of the Works and Process series of the Guggenheim Museum.
"The Cave," based on interviews with Israelis, Palestinians and Americans, re-examines the biblical story of Abraham and his family and explores the common ancestry of Jews, Muslims and Christians.


Angeoin Corp. reports earnings for Year to July 31


Actrade International Ltd.  (NMS) reports earnings for Year to June 30


Wellco Enterprises reports earnings for Year to July 3


ResoQuest Resources reports earnings for Year to June 30


World's Tiniest Steam Engine: It Fits in a Dot
SCIENTISTS at Sandia National Laboratories in Albuquerque, N.M., have built a steam engine so small that several could fit into the space occupied by the period at the end of a sentence in a newspaper.
Paul McWhorter, an engineer at the laboratories, said the microscopic steam engine, built with the same techniques used in the manufacture of microelectronic chips, was 100 times as powerful as microscopic electric motors of the same size.


Review/Fashion; In Milan, Bravado, Ready to Wear
Gianni Versace led fashion on a rollicking march to spring while taking time out for a nod to the punks of yesteryear.
Domenico Dolce and Stefano Gabbana left no ethnic lode unmined, but also turned up with the best little black dresses, which they attributed to their Sicilian heritage.


International Dairy Queen (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27


Orioles' Sale Approved
Major league owners voted by 28-0 yesterday to approve the $173 million sale of the Baltimore Orioles from ELI JACOBS to a group headed by PETER ANGELOS.
Angelos's investment group agreed to purchase the team at a United States Bankruptcy Court auction Aug. 2. (AP)


Q &amp; A
Nicotinic Acid
Q.
Does nicotinic acid have any thing to do with nicotine?
If eggplant contains it, is it safe to eat eggplant?


McGriff and Turnaround Are Same Word to Braves
No sooner did the Atlanta Braves settle one great debate with the San Francisco Giants then another has begun to rage:
Now that the Braves have won their third consecutive National League West title, could they have done it without the midseason acquisition of Fred McGriff?


The Optimistic Islanders Go West
As he blocked the puck in front of his net, Ron Hextall felt a little too crowded by too many Rangers.
This was last month, in an exhibition game at Nassau Coliseum, the first time he had met the local rivals in his new, Islander uniform.
So he raised his big goalie stick and swatted them, earning a two-minute penalty for slashing.
Later, when the Rangers scored a goal and celebrated in front of him, Hextall fished the puck out of the twine and fired it at the Blue Shirts, earning another misdemeanor sentence.


Chief of I.B.M's Credit Arm Is Leaving at End of Year
Harry L. Kavetas, president of the IBM Credit Corporation, the computer maker's financing arm, announced yesterday that he was leaving the company.
The departure of Mr.
Kavetas, who is 55, is further evidence that I.B.M. executives who were passed over for top posts by the new chairman, Louis V. Gerstner Jr., prefer to leave at this point.
In assembling his inner circle, Mr.
Gerstner has selected several outsiders, including Jerome B. York of the Chrysler Corporation as the International Business Machines Corporation's chief financial officer.
As a senior finance executive, Mr.
Kavetas would have been in the running for the job.


TSR Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Best Buy Co., Minneapolis, is offering $150 million of 8 5/8 percent notes due in 2000 at 100 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Noncallable for five years, the notes are rated Ba-3 by Moody's, BBB- by Duff &amp; Phelps, and B+ by Standard &amp; Poor's. *
Pennzoil Co., Houston, plans to offer $250 million of new debentures, through underwriters led by Lehman Brothers, exchangeable for shares of common stock of the Chevron Corp. owned by Pennzoil.


Washington Talk; In Finagling on Trade Pact, Legislators' Barter Is Votes
It's a ritual as old as Congress itself.
The Louisiana delegation wants to change a provision in the North American Free Trade Agreement that could put local sugar farmers out of business.
Florida lawmakers want safeguards to protect orange growers who fear a surge of Mexican citrus.
And Iowa and Ohio legislators are urging a slower phase-out of tariffs on stoves and refrigerators to protect local producers.


CSP Inc. reports earnings for Year to Aug 27


Time Says Photographs of Moscow 'Child Prostitutes' Were Staged
The editors of Time magazine have determined that several photographs published in June purporting to show child prostitutes in Moscow were staged.
The photographs, whose authenticity was questioned soon after their publication, have set off an intense debate over the ethics of photojournalism and have cast a spotlight on the way major news organizations obtain and verify photographs.


Continental Pharma reports earnings for Year to July 31


United Merchants &amp; Manufacturers Inc.  reports earnings for Year to June 30


Norand Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Review/Music; How Do You Build Up To Beethoven's Fifth?
As a way to link the seven programs that the New York Chamber Symphony is playing in its 17th season, Gerard Schwarz is leading his 46-piece ensemble in the nine Beethoven symphonies.
The season prospectus gushes with worshipful advocacy of these not exactly underplayed works.
Mr.
Schwarz, for example, is quoted as saying that "their variety makes them the most extraordinary body of work ever written by a single composer."
Depending how oversold on Beethoven they feel, listeners may either nod in assent or wonder whether the Beethoven symphonies are really more varied than, say, the songs of Schubert or the Beatles, the Verdi operas, the Mozart or Schoenberg chamber works, the stage music of Kurt Weill, the explorations of Miles Davis, or for that matter, the Beethoven string quartets.


Cuomo Picks Investment Banker For Municipal Assistance Post
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today appointed Eugene J. Keilin, a Manhattan investment banker and longtime associate of Felix G. Rohatyn, to succeed Mr.
Rohatyn as chairman of the Municipal Assistance Corporation.
Mr.
Rohatyn announced his resignation last month from the agency he helped form 18 years ago to pull New York City from the brink of bankruptcy.
When bankers closed the credit markets to the city in 1975, the state formed the corporation as a vehicle to borrow on the city's behalf.
It continues to manage a large investment portfolio on the city's behalf, and its nine-member board oversees the city's finances in an advisory role.


Assessing the Harm In Ocean Dumping
To the Editor:
Carol M. Browner, Environmental Protection Administrator, alleges that a prohibition on low-level radioactive dumping is essential to protect the oceans ("Pentagon Fights Wider Ocean-Dumping Ban," Sept. 26).


Altai Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Philip Morris hopes to prosper by borrowing a theme from quitters.
"YOU can do it!" "You bet you can!" Those exhortations, often heard as entreaties to quit smoking, are actually headlines from new cigarette ads.
In a campaign beginning later this month, Philip Morris appropriated the rah-rah rhetoric of stop-smoking programs to encourage sales of its Merit line, which has suffered a prolonged slump in the face of intensifying competition from other low-tar cigarettes and cheaper brands.


SHOWDOWN IN MOSCOW: Scene; For Moscow, a Sigh of Relief Replaces Feelings of Outrage
Drawn by a mix of horror and fascination, thousands of Muscovites turned out on the southern bank of the Moscow River today to watch as their White House -- once a symbol of Russian democracy -- turned black with smoke.
Young men climbed trees and young girls sat on their boyfriends' shoulders to get a better view.
Old women out walking their dogs made a detour to peer over the shoulders of a crowd that had grown six deep.
Soldiers had the best vantage point of all, sitting atop T-80 tanks that had their guns pointed directly at the White House, as the Parliament building is known.


Bergen Brunswig Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


School Financing Not Less For the Poor, Study Says
School districts serving poor students in New York City get about the same government resources as middle-class districts in the city, even before special state aid for the poor is counted, according to a major study of school budgets.
But the extra money may not reach students and make a difference, according to the study, by the Educational Priorities Panel, an advocacy group, which found that districts serving the poor spend less on teachers and other direct school services and more on administration and overhead.


The Electric Henderson On His Power Failures
Watch Rickey Henderson in the batter's box.
Watch Henderson wiggle his bat, shift his muscular legs and use his powerful arms.
Crash.
A baseball is hammered.
Whack.
Another ball disappears over the fence.
Always chatting, always waiting for the precise pitch, Henderson can make the game look simple.
He hits for power, he steals bases, he terrorizes pitchers, catchers and managers and he guides teams to the post season.
That is, when he wants to.
Usually, compliments are quickly followed by criticism when Henderson is Exhibit A. He applies intensity when he feels like it.
Or does he?


R.P.M. Tech Inc. reports earnings for Year to May 31


Wolf Financial Group Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


SHOWDOWN IN MOSCOW: The Overview; RUSSIAN ARMY ROUTS REBELS AT PARLIAMENT AS YELTSIN TAKES STEPS TO TIGHTEN CONTROL
Tanks and troops loyal to President Boris N. Yeltsin today crushed an armed uprising by his opponents with a potent show of force that left their white riverside stronghold battered and in flames.
The Parliament building, known as the White House, was shaken by huge explosions from 125-millimeter shells fired from T-72 and T-80 tanks.
As crack airborne troops conducted a floor-by-floor assault, hundreds of legislators, defenders and supporters began filing out of the building shortly before 5 P.M.
Their leaders followed at 6 P.M. (11 A.M., Eastern time).


Lilly Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Viacom said the Nynex Corporation had agreed to invest $1.2 billion in it, giving Viacom new ammunition for its $7.4 billion bid for Paramount Communications.  [ Page D1. ]  Behind the war between Viacom and QVC Network for Paramount lies the wisdom that bigger is better in the media business.
But earlier media mergers have yet to demonstrate the magic of synergy.  [ D1. ]
The planned merger of Keycorp and the Society Corporation, which would create the country's 10th-largest banking company, was set in motion by a spirited horse in Wyoming.  [ D1. ]


New Zoning For Waterfront Faces Barriers
New zoning rules for New York City's waterfront, which are meant to open miles of shoreline property to the public, may be on the verge of defeat by the City Council, key Council leaders said yesterday.
"My sense is that this proposal could well be going down," said Councilman Walter L. McCaffrey, Democrat of Queens, who heads the Council's zoning and franchises subcommittee, which is to vote on the rules tomorrow.
"The proposal has little support among the members."


Isco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


Valley Resources Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Tranzonic Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Review/Film Festival; Following Flaubert, An Eminent Director Finds a Fresh Ema
At the age of 85, the Portuguese director Manoel de Oliveira, who has been making movies since 1931 and is still little known in this country, has brought forth what a number of European critics describe as his chef-d'oeuvre: "Valley of Abraham" ("Vale Abraao"), a contemporary variation on Gustave Flaubert's "Madame Bovary," inspired by Agustina Bessa-Luis's Portuguese novel also titled "Valley of Abraham."
The film is a grand, singularly idiosyncratic work, as austere as Robert Bresson's "Diary of a Country Priest" and as thick with narrative details and chatty asides as "Little Dorrit." It mesmerizes, sometimes maddens and tests the emotional and physical reflexes.


By Design; Shawl Season
What to wear when a jacket isn't enough and a coat is too much?
A cuddly shawl.
Scores of fashionable New York women can be seen dashing around the city with a swath of wool or cashmere wrapped around their jackets.
The wrap might be a folded square or an unlined cape.
Whether so sizable the fringes tease the sidewalk or just big enough to protect the chest and back, it should be worn with insouciance.


Officer Is Given Probation in Beating Case
A New York City police officer was sentenced yesterday to probation, community service and a fine for his assault conviction stemming from the beating of a teen-ager who had slashed the face of another officer.
The sentence was criticized by District Attorney Charles J. Hynes of Brooklyn because it had no jail time.
Officer Thomas Cea, 27, could have been given up to a year in jail.


Saratoga Brands Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


'Dear Compatriots': Yeltsin's Appeal to the People
Following is a transcript of yesterday's televised speech to the nation by President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, as translated by The Associated Press.
Dear compatriots:


Court Upholds Fine In Mammogram Case
A New York State Supreme Court Judge has upheld a $170,000 fine against a Long Island doctor who provided 225 patients with questionable mammograms, the Nassau County Health Department announced this evening.
County officials said the decision, which was issued two weeks ago by Judge Harry Kutner, said that Dr.
Padma Ram of Floral Park had committed violations of the state radiation code that "bespeak a casual disregard of the health of patients." These violations were "repeated and continuous," it concluded.


Sterling Financial Corp. (Wash.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Waxman Industries reports earnings for Year to June 30


Finish Line (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Spectrum Control (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Image Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 3


'Synergy': The Unspoken Word
It is the kind of multibillion-dollar bidding war not seen since the go-go 1980's: two big cable television companies fighting to buy Paramount Communications Inc., an entertainment empire that includes professional sports teams, book publishing houses and the last major independent movie studio in America.
Behind this duel between Viacom Inc. and QVC Network Inc. also lies the 1980's conventional wisdom that bigger is better in the media business.
"Synergy" they called it in the 80's, when Time and Warner were courting, Sony was eyeing Columbia and Matsushita was wooing MCA.
As in a good marriage, each partner would bring qualities that when combined would magically create something better than either could achieve alone.


Victoria Creations Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Integrated Resources Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 30


SoftKey Software reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Corrections
An announcement yesterday about a memorial service for a historian of photography who died on Feb. 26 misspelled his name.
He was Beaumont Newhall.
The service is tomorrow, at 11 A.M., in the Roy and Niuta Titus Theater 1 at the Museum of Modern Art, 11 West 53d Street.


Advance Circuits Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


The Hospital World's Hard-Driving Money Man
Richard L. Scott's idea of fun is fixing up rundown hospitals, closing some institutions and seeking to please doctors.
Riding a nationwide wave of health-care consolidations, the 40-year-old lawyer has gone to the top of the world's largest for-profit hospital empire in eight years of nonstop wheeling and dealing.
His eight-year-old Columbia Healthcare Corporation has agreed to merge with the HCA-Hospital Corporation of America to create a 190-hospital colossus stretching across 26 states and two foreign countries.
On Sept. 1, Columbia completed a merger with Galen Healthcare, the big chain of former Humana hospitals.


Q &amp; A
Nicotinic Acid
Q.
Does nicotinic acid have any thing to do with nicotine?
If eggplant contains it, is it safe to eat eggplant?


Benz Trades In U.S. Today
Shares of Daimler-Benz A.G., the parent of the German auto maker Mercedes-Benz, will trade on the New York Stock Exchange starting today.
Big Board executives hail the first listing of a German company as part of an effort to allow American investors to buy shares of major foreign companies with the protections of a domestic market.


Spec's Music (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Nike Game Brings Bans
Two of the nation's top high school basketball players were suspended yesterday for four games by an Illinois regulatory agency for taking part in a Nike-sponsored tournament.


The 1993 Snake Oil Protection Act
Forget health care reform or reinventing government.
The biggest volume of mail being logged in many Congressional offices these days calls on the lawmakers to block action by the Food and Drug Administration to ban the sale of vitamins and other dietary supplements.
The only problem is, the agency has no such proposal.
Using scare tactics and misinformation, the dietary supplement industry has managed to rally thousands of health-minded Americans to support legislation that would actually deprive consumers of reliable health information.


Mexico Will Phase Out Price Supports for Corn
Mexico said today that it would phase out its politically sensitive system of price supports for corn and other crops and replace it with direct payments to farmers based on the amount of land they cultivate.
Mexican officials called the new system a "transitory scheme" that would last for 15 years and was intended to lead to the development of more economically competitive farms.
The program is meant to complement an economic stimulus package of tax cuts and wage increases that Mr.
Salinas announced on Sunday.


Haiti Police Chief Poses Hurdle to Aristide's Return
On the eve of the arrival of 600 American troops in Haiti, the self-appointed commander of the country's military police stands as a menacing obstacle to an accord aimed at sealing the return on Oct. 30 of the elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Catching American diplomats off guard and sending a chill through many Haitians, who were already bracing for a surge in the country's endemic political violence, the commander, Col.
Joseph Michel Francois, has declared that he has no intention of complying with the internationally brokered pact, which calls for his removal.


SHOWDOWN IN MOSCOW: TV Critic's Notebook; Commotion and Confusion on the Air as History Is in the Making
It was like a television remake of the Russian Revolution: crowds under the red hammer and sickle driving the outnumbered police and militiamen before them, storming Government buildings, becoming masters of the streets.
Or at least some streets and some buildings, at least for a while.
They were even chanting "All power to the Soviets!"
CNN was there, of course, as it was so dramatically in the Persian Gulf war and the landing in Somalia.
This time scenes of conflict were shown before a bright backdrop of autumn colors.
Steve Hurst, CNN Moscow correspondent, was on the job from the first morning signs of confrontation into the night, calling what he was watching from the the network's studio in the mayor's office "total confusion."


When the Cheering Had to Stop
The 15 girls who lead the cheers for the Hempstead, Tex., Fighting Bobcats -- and, indeed, their counterparts all over the country -- aren't dancers, although they often mimic a chorus line.
They aren't athletes, although their splits and high kicks can be awesome.
They are youngsters who for a few, fleeting years have a moment in the sun.
If cheerleaders are sometimes seen by adults as all-round good kids, role models even, it's because their good looks and vitality grant them status in high school society and give them a certain nostalgia value for their elders.
They embody everything the people in the stands want to believe about youth and its legendary partner, innocence.


Carolina Freight Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 11


Books of The Times; Happily Casting for the One That Will Get Away
Fly-Fishing Through the Midlife Crisis
By Howell Raines
Illustrated. 352 pages. William Morrow &amp;  Company. $22.
Water is different.
It ripples, runs, gleams and shines, mirroring the sky or turning unfathomably black; and more than any form of food it is of course the staff of life.
Not surprisingly, most waters are being overfished nowadays, and not just for protein, but for the sake of "interrupting the invisibility of these shining creatures and existing for a moment with them in their wildness," as Howell Raines explains.


Bosnian Muslims Aren't Simply Victims
To the Editor:
A report from Sarajevo on continued fighting between Muslims and Croats in Bosnia and Herzegovina despite the declaration of cease-fire states, "the Serbs hold 70 percent of Bosnia, and the Croats most of the rest" (news article, Sept. 19).
This is mistaken.
According to maps used by Lord Owen as a basis for negotiating a partition of the country, at the end of August, Bosnia was divided as follows: Serbs, 73 percent; Muslims, 17 percent; Croats, 10 percent.
The days when the Croats controlled most Bosnian territory that was not held by the Serbs are long gone.
Since last spring Muslim offensives have successfully wrested land away from the Croats.
Those offensives continue today and remain a major obstacle to the signing of a peace agreement.


M-Corp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 5


USA Classic Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Can They Finish Sixth Ave. by Fashion Week?
To the Editor:
The Council of Fashion Designers of America has organized under a private corporation, 7 on Sixth, a boost to the fashion industry of New York City.
It has so far created with massive tents in Bryant Park a central place to see what New York fashion has to offer.


Review/Music; Courting Ecstasy In Songs Of Pakistan
Toward the end of Abida Parveen's recital of mystical Sufi songs of Pakistan at Symphony Space on Saturday night, men were standing at the side of the hall, swaying and clapping with the beat; others were shouting "Allah!" in response to the singer's cues; still others rushed down the aisle tossing dollar bills on the stage in gratitude.
This was not inappropriate behavior.
The texts, some written by Sufi saints hundreds of years ago, were love poems in Urdu, Punjabi, Sindhi and Seraiki that are meant to have mystical religious meanings.
They were similar in that respect to the erotic poetry of "The Song of Songs." The purpose of the music was not to provide pleasure (orthodox Islam, at any rate, frowns on such a secular use of music) but to lead the listener into a state of ecstasy and religious frenzy.


Sports of The Times; Is There A Hex On the Sox?
ONLY two outfielders in Chicago White Sox history have been named Jackson.
Did Bo know the other?
"Sure," he said yesterday, "that's easy. Jesse Jackson."


Rocky Mountain Helicopters Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-19  MOSCOW UPRISING IS CRUSHED  Troops loyal to President Boris N. Yeltsin crushed an armed uprising with a show of force.
Hundreds of Parliament members and supporters filed out of the building, and their leaders followed.
A1  RUSSIANS HOLD THEIR BREATH  As Parliament burned, Russians watched with a mixture of fascination and horror.
Though opinions varied about who was responsible for the violence, most yearned for order to be restored.
A1


SHOWDOWN IN MOSCOW: Tactics; Yeltsin Attack Strategy: Bursts Followed by Lulls
The assault on the Russian Parliament building today was a textbook example of the decisive application of military power.
But for all the firepower -- and the fires burning inside tonight showed that there was plenty -- the attack was punctuated by long lulls as the Russian military waited to see if the rebels would yield.
Strobe Talbott, the American Ambassador at Large to the former Soviet republics, said President Boris N. Yeltsin's aides had indicated that they considered two basic tactics: an all-out attack or a gradual operation that would give the anti-Yeltsin forces an opportunity to surrender.


Can 70 Million Fans Be Wrong?
However the numbers are calculated, major league baseball set an attendance record this season, belying the talk even within the sport that it is losing its popularity.
The commissioner's office confirmed yesterday that the total attendance was 70,257,938, 23.7 percent above the record of 56,813,760 set in 1991.
The total was bolstered by the addition of the Colorado Rockies (4,483,350) and the Florida Marlins (3,064,847) and by a change in the way the National League reported attendance this season.


Justices Turn Down Bail for One Officer In Rodney King Case
A police officer convicted of beating Rodney G. King failed today in his final bid to stay out of prison when the United States Supreme Court rejected his request to remain free on bail.
The officer, Laurence M. Powell, must now begin serving his two-and-one-half-year sentence on Oct. 12.
The Supreme Court has not yet ruled on a similar request for bail by the second officer convicted in the 1991 beating, Sgt.
Stacey C. Koon.


Vodafone
The American depository receipts of the Vodafone Group, Britain's largest mobile phone operator, rose yesterday after the company said it had added more than 50,000 new subscribers in the third quarter.
The stock began advancing last week, with many investors anticipating the news.


City Splits In Its View Of Accused In Beatings
This city has two images of Damian Williams, the man on trial in the beating of a white truck driver in last year's riot, and these images sometimes seem to have very little to do with each other.
To horrified television viewers, Mr.
Williams is a symbol of the unpredictable violence that menaces this city, the man prosecutors say was captured on videotape throwing a brick at the head of the driver, Reginald O. Denny, and then dancing a victory jig.
But for some black residents, the 20-year-old defendant also represents something else: society's unequal treatment of blacks and whites.


Insta Cool Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


For White Sox, All Eyes Are on Thomas's Elbow
As dominating a hitter as he has been this season, Frank Thomas would have elbowed his way into prominence in the American League Championship Series one way or another.
But today he was the primary topic of conversation because of his elbow.
Gene Lamont, the Chicago White Sox manager, and the team's talented trainer, Herman Schneider, left no doubt that Thomas, the heavy favorite to win the league's most valuable player award, would be in the lineup against the Toronto Blue Jays in the playoff opener Tuesday night.
But Lamont left open the question of where Thomas would play.


General Microwave reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Review/Film Festival; 3 Views of the Human Comedy and Otherwise
Anyone who has nursed a childhood obsession with a television program -- and who hasn't devoutly wished at one time to escape childhood growing pains by diving through the tube into a magical realm? -- should find a haunting resonance in Todd Haynes's half-hour film, "Dottie Gets Spanked."
The longest and most original of the three short films in the "Avant-Garde Visions" program of the New York Film Festival at 6 o'clock this evening, "Dottie Gets Spanked" observes the world through the eyes of a shy 6-year-old boy named Steven Gale (Evan Bonifant).
It is 1966 in suburban New York, and Steven has a fixation on a Lucy-like television star named Dottie Frank (Julie Halston).
His fervor is so all-consuming that his parents are beginning to worry.


O'Rourke Outlines Proposal to Increase Westchester Jobs
As the heated campaign for Westchester County executive entered its final month, Andrew P. O'Rourke, the Republican incumbent, today announced a jobs program that his Democratic rival, Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky, immediately derided as strikingly similar to the economic-growth program he had proposed weeks ago.
The sniping underscored the importance of white-collar jobs to Westchester voters, many of whom have been laid off by the struggling Fortune 500 companies that call the county home, including the International Business Machines Corporation.


Intermetrics Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Juno Lighting Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


In WPIX vs. MSG, Benches Have Cleared
Once upon a time, the MSG Network and WPIX-TV/Channel 11 got along quite nicely.
Their executives claimed to be friends.
They even had a three-year deal that made non-cable homes happy: MSG, which controls the rights to all 150 locally televised Yankees games, bought the time to put 50 of them on WPIX.
But that amity expired on Sept. 24.
Now, as hopes flicker that MSG and WPIX will make a new deal to keep Yankees games on free TV, war has broken out.
"They're making it impossible to make a deal," said Michael Eigner, general manager of WPIX.
Yesterday, he released a 31-page analysis of MSG's deal with the Yankees that WPIX says is irrefutable evidence of MSG's reluctance to make a deal with the station.
MSG called it all nonsense.


Passers Take Hits; Eagles Add O'Brien
Such National Football League quarterbacks as Randall Cunningham, Joe Montana, Bobby Hebert and Steve Young took batterings of various degrees Sunday.
Cunningham, the worst off of that group, will be sidelined 8 to 10 weeks, and the Philadelphia Eagles came to terms last night with former Jet Ken O'Brien to replace him on their roster.
Cunningham broke his left leg during the Eagles' 35-30 comeback victory over the Jets.
He flew to California yesterday for an 8 o'clock appointment this morning with Dr.
Clarence Shields, the orthopedist who in 1991 reconstructed Cunningham's left knee.


Modatech Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Dev-Tech Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


SHOWDOWN IN MOSCOW: The Outlook; As Guns Fall Silent
The defeated leaders of the armed uprising against President Boris N. Yeltsin may not have had a broad popular base.
But the criticism leveled by these men, Aleksandr V. Rutskoi and Ruslan I. Khasbulatov, against Mr.
Yeltsin, his policies and his embrace of one-man rule has resonated with a broad swath of Russians who regard themselves as centrists.
This broad center reacted with disgust to the motley collection of Communists, ultranationalists, fascists, bully boys and anti-Semites who clustered around the Parliament's cause.
But while most Russians are surely relieved to have order restored, they did not stir themselves to rally for Mr.
Yeltsin.


Sheik Amin Tarif, Arab Druse Leader In Israel, Dies at 95
Sheik Amin Tarif, the spiritual leader of the Arab Druse in Israel, died Saturday in Julis, a village in northern Israel.
He was 95 and lived all his life in Julis.
The cause of his death was not announced.


Riley Says Stand-Pat Knicks Can Still Stand Tall
While making no promises and no predictions, Pat Riley insisted today that the Knicks have the necessary talent to win a championship.
At his annual pre-training camp news conference today, the Knicks' coach disputed the off-season impression that the gap between the Knicks and the three-time champion Chicago Bulls has widened.


Trenton Indus reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Judging Suburban Nook By Its Used Hardcovers
THAT most aggravating of suburban phenomena, Saturday traffic, was building on the snaking streets of Westchester as families dispatched squadrons of minivans on errands.
The day was crisp, a hint of urgency in its chill.
In the parking lot of the Scarsdale Public Library, acorns popped and rattled off cars as gusts of wind ruffled the oaks along Post Road.
Inside the library, the initial rush was over.
The dealers who had lined up early, before the doors opened, had filled their cartons and taken away their booty, leaving the Scarsdale Book Fair to the amateurs, to the residents of Scarsdale, in many cases the same people who had donated the books.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FORTIS FINANCE N.V.  and ASLK-CGER Holding said in a joint statement that they had signed a final sale agreement giving Fortis a 49.9 percent stake in the Belgian savings bank and insurance company for $1 billion.
GERAGHTY &amp; MILLER INC., Plainview, L.I., said it had signed a definitive agreement to be acquired by Heidemij Holding N.V., a Dutch company, in a stock swap valued at about $76 million.


On My Mind; Giving Russia Time
The day that Boris Yeltsin climbed up on that tank a couple of years ago, the West cheered for joy, and made a great human and political error.
It is embarrassing to think about now, it was so intellectually and politically callous, so we don't.
For all their lives, the people imprisoned under Soviet Communism never read a free newspaper, voted in a free election, made a single free speech, or heard one.
They lived in a state whose captives knew that it was dangerous even to think.


United Service Advisors Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


A Singer Overcomes Success
Damon Evans, an actor and operatic tenor who sings tomorrow night on the "American Playhouse" and "Great Performances" presentation of "Porgy and Bess," is an exile from American fame.
In the 1970's, he had what seemed a tremendous stroke of luck: a job on the hit television series "The Jeffersons," playing the son, Lionel.
His three seasons in the employ of Norman Lear handily took care of his music-school tuition.
But he soon discovered that thanks to his television work, American opera companies did not take him seriously.
Now living in England, Mr.
Evans has found work mainly in countries where "The Jeffersons" is unknown.
Snobbishness is not the only obstacle Mr.
Evans faces.
He regularly runs into what he called in a telephone interview "the historically documented resistance to black men in classical music." American opera companies offer him minimum weekly contracts, pegged to particular roles like Sportin' Life in "Porgy and Bess." But he says there is still a general reluctance to engage black male singers for the long term.
In 1989 he turned down an offer from the Metropolitan Opera because it was connected only to the Gershwin opera.
"I am a total package," he said, adding, "I am not going to belittle myself or swallow my self-esteem." Mutual Suggestions
When Mr.
Evans went to England for the Glyndebourne Festival production of "Porgy," the one taped by PBS, he encountered no such problems.
Simon Rattle, the conductor, engaged him as Sportin' Life, then offered him other opportunities, starting with Beethoven's Ninth Symphony.
The singer also found the working atmosphere to be more comfortable and constructive.
"After the first dress rehearsal, Simon had notes for us, suggestions on things we could do differently, and we had notes for him," Mr.
Evans said.
"He accepted them with humility."


Bob Michel's Quiet Leadership
It's not easy being minority leader of the House when your party has been in the minority for nearly 40 years.
Sooner or later, the troops get restless.
That may have something to do with Bob Michel's decision to retire as minority leader next year, at the end of the current Congress.
Representative Michel's stewardship was valuable to Presidents Reagan and Bush, helping to bridge differences between the Republican right and the majority Democrats.
But he kept such a low profile that Mr.
Reagan once called him "Michelle." (It's MY-kel, as in Michael.)


Treasury Vows a Review of S.&amp; L. Agency
Top officials of the Treasury Department, striking a conciliatory tone, promised today to follow up on the complaints of mismanagement at the Resolution Trust Corporation that have stalled the nomination of a new chief executive for the agency.
At a meeting of the Thrift Depositor Protection Oversight Board, a Cabinet-level committee that supervises the agency, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen and Deputy Treasury Secretary Roger C. Altman said they would review every charge made at a September hearing of the Senate Banking Committee, where 13 whistle-blowers testified about waste, fraud and mismanagement at the agency.


In Real-Estate Slump, Some Owners Are Donating Buildings
It sounds like a bad one-liner: The market for commercial real estate in New York City is so bad, they're giving it away.
But in isolated cases, it's true.
The latest example came last week, when a pair of Minnesota investors donated a 15-story office building at 30 West Broadway, in Manhattan's financial district, to the City University of New York.
In June, General Electric donated the 50-story Art Deco masterpiece at 570 Lexington Avenue, at 51st Street, to Columbia University.


Air Methods Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Walgreen Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Supreme Court Roundup; Opening Term, Court Will Ponder Sign on a Home
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether a city can prohibit homeowners from placing political signs on their property while permitting "for sale" signs and other types of notices that do not convey opinions.
Formally opening its 1993-94 term, the Court accepted nine new cases, including an appeal from a St.
Louis suburb that refused to permit a local resident to put up a sign expressing her opposition to the Persian Gulf war.
Two lower Federal courts ruled that the sign ordinance, imposed by Ladue, Mo., violated the First Amendment's guarantee of free speech.


PMG Financial reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Colorado Medtech Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


CMX/Data Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.07
3.19
3.22
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.96
2.90
2.67
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.08
3.01
2.78
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.89
4.91
5.75
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.00
5.99
7.34
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.04
7.01
8.42
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.43
5.45
6.36
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


School in Red Hook Unfairly Maligned
To the Editor:
Re "In Defense of 'Bloody' Red Hook" by Brent Staples (Editorial Notebook, Sept. 24): During the school year 1992-93, approximately 20 employees of the children's book division of Random House served as volunteers at Public School 27 in Brooklyn's Red Hook section, which Mr.
Staples uses as counterpoint to Patrick Daly's Public School 15.


Bridge
The expert makes many subtle uses of the suit-preference signal, which often occurs after a different signal has been given in the same suit.
A good example is the diagramed deal from the International Team Trials played in June in Memphis.
East and West were Michael Becker and Ron Rubin, who defended a slightly optimistic contract of three no-trump.
East might have doubled two spades, to direct a lead, and that would have helped his partner.
But it might well have discouraged North-South from bidding game, and landed them in a safe part-score.


COMPANY NEWS: A Mill for High-Grade Pulp; Giving Recycled Paper A New Chance to Shine
Not many mills can turn the waste paper pouring out of the nation's offices into high-quality pulp for recycling.
That weak link in the recycling chain gets a little stronger today with the opening of Superior Recycled Fiber Industries' $76 million mill in Duluth, Minn.
"There are some larger plants that turn office waste into low- grade papers like tissue and some big higher-quality de-inking facilities attached to paper mills, but this will be the largest high-quality pulp producer for the open market," said Gerald Ostroski, president of Synertec Inc., which is Superior's majority owner.
Synertec is a subsidiary of the Minnesota Power and Light Company.


Howell Industries reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Syncor International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Telescope Makers to Pay $25 Million for Flaw
ENDING a bitter dispute, the Federal Government yesterday announced a deal to drop all potential lawsuits against the makers of the faulty mirror in the $1.5 billion Hubble Space Telescope in exchange for $25 million.
The agreement, said Edward A. Frankle, general counsel of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, was "fair and reasonable."


CHRONICLE
MARTIN S. GOTTLIEB, the special-projects editor on the Metropolitan Desk of The New York Times, will become the managing editor for news at The Daily News, it was announced yesterday by MARTIN DUNN, The News's editor in chief.
Mr.
Gottlieb will start his new job on Monday.
Mr.
Gottlieb, 45, a former editor in chief of The Village Voice, has been a reporter and editor on The Daily News and has also been a visiting professor and lecturer in journalism at Columbia University, the University of California at Berkeley and New York University.


Nassau's Outside Agitator; Republicans Confront 'a Very Scary Guy' in Benjamin Zwirn
Last December, Nassau County was 24 hours from the deadline to pass a budget, and Supervisor Benjamin L. Zwirn, a Democrat, was resisting the latest Republican proposal, even though missing the deadline would mean a drop in the county's credit rating.
Angry about patronage positions, he was either playing a high-stakes game of chicken or was prepared to let the deficit-ridden county's financial position become even more precarious.


Hints of Confrontation In Opening Statements
J.
Gilmore Childers, the chief prosecutor in the World Trade Center case, may well have felt like a mute person suddenly given a voice as he stood before the jury yesterday and made his opening statement.
For the first three weeks of the trial, mostly taken up with jury selection, Mr.
Childers and the other members of the prosecution team were silent presences in the courtroom, as impassive as wax figures, slipping out a back entrance of the courtroom every day and leaving it to the teams of defense lawyers to talk to reporters looking for explanations of each day's events.


Wheatley TXT Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


New Plan Realty Trust reports earnings for Year to July 31


Eyes and Computers
Attempts to alleviate eye strain among computer users by stabilizing flickering on the screens could have the opposite effect, psychologists have reported.
Flickering occurs every time a cathode ray tube computer refreshes the screen with new information, usually 50 to 60 times a second depending on the frequency of the power supply.


American Healthcorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Injury List Gives Jets Further Key Losses
The Jets egos weren't the only things left battered and bruised by their 35-30 loss to the Eagles on Sunday.
Philadelphia inflicted a heavy toll on the Jets' roster, putting nine players on the injury list and dealing a severe blow to the Jets' offensive and defensive lines.
Ankle and foot injuries took their toll on five starters.
Center Jim Sweeney, who has started 130 straight games since 1984, sprained his ankle in the second quarter, and the Jets said he would be out for the next three to six weeks.
Starting defensive tackle Scott Mersereau is listed as out for the next two to four weeks with a similar injury.
Dwayne White, the starting right guard, is listed as doubtful for the next one to three weeks with an ankle injury.


30 ISRAELIS HURT BY SUICIDE BOMBER
A Palestinian driving a car packed with explosives blew himself up today in a suicide attack on an Israeli commuter bus outside the Israeli Army headquarters in the West Bank.
Thirty passengers were wounded; most wounds were slight, and none life-threatening.
But the number of casualties was the greatest since Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization signed an agreement three weeks ago that is supposed to lead to a transfer of authority in the West Bank and Gaza Strip from Israeli to Palestinian hands.


SHOWDOWN IN MOSCOW: World Reaction 1; European Leaders Support Yeltsin, Blaming His Foes for Bloodshed
European leaders rushed to express support for Boris N. Yeltsin today even after it became clear that there had been heavy bloodshed as military forces loyal to the Russian President attacked his opponents in the Parliament building.
Foreign ministers of the 12-nation European Community, meeting in Luxembourg, blamed "elements hostile to the democratization process" for the violence in Moscow and expressed support for Mr.
Yeltsin and "the process of reform."


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about David M. Spain, a civil rights worker and pathologist, misstated his age in some copies and omitted a survivor.
Mr.
Spain was 80.
The survivors include his brother, Norman, of Ardsley, N.Y.


Stocks Close Mixed, With Dow Easing 3.35
The stock market closed mixed yesterday, as many traders sat on the sidelines to focus on the political events in Russia, where opponents of President Boris N. Yeltsin surrendered after a weekend revolt.
"Investors were already nervous because of the valuation levels in the market and because of what happened in previous Octobers," said Robert Freedman, chief investment officer of John Hancock Mutual Funds.
"Yesterday they waited to see how things played out in Russia and stocks traded in a very narrow range. Our phones were very quiet."


DF&amp;R Restaurants Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Aspin Overrules Navy Secretary, Saving Admiral
Overruling his new Secretary of the Navy, Defense Secretary Les Aspin said today that he would keep Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d as the Navy's top officer.
Navy Secretary John H. Dalton, who took office in July, had called for Admiral Kelso's removal as Chief of Naval Operations for failing to show proper leadership at a 1991 convention of naval aviators where 83 women were assaulted.


Lindsay Manufacturing Co.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


CHRONICLE
The publishing merry-go-round keeps on spinning: INGRID SISCHY, the editor in chief of Interview magazine, has been named the new fashion writer of The New Yorker, TINA BROWN, the editor of The New Yorker, announced yesterday.
Ms.
Sischy, who will also write about style and photography, is succeeding HOLLY BRUBACH, who has been named style editor of The New York Times Magazine.
Ms.
Sischy, 41, has been writing about photography for The New Yorker since 1987, and has been editor in chief of Interview since 1989.
Before that, she was editor in chief of Artforum magazine.
She plans to continue in her Interview post along with her new responsibilities.


Michel, G.O.P. House Leader, to Retire
Representative Robert H. Michel, the House Republican leader, who has preferred consultation with Democrats to confrontation, announced today that he would retire after next year's election, a decision that could clear the way for the more combative style personified by Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia.
The 70-year-old Mr.
Michel said at a news conference in Peoria, Ill., which he has represented since 1957, that Congress today lacked "camaraderie" and complained of House members who indulge in "trashing the institution."


Cherry Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


'Dear Compatriots': Yeltsin's Appeal to the People
Following is a transcript of yesterday's televised speech to the nation by President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia, as translated by The Associated Press.
Dear compatriots:


Wathan Leaves Angels
JOHN WATHAN, interim manager of the California Angels during much of the 1992 season and their bench coach this year, will not return to the team next season.


Cangene Corp. reports earnings for Year to July 31


Sales of U.S.-Made Vehicles Inch Up
Dragged down by weak sales by the General Motors Corporation, sales of domestically built cars and light trucks rose slightly in late September, gaining only 6.2 percent over the corresponding period last year, when sales were slow.
G.M.'s problem appeared to stem more from supply than demand.
Slow plant retoolings to produce new models and faulty parts from suppliers caused G.M. to fall more than 70,000 units behind its third-quarter production goals, and dealers are feeling the shortfall.


Frederick Gash, 82, A Patron of the Arts
Frederick Gash, a patron of the arts who helped raise millions of dollars for dance, music and education, died on Saturday at Beth Israel Hospital.
A resident and native of Manhattan, he was 82.
The cause was acute pneumonia, said his wife, Emily Genauer.


Essex County Gas Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to July 31


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Rutgers
Rutgers, needing everything it has for the Big East game against Boston College on Saturday at Giants Stadium, is hurting.
Rusty Swartz, the left outside linebacker, was hospitalized with a concussion and internal injuries when the motorcycle he was riding to class Monday morning was in a collision with an auto.
He will be out for a minimum of 10 days and could miss the rest of the season.


Campbell &amp; Wagman Plans to Shut Down
Campbell &amp; Wagman Inc., a seven-year-old agency in Los Angeles, said yesterday that it had decided to close after determining that it would not participate in the review of its largest account, First Interstate Bancorp, with billings of $30 million.
"We were far too dependent on one client," said Craig Campbell, the agency's president, adding, "From a financial standpoint, it doesn't make sense to keep the agency open without First Interstate." He estimated the agency's other billings, from clients like the Italian Trade Commission and the Los Angeles Convention and Visitors Bureau, at $5 million.


Atlanta Journal; Atlanta: The City Without a Slogan
The erstwhile "Gate City of the South," "Capital of the New South," "City too Busy to Hate," "Black Mecca" and "World's Next Great City" has a problem.
After a year of earnest groping and with Sydney, Australia, already selected as host of the 2000 Summer Olympics, Atlanta's best consultants and image meisters have yet to come up with just the right slogan to market their city before the world comes calling at the 1996 Olympics here.


Weicker's Lieutenant to Run for Governor
Lieut.
Gov.
Eunice S. Groark, who joined Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr.'s fledgling independent third party as his running mate in 1990, announced today that she would run for governor next year.
"Governor Weicker and I have worked hard to provide leadership, and we have established a record of getting things done," Mrs.
Groark said at a news conference at the State Capitol.
"I believe for Connecticut to succeed that that leadership must continue."


Arts World: Many Tiny Economic Stars
For all the acknowledged importance of Broadway theater, Woody Allen's movies or a blockbuster show at the Museum of Modern Art, a new study by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey has found that the arts in New York exert their greatest economic impact through a myriad of far smaller and more obscure enterprises and organizations.
According to the comprehensive, yearlong research project, the arts and other cultural activities have grown substantially in importance over the last decade.
They now pump at least $9.8 billion a year into the New York metropolitan area and, directly and indirectly, support more than 107,000 jobs.
The arts directly employ some 41,000, appreciably more than the 36,000 employed in advertising.


Women Seeking Asylum
Do women who have been raped or have suffered other gender-related violence deserve special treatment when being considered for political asylum in the U.S.?
Their claims ought to be heard with more sensitivity than they often get now.
But increased sensitivity is possible without making gender a special category for asylum.
In this area of refugee protection, the U.S. might well look to Canada, which offers a reasonable model.
The U.S., like many other countries, has adopted internationally recognized standards for extending asylum to foreigners.
Those standards cover people who were persecuted in their homelands because of their race, religion, nationality, membership in a social group or political opinions.
Persecution based on gender can be considered within these categories without carving out a new one.


Hopeful Start for Profit-Making Schools
A year ago, the Harlem Park Community School here seemed to represent the worst of what was wrong in public schools: graffiti covered the halls, crack vials littered the grounds, students did not have enough textbooks and, because the toilets did not work, the children sometimes defecated or urinated in stairwells.
Today, the building is clean, attendance has improved and, while it is too early to see conclusive results in test scores, there are early indications that students are learning faster than expected, and with more enthusiasm.
One mother, Pamela M. Brown, said last week: "A lot of the parents say their kids come home singing. Kids are excited about going to school." School Board Failure
The difference: Harlem Park and eight other Baltimore public schools have been taken over by a private company that runs them for profit.
The Baltimore City School District, unable for many reasons to improve the schools, ceded them to Education Alternatives Inc., which gets the same annual allotment for each student as the public schools -- $5,918 this year.


Review/Fashion; The Look in Milan: Easy
As the spring and summer fashion openings continue to unfold here, interest has begun to shift from the nature of the presentations to the clothes themselves.
There is a growing realization that the prime business of the showings here is the introduction of clothes that stores can sell and women can wear.
The styles that command the most attention are not the ones that rate high in shock appeal but those that make a smooth transition to fresh, new looks.
It is, at any rate, the fabrics of fashion that offer the most news.
They are mostly thin and fluid, with no hard edges.
Many are crushed, crumpled and slashed.
Fluidity is a key to the Emporio Armani collection.
This is something of a tour de force considering that Giorgio Armani's forte is tailoring.
The jackets skim over the body as if they are tunics, and they are paired with trousers with legs wide enough to continue the feeling of ease.
Sometimes there's a lace band at the wrists of a jacket where a cuff might be.
Sometimes there's a line of embroidery down the outside of the trouser legs, where a satin ribbon could be placed if they were dinner pants.
These details are worth mentioning only because there are so few of them.
All the styling is in the shape.


Rabin and Arafat Open Talks Today
Yitzhak Rabin and Yasir Arafat will meet in Cairo today, the first encounter of substance by an Israeli Prime Minister and the Palestine Liberation Organization chairman.


CHRONICLE
WILLIAM M. KUNSTLER'S name tends to conjure up images of a crusader for unpopular causes and controversial defendants.
But a star-struck movie fan?
He certainly seemed like one the other day when he hung up the phone after talking with LEW AYRES, the film actor.
The call brought an end to the lawyer's long search for Mr.
Ayres, whom he'd met briefly in the Philippines while they were both serving in the United States Army during World War II.


Bellwether Area Cool to Whitman
If Middlesex County is any indication, and Middlesex County usually is, Christine Todd Whitman has run smack into a wall of voter skepticism in her bid to defeat Gov.
Jim Florio.
Here in the heart of New Jersey, in the blue-collar neighborhoods of Carteret and along the cheek-to-jowl strip malls of Route 1, Mrs.
Whitman's anti-Florio message and promises of economic reform seem to have fallen largely on disbelieving ears.


Study Ties Prostate Deaths to Animal Fat
AMERICAN men whose diets are rich in animal fats, and particularly fats from red meat, face nearly an 80 percent greater risk of developing potentially fatal prostate cancer than do men with the lowest intake of such foods, a major new study has found.
The study, which has been following the medical fates of more than 51,000 male health professionals since 1986, provides the strongest evidence yet linking dietary fat to the chances of dying of prostate cancer, which is the second leading cause of cancer deaths in American men, after lung cancer.


Stolt Comex Seaway S.A.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Eating Well
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON, who is shaping the Administration's health-care reform proposal, believes strongly that nutrition is an important part of health care.
For instance, she said yesterday through her spokeswoman that "good nutrition has proven health benefits and is one of the cheapest ways people can be more responsible about their health."
Because of her often-stated views, nutrition professionals eagerly awaited the specifics of the health-care reform plan last month, hoping to see Mrs.
Clinton's interest reflected.


Kruk Certainly Willing But Is the Slugger Able?
The lineup appeared out of nowhere.
It listed Ricky Jordan as the starting first baseman for the Phillies.
Manager Jim Fregosi, taken aback by the bogus lineup, said it was wrong.
John Kruk was going to be at first base.
The answer seemed definitive, but the odd sequence underlined the nervousness about the physical condition of the player who hit .316 for the Phillies in 1993.
Kruk injured his back last week and has been suffering from spasms since.
He said he'd play.
Fregosi tried to be more eloquent in that special way the Phillies have.


CHRONICLE
In 1958, Dr.
WILLIAM H. PICKERING was instrumental in the launching into orbit of Explorer I, the first American space satellite, 83 days after the former Soviet Union took the world by surprise with Sputnik.
That was the first of many scientific triumphs in space and on Earth for Dr.
Pickering.
Tomorrow, he is to receive the first Francois-Xavier Bagnoud Aerospace Prize, a $250,000 award to be presented at the University of Michigan.
The award, for contributions to the aerospace field, is named for Mr.
Bagnoud, who was killed in 1986 while piloting a helicopter rescue mission in Mali.
He was 24.


State Financial Services Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lintas Loses Diet Coke's Account After 11 Years
The Coca-Cola Company rocked Madison Avenue yesterday by moving its main Diet Coke account from the advertising agency that helped introduce the brand with great success in 1982.
The account for Diet Coke advertising in English-speaking countries, estimated to be worth $95 million in annual billings, was moved from Lintas New York to Lowe &amp; Partners of New York.


Sports of The Times; Gloom On 2 Fronts For Chicago
THINGS were merely ominous for this city, what with the White Sox getting hammered in their first post-season game in 10 years.
And then came the truly miserable rumor that Michael Jordan just might be retiring.
He would not confront those rumors until a news conference scheduled for this morning, but from the pallor of the White Sox owners, who also happen to be the Bulls' owners, there was a grim look of truth to it.
Certainly nobody would deny the rumors.
Jordan is expected to tell people there are "no more challenges" after three straight championships.


Lemaire Is Putting New Life Into Devils
Two significant characteristics are the same as last season for the Devils: They have a new coach and they have a gap the size of the Grand Canyon at center.
But unlike last season, they are viewing one of those facts as a positive.
Coach Jacques Lemaire commands enormous respect among the players as a result of his accomplishments as a center for the Canadiens and because he is an advocate of simplicity.
The same cannot be said of Herb Brooks and his reign as the coach last season when some of the Devils claimed they got confused with Brooks's system.


National League Championship Matchup
ON THE MOUND Can They Get The Final Outs?
The rotation gave the revolution the club staged over the second half in the N.L.
West its momentum.
It's deep and often unmerciful, paid multi-millions to allow as close to nothing as possible.
The team's collective e.r.a. of 3.14 wasted the rest of the competition in the N.L.
Greg Maddux should win his second straight Cy Young Award, Tom Glavine won 20 games for the third straight season and Steve Avery has the most sinister stuff of all of them.
John Smoltz, the man with all the pitches and all too often the habit of wasting a great part of his talent, is a post-season deity in Atlanta.
He seems to find his zone when the October moonlight finds him on the mound.
Avery split his season record against the Phillies, his e.r.a. a full half a point higher versus Philadelphia than it was for the season.
He will also be facing the club's right-handed lineup, certainly its more lethal incarnation.
Maddux simply is the best pitcher in baseball at the moment.
He walks no one, gives up a hit every five innings or so and always takes his club deep into games.
Glavine, who has a mixed post-season resume at best, may enter the scene with the most to personally prove.
The bullpen, as almost virtually all in baseball are, is ordinary.
Mark Wohlers throws hard, but straight, and so is turning around a lot on the mound.
Kent Mercker never seems to throw strikes when he has to.
Steve Bedrosian and Jay Howell have been effective surprises.
But the Braves have not won the World Series the last two seasons because they never seemed able to get the final out.
Greg McMichael, barely invited to spring training, gets the invitation to make history for the Braves as the club's closer.
But the right-hander, whose out pitches are not strikes, has been awfully suspect after a summer-long run of fantasy finishes.
The Phillies, who have faced McMichael six tmes in 1993, stuck him with an 8.53 e.r.a.
At Least They're Healthy Conventional wisdom says the Phillies are at the wrong end of a mismatch in this department.
As usual, there's considerable truth to standard thinking.
The club's starters, a revelation over the first half, were often wounded and worked over across the team's uneven trek to October's promised land.
Tommy Greene has been hurt, and Terry Mulholland was once feared done for the season.
All are now available and certainly capable.
They may have to be much more.
Their track record, though, says the corps, one augmented Danny Jackson's left-handed presence, will give the Phillies innings, keep them close enough for there to be hope that the offensive engine will wear down the opposition.
Certainly, turning the games over to the bullpen will be a mortifying option.
The contingent of relievers, one the front office sought all season to improve and alter, was ranked 11th in the N.L.
They together amassed 24 blown saves.
The Phillies, not surprisingly, were a marginal 23-20 in one-run games.
Mitch Williams, the theoretical closer, is the perfect top man for a below average bullpen.
His final pitching line of the season about captured the perpetually potential downside to his dramatics: 1 IP, 1 hit, 2 runs, 2 walks, 2 wild pitches.
Advantage Braves IN THE FIELD Sometimes Vulnerable You don't win three straight division titles without a line of defense, and the fielding fortifications for the Braves got more imposing when McGriff was added.


Pizza It Is, and Pizza It Isn't
Americans long wedded to pizza have begun to wonder how to distinguish between their favorite pie and the focaccia that now turns up everywhere.
Pizza, after all, has been the beloved, second only to hamburger on the nation's menu.
Focaccia, the darling of health-minded, status-conscious epicures, is the interloper.
Or is it?


Plasma-Therm Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Tremors in Cuba Bending Exiles' Hard Line
As Cuba's economic and political crisis deepens, exiles here are reaching out to their kin on the island as never before by sending aid, exchanging visits and seeking their advice on how to ease Fidel Castro from power.
The monolithic core that once dominated exile politics is splintering, and moderates are emerging as a vital new force among Cuban-Americans.
Convinced that Mr.
Castro's fall is imminent, exiles here have plunged into an impassioned debate over how to bring down his 34-year dictatorship without inflicting further hardship on Cuba's 11 million people.


Books of The Times; An Autobiography Told In Pictures of Others
An Autobiography
By Richard Avedon
Illustrated. Unpaged. Random House. $100.
Fashion photography isn't just about styles in dress, it's about styles in manners, art, attitudes and social causes.
Richard Avedon has been a great fashion photographer, and he remains an influential one.
Now he has selected and put together pictures from 1932, when he was a boy photographing his sister, to the present, which finds him a seasoned professional, an alumnus of Harper's Bazaar and Vogue and a resident at The New Yorker.


Celtics Lose Abdelnaby, a Starter
ALAA ABDELNABY a Boston Celtics starting forward, underwent back surgery yesterday, three days before the start of training camp, and is expected to be sidelined for three months.
Of the 16 players expected at the opening of camp Friday at Brandeis University, only eight have played for the Celtics.


Broadway Musicians Approve Tentative Pact
The executive board of Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians voted yesterday to approve a tentative agreement in contract talks with Broadway producers.
The vote was 6 to 2, setting the stage for a ratification vote today and tomorrow by union members.


Possis Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to July 31


AT LUNCH WITH: Marilyn Tucker Quayle; With the Spotlight Off, Basking in Brighter Times
MARILYN TUCKER QUAYLE is free at last.
Free from political expectations and expediency, free from images imposed by the national news media, free from the stiletto prickliness that contrasted so sharply with her husband's sunny demeanor.
Now that the Quayle family is back home in Indiana, the woman who groused that she couldn't join a law firm when her husband, Dan Quayle, became Vice President, then touted her stay-at-home status at the Republican National Convention as a counterpoint to Hillary Rodham Clinton's lawyer life, has shucked her armor.


Safety-Kleen Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 11


Encyclical on Morality Doesn't Stifle Debate, Church Officials Say
Roman Catholic officials at the Vatican and in the United States presented Pope John Paul II's new encyclical, "Veritatis Splendor" ("The Splendor of Truth"), in very conciliatory tones today.
They insisted that his statement on fundamental moral theory was intended to encourage reflection and discussion of basic principles of morality, not to cut off debate.
"Early press coverage of the encyclical has implied its chief objective is to quell dissent," said the Rev.
Augustine DiNoia of Washington, who heads the office on theological doctrine for the American bishops' conference.
"This is a mistake. The encyclical is meant to invite a dialogue between theologians and bishops."


Theater in Review
The Perfectionist  McCarter Theater 91 University Place Princeton, N.J.
Through Oct. 17  By Joyce Carol Oates; directed by Emily Mann; sets by Thomas Lynch; costumes by Jennifer von Mayrhauser; lighting by Pat Collins; composer, Lucia Hwong.
WITH: Betty Buckley, Josh Hamilton, Peter Maloney, Shareen Mitchell, David Selby and Dina Spybey.


Poles a Quick Study With Fast Food
Poles love pizza.
But Pizza Hut didn't know they loved pizza that much.
Or that they would fall for corn on the cob, or burritos, or for that matter, Taco Bells.
After six weeks, Pepsico's first "three in one" restaurant outside the United States, with a Pizza Hut, Kentucky Fried Chicken and Taco Bell under one roof, has proved an overwhelming success.


UNREST CONTINUES IN HAITI'S CAPITAL
In the latest blow to efforts to make a peaceful transition to democracy, about 30 heavily armed civilians hunting for the Mayor of the capital broke up a political meeting at a hotel today with bursts of automatic weapons fire.
The Mayor, Evans Paul, has been the target of repeated threats from police auxiliaries and others opposed to democracy.
Moments before the attack, Mr.
Paul was driven away in an unmarked vehicle from the hotel where the meeting was held.


U.N. Says a 2d Serbian Siege Imperils 150,000
As Sarajevo marked 18 months under siege by Serbian nationalist forces today, United Nations officials said 150,000 people trapped by another, little-noticed Serbian siege were facing increasingly desperate conditions because Serbian forces have refused to allow any United Nations relief convoys to the area in more than four months.
The officials said reports from United Nations field officers in central Bosnia and accounts relayed by amateur radio operators inside the besieged pocket indicated that the only thing preventing widespread deaths from starvation in the region around the towns of Maglaj and Tesanj was the nightly airdrops of food by United States military aircraft.


Infection Risk Rises During Menstruation
To the Editor:
"Radical New View of Role of Menstruation" (Science Times, Sept. 21) describes a new suggestion about the physiological purpose of menstruation.
In this hypothesis, advanced by Margie Profet of the University of California, Berkeley, menstruation evolved to rid the uterus of bacteria.
While interesting, this notion lacks a scientific or medical basis.


Amtrak's Sunset Limited Is Back in Business


Executive Changes
B.
F.
GOODRICH CO., Akron, Ohio, named David L. Burner executive vice president.
He will continue as president of B. F. Goodrich Aerospace.
CAMPBELL SOUP CO., Camden, N.J., said that its chairman, Robert J. Vlasic, would retire next month.
David W. Johnson, Campbell's president and chief executive, was named to fill the post.
Mr.
Vlasic will continue as a member of the board.
Also, Bennett Dorrance, a member of Campbell's board, was named to the new position of vice chairman.


U. N. Approves Troops for Rwanda
The United Nations Security Council voted today to send a new peacekeeping force to the small central African country of Rwanda to oversee a cease-fire agreed to in August between warring elements and to prepare for new elections.
The new force will consist of some 2,500 soldiers and include 331 military observers.
Its duties will be to restrain the Rwanda Army, disarm irregular forces, protect the capital of Kigali, help with the return of refugees and oversee election preparations.


Trade Pact to Give Latin America a Big Boost; Democracy in Mexico
To the Editor:
Some of the statements in "One Specious Argument for Nafta" (editorial, Sept. 23) do not reflect the political and electoral transformations recently approved by the Mexican Congress and greatly promoted by the governing party, the Partido Revolucionario Institucional, or PRI.


'Young Republican' Arrested in Murder Scheme
The head of a young Republican club tried to have a political rival killed for spreading the claim that he had molested club members, Federal prosecutors in Manhattan said yesterday.
The man, Thomas R. Stevens of Queens, was arrested Monday, in what prosecutors call the latest escalation of a feud that has raged for two years and has included an arrest for robbery and sodomy, and a $7 million lawsuit.


Clinton Pitch on Health Takes Zigs and Zags
President Clinton's appearance at a picturesque park here today was staged with utmost care to take advantage of all of the things the Administration wanted to emphasize this week.
Most of the crowd was elderly and they all lived in California, a state that remains crucial to Mr.
Clinton's political success.
The topic was health care.
But after little more than half an hour of reassuring his audience that Medicare benefits would not be cut, the President apologized and ducked offstage to his waiting motorcade and rushed back to Washington to meet with his national security advisers on developments in Somalia, leaving a policy adviser, Ira C. Magaziner, behind.


Buttafuoco Admits to Sex With Amy Fisher
Joseph Buttafuoco admitted today what most of America had believed all along: that he had had an affair with Amy Fisher.
Dressed in a dark blue suit, a flamboyant floral tie and his signature black-and-white snakeskin cowboy boots, Mr.
Buttafuoco pleaded guilty to one count of statutory rape for having sex with Miss Fisher when she was a 16-year-old high school student.
In New York, the age of consent is 17.


Teachers' Pension Fund Asks for Diverse Boards
A big teachers' pension fund that is one of the country's largest investors issued new guidelines yesterday for companies in which it invests.
The guidelines call for an end to all-white and all-male boards but give companies leeway in deciding how, and how much, to pay executives.
The guidelines, issued by the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association and College Retirement Equities Fund, are the first such detailed description by a large institutional investor of its preferences and come at a time when shareholders are paying closer attention to how they can get companies to improve their performance.


Admiral Kelso Keeps His Command
In deciding not to sack Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d from his post as Chief of Naval Operations, Defense Secretary Les Aspin has made a decision based on politics, not principle.
By overruling Navy Secretary John H. Dalton's call to remove Admiral Kelso, Mr.
Aspin spared President Clinton further corrosion of his uneasy relationship with military brass.
Secretary Dalton held Admiral Kelso responsible for the events at Tailhook '91, the seamy Las Vegas convention of retired and active-duty naval aviators, and for the subsequent botched investigation.
"The deficiencies in the investigations," the Pentagon charged in its September 1992 report on the Navy's inquiry, "were the result of an attempt to limit the exposure of the Navy and senior Navy officials to criticism regarding Tailhook '91." In other words, the Navy was more interested in covering itself than in uncovering the truth.


Bidding War Shakes Loose Fat Fees for Wall St.
Thanks to the battle for control of Paramount Communications Inc., it has been raining hard on Wall Street.
And nobody seems to be complaining -- certainly not the rainmakers.
With QVC Network Inc. and Viacom Inc. engaged in a complex and protracted battle, the people who will get advisory, financing and legal fees should clear several hundred million dollars, no matter who wins.


Safety-Kleen Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 11


Review/Theater: The Fiery Furnace; Sturdy Midwestern Women Making Compromises With Life
In "The Fiery Furnace," a new Circle Repertory Company production at the Lucille Lortel Theater, dear Julie Harris is the matriarch presiding over a cozy Wisconsin farmhouse kitchen of the 1950's.
Appliances and new miracle products like Reddi Wip are proliferating, promising a new age of homemaking ease.
A casserole is in the oven, the cookie jar is full and Ike is in the White House.
What possibly could be wrong with the picture?
Only everything, of course.
The glossy Brownie snapshot depicting the 1950's as a paradise of wholesome family bliss has long since been exposed as a sham.
Fittingly, Timothy Mason, the author of "The Fiery Furnace," wastes little time before taking a crowbar to the cheery facades once propagated by Life magazine and "Father Knows Best." When father knew best, women often knew depression, loneliness and a battery of other miseries, some of which would not have proper names until the feminist revolution arrived in the decades to come.


By Any Name, Dykstra Is as Tough as Nails
Lenny Dykstra still has his tobacco juice and his toys and that arrogant strut.
He is still the guy who named his youngest son Cutter, after the bad guy in the Judith Krantz novel "I'll Take Manhattan." He is still the guy whose autobiography, "Nails," would be "four pages long without the expletives," according to a former teammate, Wally Backman.
One Philadelphia columnist calls him "Pigpen." His teammates call him unprintable names, or simply "the dude."


Falcons' Miller to Miss the Season
Quarterback CHRIS MILLER of the Atlanta Falcons will miss the rest of season after reconstructive surgery on his left knee Monday night.
The team said the operation in Vail, Colo., repaired an injury from the Sept. 27 game against the Pittsburgh Steelers.
Miller was hurt after throwing a pass on the run.
He wasn't hit by a defender.
Dr.
RICHARD STEADMAN performed the surgery on the same knee Miller injured midway through the 1992 season. (AP)


The Phillies and Braves Have Bullpens of Doubt
One is a cartoon character of a player.
The other is baseball's latest storybook creation.
Their jobs are to close games, and so an examination of Mitch Williams and Greg McMichael is not a bad way to open the debate on the National League Championship Series that begins Wednesday night between the Phillies and the Braves.
Williams, the Wild Thing who is anything but a sure thing, has got the haircut out of the 1970's and the fastball in the 90's and the brain that goes past the boiling point every now and then.
He never sees where half his pitches wind up, and his manager and teammates on the Phillies as often as not don't care to look.


Mr. Badillo Invokes Race
Herman Badillo, the Republican-Liberal candidate for Comptroller, began running a new 30-second television commercial today that accuses Mayor David N. Dinkins of encouraging his supporters to inject racial issues into the mayoral campaign.
The commercial, paid for in part by Mr.
Badillo and in part by the Republican-Liberal mayoral candidate, Rudolph W. Giuliani, focuses on two racially charged statements made last week.
In one, Eric Adams, the head of a black police officers group, said that if Mr.
Badillo were concerned about Hispanic people, he would have married a Hispanic woman.
Mr.
Badillo's wife is Jewish.
In the other, the Rev.
William H. Jones, the head of a Baptist ministers group, said Mr.
Giuliani was supported by "fascist elements."
PRODUCER: The Garth Group of New York.


A. P. Molinaro Jr., 65, Advertising Executive
Albert P. Molinaro Jr., an advertising executive who marketed health-care products, died on Monday at Hunterdon Hospital in Flemington, N.J.
He was 65.
The cause was prostate cancer, his family said.


Stolt Comex Seaway S.A.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Maybe Knicks Are After N.F.L. Title
The Knicks kicked off a new preseason earlier this week by dedicating a renovated practice gymnasium, in which Pat Riley revealed his rewritten battle cry.
"We need to be 10 times more physical and 10 times less emotional," said the author of "The Winner Within, A Life Plan for Team Players."


Joseph Warren Dies; Character Actor, 77
Joseph Warren, a character actor who appeared in dozens of plays and films, died on Friday at the Village Nursing Home in Manhattan.
He was 77.
The cause was respiratory failure, said his wife, Anna.
He had lived in the nursing home since suffering a stroke in 1990.


Columbus Day Again Looks Like a Holiday
At last, after months of politically charged disputes, Mayor David N. Dinkins and the New York City Board of Education have found something they can agree on: closing the schools on Columbus Day.
Only a month ago the Board of Education voted to hold classes for nearly a million schoolchildren on Columbus Day to make up some of the days lost to asbestos testing that delayed the opening of school by 11 days.


Second City Puts Jordan Feelings First
Like the patrons in the America's Bar on East Wacker Drive, the rest of Chicago was stunned tonight by the news that Michael Jordan will announce his retirement from basketball.
It was reported that Jordan said he didn't have any more challenges.
"We were watching the White Sox game when the news came over the television," said Jeff Tronsen, the bartender at the America's.
"Everything just stopped. I turned up the television."


Chairman Of Hershey Is Retiring
Richard A. Zimmerman, chairman and chief executive of the Hershey Foods Corporation, said yesterday that he would retire on Dec. 31.
Hershey's president and chief operating officer, Kenneth L. Wolfe, will replace him, the company said.
The announcement was made after trading ended on the New York Stock Exchange, where Hershey closed at $50.125, down 25 cents.
Hershey shares have risen 6.65 percent over the last year while shares of most other food companies have been decliners.


DMR Group reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Pizza Chain Account Goes to Thompson
Showbiz Pizza Time Inc. in Irving, Tex., said yesterday that it had selected J. Walter Thompson Chicago to handle the account of its Chuck E. Cheese pizza parlor chain, previously at the Keller Crescent Company in Irving.
Billings were estimated at $15 million.


No Headline
"You don't want to help Fidel, but you feel sorry for your family, and you don't want them to have to suffer." -- MARIA PINERA SUTTLES, a Miami woman sending supplies to relatives in Cuba.  [ B8:2. ]


Review/Television; Two Law Series Return, With Some Revisions
Despite obvious drawbacks, a television formula can be a thing of wonder.
It depends on the talent and inventiveness of those doing the mixing from week to week.
Two rigidly formularized NBC series returning this season are proving to be in remarkably tiptop shape.
"Law and Order," Wednesdays at 10, is sharper and more provocative than ever.
"L.A. Law," Thursdays at 10, is showing its distinctive spunkiness again after being widely judged dead in the water for the last couple of seasons.
Created by Dick Wolf, "Law and Order" splits its weekly hour into two neat halves.
In the first, a crime is (or seems to be) committed and the police, primarily the detectives played by Jerry Orbach and Chris Noth, track down the perpetrators.
In the second, the district attorney's office takes over, and prosecutors -- portrayed by Michael Moriarty and, new this season, Jill Hennessy -- take the case to trial.
Actors come and go on the series: Mr.
Orbach replaced Paul Sorvino, who had replaced George Dzundza.
But the formula rarely budges.


Health Care Units To Merge at WPP
Two health care communications units of the WPP Group are merging.
The J. Walter Thompson Company's JWT Healthcare unit in New York will become an operating division of the Ferguson Communications Group in Parsippany, N.J.
Jack Stevens, who was chairman and chief executive at JWT Healthcare, will continue in those roles at the division, which has been renamed Deltakos; he will report to Thomas G. Ferguson, chairman and chief executive at Ferguson.
Thomas A. Vargas, who was senior vice president at Thomas Ferguson Associates, a Ferguson unit, joins Deltakos in the new position of president and chief operating officer, reporting to Mr.
Stevens.


Initiative on Northern Ireland Stirs Optimism
A new initiative by two of the most influential Roman Catholic leaders in Northern Ireland has led to a feeling of optimism among many that fresh negotiations could get under way soon to try to resolve the sectarian violence that has killed more than 3,000 people in the last 25 years.
Ten days after the initiative was announced, political leaders, diplomats and academic analysts agree that for the first time since the early 1970's a process is underway that seems to be leading to negotiations involving the Irish and British Governments and the outlawed Irish Republican Army, through its political wing, Sinn Fein.


Dow Gains 9.50 Points in Anxious Trading
Stocks were mixed yesterday in heavy trading, and the Dow Jones industrial average was the only one of the three most widely watched market indicators to close with a gain.
The Dow rose 9.50 points, to 3,587.26.
But the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index fell 0.14 point, to 461.20, and the Nasdaq index retreated 2.57 points, to 762.27.


Mexico City Journal; 1968, Soaked in Student Blood, Refuses to Fade
Francisco Buendia was not born when angry students shook this city with demonstrations as it prepared to be host to the 1968 Olympic Games.
Although he looks something like a throwback in shredded jeans and long hair, he conceded that he was not much of a counterculturalist, either.
"I agree with the economic modernization of this country," Mr.
Buendia, 20, a student, said, lowering his voice lest other protesters overhear him.
Referring to accords that Mexico has signed with Canada and the United States, he added, "I'm probably one of the only people here who supports the free-trade agreement."


Parking Rules
Alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City tomorrow and Friday for the Jewish holidays of Shemini Atzereth and Simhath Torah.
Other regulations remain in effect.


LOAN GUARANTEES FOR ISRAEL ARE CUT
The Clinton Administration has slashed the loan guarantees that it will give Israel next year because of Israel's continued settlement in the occupied territories and its disputed construction in East Jerusalem, officials here said today.
Instead of receiving guarantees on $2 billion, Israel will have to settle for assurances on less than $1.6 billion.
In all, the officials said, the Administration has recommended to Congress that $437 million be sliced from the program, a dollar-for-dollar penalty because of Israeli spending on settlements in the territories.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CARAUSTAR INDUSTRIES, Austell, Ga., a cardboard tubing maker, will buy Federal Packaging Corp., St.
Paris, Ohio, for undisclosed terms.
MERRILL CORP., St.
Paul, has entered into a letter of intent to acquire May Printing Co.
Terms were not disclosed.


Advanced Micro's Profit Rises Nearly 25% but Stock Falls
Advanced Micro Devices Inc., the leading maker of Intel-compatible microprocessor chips, released third-quarter earnings results today that disappointed Wall Street investors, who drove its stock down $4.75, to $22.
Advanced Micro, based in Sunnyvale, Calif., reported revenue of $418.4 million for its third quarter ended Sept. 26, an increase of more than 17 percent compared with $356.7 million a year ago.
Net income was $61.3 million, or 61 cents a share, compared with Wall Street forecasts in the 69-cent range.


Lance Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 4


Stop Subsidizing Arm Sales Abroad
As the cold war recedes, America's need for weapons will inevitably decline.
Military contractors worried about the loss of business have come up with the wrong answer: Sell more arms abroad.
The U.S. increasingly dominates the shrinking world market in arms sales, amassing a 60 percent market share in the third world last year.
But that's not good enough for the contractors.
They want Congress to back $1 billion in Government loan guarantees, subsidizing arms makers who market their wares to foreigners on credit.


Applied Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to May 31


Revolutions Tend To Reap as They Sow
To the Editor:
An Associated Press news item on Alexander Solzhenitsyn's condemnation of the French Revolution (Sept. 27) fails to explain why "massacres" took place in the Vendee region of France 200 years ago.


Sytje's Pannekoeken Huis Family Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 12


Witness Says He Saw Yellow Van Just Before Blast
In a surprise eyewitness account, a Secret Service agent testified yesterday at the World Trade Center bombing trial that he spotted a yellow van parked in the trade center garage just before he was knocked unconscious by a violent blast.
Prosecutors have said that the bomb was contained in a yellow Ryder rental van.
But under hammering cross-examination by defense lawyers, the witness, Jan Gilhooly, acknowledged that he had not mentioned the crucial sighting to investigators who interviewed him a day after the Feb. 26 explosion and that he first told prosecutors about it on Monday night.


Turn On the Lights in Central Park and Improve the Security
To the Editor:
Elizabeth Barlow Rogers, administrator of Manhattan's Central Park, speaks of the importance of seeing the way the park is used (news article, Sept. 30).


A.M.A. Says Compromise Is Possible on Budgets
The American Medical Association soft-pedaled its unhappiness with parts of President Clinton's health plan in Senate testimony today, saying it could even agree to overall national health care budgets if doctors were involved in setting them.
Meanwhile, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, Donna E. Shalala, faced a flurry of questions today when she appeared in two House hearings.
She said the Administration would deliver its bill in two weeks, in answer to Republicans who repeatedly complained that it was hard to focus on an unfinished proposal.


Rice Continues Its Surge On Talk of Japan Purchases
Prices for rice futures contracts at the Mid-America Commodity Exchange hit their upward limit today for the third time in a week, driven by excitement over prospects that Japan will import rice from the United States this year for the first time since 1975.
The November contract quickly rose to $8.25 a bushel, up the 45-cent limit, and stayed at that price until the close as traders with short positions scrambled to limit their losses in the face of the strong buying.


Somali General Denounces Further Peace Talks
After the fiercest battle between United Nations and Somali forces in Mogadishu, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, the fugitive clan leader, said in a radio broadcast Monday night that he would no longer take part in any peace talks and urged Somalis to defend themselves against United Nations "colonialism."
General Aidid, who has been in hiding since June 17, warned the United Nations that bringing in more troops "would not serve peace but worsen the situation," the Italian News Agency ANSA reported.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Turner officials pull back from allowing CNN to run commercials that imitate news interviews.
THE Turner Broadcasting System considered, but rejected, plans to run commercials that resemble segments of news interview programs on its CNN and Headline News cable television networks.
Since CNN began operations in 1980, followed by Headline News a year later, Turner's policies have prohibited carrying sales pitches that imitate programming.
The rationale was that viewers might be confused because such paid messages could blur the line between news content and advertising.


Baby's Painful 2 Years of Life Highlight the High Cost of Futile Medical Care
Portia Davis sits strapped in a wheelchair at the Hospital for Sick Children in Washington, a feeding tube passing through her nose.
Her tiny, pointed head jerks mildly as she passes from seizure to seizure, small convulsive shivers with barely a break in between.
She is 2 years old now and, medical experts say, neurologically devastated.
She has virtually no brain, and although her eyes are open she is completely unresponsive and unaware of her surroundings.
Doctors say she has no prospects for improvement.


Two Who Survived Tell Of Euphoria, and Fear
It wasn't until he emerged from the Russian Parliament at 5:10 P.M. on Monday afternoon that Aleksei Vorobyov realized that the top half of the building was on fire.
All day, he and his colleague, Tatyana Romanenkova, both correspondents for the Russian Parliament's now-defunct newspaper, had heard the sound of automatic gunfire, coming from inside and outside the building.
They had watched as the tanks and armored personel carriers surrounding the White House, as the Parliament building is known, opened fire.
But until the end they were convinced the big guns were firing not shells, but blanks.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Shell Oil will spend $1.2 billion on a giant field in the Gulf of Mexico, intending to push offshore-recovery technology to the deepest levels yet.
The announcement was welcomed by the drilling industry, where activity is the lowest in decades.  [ Page D1. ]
The main Diet Coke advertising account was moved to Lowe from Lintas, the agency that helped introduce the brand with great success in 1982.
The move came amid slumping soda sales and Coke's dissatisfaction with Lintas ads.  [ D1. ]


The Loneliness of the One-Mushroom Pasta Sauce
SO many kinds of mushrooms are in the markets today, even in ordinary supermarkets, that it is easy to find more than just the standard white variety.
Which is great for pasta dishes, since a variety of mushrooms will play off one another and enhance the otherwise subtle taste of a one-mushroom sauce.
I have seen this dish made with many pasta shapes, but my favorite is pappardelle, available at some Italian markets.
It laps up the sauce so nicely.
If you can't find it, use whatever fresh pasta is available.
To add sharpness to this mild and sweet dish, the salad contains some flavorful black olives.
The dinner will take less than 30 minutes to prepare.


Short Gains an Edge, But a Victory? Not Yet.
Careful, conservative play by Nigel Short brought him to an effortless draw yesterday in London in Game 13 of his world championship match with Gary Kasparov.
In fact, toward the end the Englishman had a slight advantage and was trying to make it count, but the Russian was diligent in restraining him.
The score is now Kasparov 9, Short 4.
This means that 3 1/2 more points will suffice for Kasparov to gain the $1.43 million winner's share of the $2.55 million purse.
But even after a winner is determined, the players are to complete the 24-game series.


Buttafuoco Pleads Guilty to Statutory Rape of Amy Rape


Charlotte Signs Johnson for $84 Million
In what the Charlotte Hornets are calling the biggest deal in league history, LARRY JOHNSON signed a contract yesterday that is believed to be worth $84 million over 12 years.
"He's the leader of this team, and he will always be the leader of this team," Hornets owner GEORGE SHINN said of the third-year player who was voted rookie of the year for 1991-92 and made the all-star team last season, averaging 22.1 points and 10.5 rebounds a game.
The Hornets would not confirm terms of Johnson's contract. (AP)


Program Announced For '93 Tucker Concert
Renee Fleming, Florence Quivar, Ruth Ann Swenson, Richard Leech, Thomas Hampson, Samuel Ramey and James Morris are to sing at this year's Richard Tucker Music Foundation Gala Concert, Dec. 12 at 7 P.M. at Avery Fisher Hall.
Daniel Oren is to conduct the orchestra, and Birgit Nilsson, the guest of honor, is to recount memories of the foundation's namesake.
The program includes the world premiere of the second Richard Tucker Composer's Commission: a work by John Kander, to be sung by Ms.
Fleming.


Possis Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to July 31


Food Notes
Health Food Branch
Commodities, the well-stocked health food supermarket at 117 Hudson Street (at North Moore Street), has opened a branch called Commodities East at 165 First Avenue (10th Street).
Unlike most health-food stores, Commodities emphasizes food, not dietary supplements.
While smaller than the original store, Commodities East is extremely well stocked with packaged foods, most of them made with organic ingredients.
Anything that is not organic must be all natural and have no refined sugar.
Grains and pastas are sold in bulk, and there is a good selection of dairy products and frozen prepared foods.
The array of produce is also attractive, with prices similar to those for nonorganic items at corner markets.


Plasma-Therm Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  CLINTON MEETS ON SOMALIA  President Clinton met with his top advisers to review the entire Somalia operation.
He sought to forge a policy that balances the need to remain in Somalia to recover American hostages and the President's own goal of putting Somalia on the road to recovery.
A1  CLAN CHIEF BARS PEACE TALKS  Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, the fugitive clan leader, said he would no longer participate in any peace talks and urged Somalis to defend themselves against United Nations "colonialism.  A17


Fleeing Literary Limelight for Calm Obscurity
Denmark's most successful author since Isak Dinesen is a 36-year-old former ballet dancer named Peter Hoeg who owns no television set, telephone or car and whose idea of a bad time is having to appear in public.
"It's not like I'm a pop star or an actor having to be in the limelight all the time," said Mr.
Hoeg, who traveled to New York recently to help promote "Smilla's Sense of Snow," the first of his four books of fiction to be translated into English.
"I've been in obscurity for the past two years, and I will return to obscurity again."


Einstein Changed World on Office Time
To the Editor:
Yes, Albert Einstein used a pen while working on his theory of relativity (letter, Sept. 25).
However, the famous physicist was working at the Swiss Patent Office in Bern, not the post office.
I corresponded more than 50 years ago with one of Einstein's former colleagues, who later rose to the rank of director, in relation to my uncle, who had worked under him.
The letter related to me that my correspondent's superior and fellow workers were well aware that Einstein was working on a private project, hiding it under papers of patent applications, which he had been assigned to work on.
Guessing that he was working on something important, nobody in the office intervened.


Lands' End
Shares of Lands' End Inc. eased yesterday after the catalogue retailer of apparel, luggage and other products announced a secondary offering by its chairman and vice chairman.
The decline ended a price run-up of almost 50 percent in the third quarter, following strong second-quarter financial results and favorable ratings by analysts.


Sytje's Pannekoeken Huis Family Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 12


Rabin and Arafat to Discuss Details
In yet another sign of how the once unthinkable is fast approaching Middle East routine, Yitzhak Rabin and Yasir Arafat will meet in Cairo on Wednesday, the first official encounter of substance by an Israeli Prime Minister and the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
In contrast to the symbolic power of these men's famous handshake at the White House on Sept. 13, the meeting this time is billed as more of a nuts-and-bolts session: how to crank up negotiations on translating from principle to reality an agreement to introduce Palestinian self-rule to Israeli-occupied territories, starting in the Gaza Strip and the West Bank city of Jericho.


A Search for Words to Mourn Troops Who Died in Somalia
Nine days have passed since the Rev.
Thomas Jackson got the news, but he is still unsure about what he will say at the memorial service for Sgt.
Eugene Williams at New Original Church of God in Christ on Friday.
Will the pastor say Sergeant Williams was a God-fearing young man who loved his country and honored his parents?
Of course.
That's obvious from the way the 26-year-old soldier died.
He was killed when his Army helicopter was shot down over Mogadishu by Somalian militia fighters on Sept. 25.


William A. Corley, 76, Bureau Chief for NBC
William Angus Corley, former chief of the NBC News bureaus in Chicago, Saigon and Moscow, and an Emmy-winning television producer and writer, died on Sunday at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.
He was 76 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of renal cancer, his family said.


Frontiers of Retailing; Financial-Desk Jockeys Can Shop at the Office
Subscribers to the Bloomberg Financial Markets computer network found something new on their monitors yesterday between low-sulfur diesel fuel prices and the Belgian bond market: the Bloomberg Shopping Mart.
Those who typed in Gift-Go got a chance to order a jacket from Brooks Brothers or a dozen roses from 1-800-FLOWERS.


In America; The Echoes of Bushwick
Nobody talks much about Bushwick.
It's just a tired, old, poverty-racked neighborhood in Brooklyn where adults without jobs move listlessly from one boring day to the next, and the police have to close off streets to slow the high-energy encroachment of youthful drug dealers, and the children, of whom there are many, find it difficult to dream because their days and their nights are so often disturbed by the sound of gunfire.
The kids in Bushwick grow up knowing that life is a crapshoot, which means you may not grow up at all.
The walls of many buildings are covered with huge and disturbing murals -- elaborate graffiti memorials to friends and playmates who died from a bullet to the head, a knife in the heart, and so on.


Bally of Switzerland Picks DDB Needham
Bally of Switzerland, the maker and retailer of shoes, leather goods and fashion accessories, has selected DDB Needham Worldwide in New York to handle its global account, the agency said.
Billings were estimated by Campaign, the British advertising trade publication, at $20 million.
The account was awarded to DDB Needham after a review that also included Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, Young &amp; Rubicam and Wirtz, a Swiss agency that collaborated with Collett Dickenson Pearce in London, its international partner.


SENATORS CRITICIZE BOSNIA AID PLAN
Members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee expressed reservations today about the Clinton Administration's plan to dispatch 25,000 American troops to the Balkans.
Senator Claiborne Pell, the Rhode Island Democrat who is the committee chairman, said he opposed an arrangement under which the United States would supply almost half of the peacekeepers of an international force in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
"It's just too high a proportion of the 50,000 total," he said.
"I think what's in Somalia is correct, where about a fourth or a fifth of the troops are American."


Team Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


MTC Electronic Technologies Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Alta Energy Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30


ONE-STOP SHOPPING FOR ECOLOGY DATA
In a report intended to help the nation safeguard plants and animals, the National Academy of Sciences called on the Government today to establish a central repository of scientific information on the nation's flora and fauna.
The report, by a committee of 19 scientists, business executives and public policy specialists, was prepared at the request of Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 1
Sept 24
Oct. 2
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.8
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.2
3.2
3.2
Gasoline stocks
207.4
207.6
210.3
Distillate stocks
127.4
129.4
131.5
Crude imports, daily
6.2
6.5
6.2
Product imports, daily
1.7
1.9
2.0
Crude stocks
328.9
327.5
324.8
Crude production, daily
6.8
6.8
7.1
Refinery utilization (%)
93.2
93.3
90.4
Source: American Petroleum Institute


The Man in the Middle: A Trusted Military Aide
Among the security ministers clustered with President Boris N. Yeltsin on Sunday night, pondering how to quell the armed uprising that was taking place at the Parliament center, the Mayor's office, and the television center, Defense Minister Pavel S. Grachev was the key official.
Not only was he the senior military officer, who knew best which army units could be trusted to stay loyal to the Kremlin, and the man who would have to organize and order the actual assault.


And in Other News From Chicago: Jays Topple Sox
The wicked hitting of the American League's top two batters, John Olerud and Paul Molitor, overcame the wild pitching of Juan Guzman tonight in the opening game of the American League Championship Series.
Fortunately for Guzman, Olerud and Molitor are on his team.
Despite Guzman's eight walks, three wild pitches and one hit batter in a bizarre six-inning performance, the Toronto Blue Jays thumped the Chicago White Sox, 7-3, in the home team's first post-season game in 10 years.


White Supremacists Investigated In 4 Firebombings in Sacramento
The house of a Chinese-American City Councilman was firebombed early this morning, and law-enforcement officials say they are investigating whether the bombing and three other recent attacks against minority targets here are the work of a new white supremacy group.
The police said a man identifying himself as a member of a group called the Aryan Liberation Front claimed responsibility for the bombing of the house of the Councilman, Jimmie Yee.


Bourque Arbitrator Rules for Bruins
In what must be considered a major victory for the Boston Bruins, and National Hockey League owners in general, a league arbitrator yesterday awarded veteran Boston defenseman Ray Bourque $2.25 million for the 1993-94 season, $2 million less than he had requested of the team.
The ruling, made by arbitrator Richard Bloch early yesterday evening, capped a tense period for the Bruins, who arrived at Madison Square Garden last night for their season opener against the Rangers.


INSIDE
Plea Deal in House Bank Case
The former head of the House bank pleaded guilty to embezzlement and will cooperate with Federal prosecutors in the case.
Page A18.
Corruption Cases Reopened
A New York City police official said he would reopen 40 corruption and misconduct cases that were withheld from prosecutors.
Page B1.
Futile Care and Tough Issues
The case of a girl who has virtually no brain exemplifies the toughest issues facing those who want to change the health care system.
Page B7.
Blue Jays Take Opener
With a 17-hit onslaught, Toronto beat the White Sox in Chicago, 7-3, in the first game of the American League baseball playoffs.
Page B11.


No. 1 Tune: Accentuate Ingredients
EXPERIENCED cooks understand that a good dish depends more on selecting fine ingredients and using them with respect than on slavishly following a recipe.
As diverse as the latest cookbooks and food books may be -- the subjects include American, French, Italian and Chinese cuisines plus baking, vegetarian dishes and snacks -- they all sing this refrain.
Sometimes the tune is subtle; other times it provides an incessant, foot-stomping beat.
But it's worth knowing by heart.
The uncompromising cook who finds time at a premium should find ample inspiration in this crop of books along with advice about how to select and care for ingredients.


Tom Bristol Coughran, Banking Executive, 87
Tom Bristol Coughran, a banking executive who was an Assistant Secretary of the Treasury during the Eisenhower Administration, died on Saturday at Alexandria Hospital in Virginia.
He was 87 and lived in Falls Church, Va.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


WORLD MORATORIUM ON NUCLEAR TESTS IS BROKEN BY CHINA
Rejecting a plea from President Clinton, China exploded a nuclear weapon at a test site beneath its western desert today, breaking an informal testing moratorium.
In response, the Administration ordered preparations for a resumption of American tests.
"The United States deeply regrets this action," Mr.
Clinton said in a statement issued this morning after receiving reports that the Chinese had set off a nuclear device in Xinjiang province.
Mr.
Clinton added that he had "directed the Department of Energy to take such actions as are needed to put the U.S. in a position to be able to conduct nuclear tests next year."


Review/Opera; Mozart's Magic Spell, Cast in Bright Colors
The Metropolitan Opera's production of "Die Zauberflote" returned to the house on Monday evening, with its brightly colored storybook sets by David Hockney and a cast of singers so fully in tune with the work's style and substance as to make the passions of Mozart's magical world ring consistently true.
For singers and directors, "Die Zauberflote" is a peculiar balancing act.
Its comic elements are meant to be farcical rather than subtle, yet the opera's main business is to describe the rite of passage from the reactive, egocentric world of childhood to the responsibilities and interactions of a fully adult world.
The path between them is one of spiritual introspection, but even the work's symbolic trials are surrounded by a frivolous filigree of comic vignettes.


Claim by Ex-Army Coach Is Turned Down
The United States Military Academy has rejected a claim by fired basketball coach TOM MILLER for $318,534 in lost salary and benefits.
West Point Athletic Director AL VANDERBUSH turned down the claim in a letter dated Sept. 21.
Vanderbush was supported by the university's top brass.
"It was the athletic director's determination that Coach Miller failed to contribute to the academy's leadership development process after he was counseled that his behavior was unacceptable," Lieut.
Col.
DON McGRATH, an Army spokesman, said.


Father-Son Recital
Pavel Berman, the winner of the gold medal at the 1990 International Violin Competition of Indianapolis, is to make his Carnegie Hall debut on Oct. 24 at 3 P.M. in a recital of works by Mozart, Shostakovich, Dvorak and Wieniawski.
He is to be accompanied by his father, the pianist Lazar Berman.
The joint recital is a benefit for Classical Action: Performing Arts Against AIDS.
Tickets are $15 to $40, or half-price for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 315-2145.


The Deepest Dive Yet For Gulf of Mexico Oil
The Shell Oil Company announced yesterday that it would spend $1.2 billion to bring into production a giant oilfield in the Gulf of Mexico, a project intended to push offshore-recovery technology to the deepest levels yet and to create 2,200 jobs, most in Texas and Louisiana, and thousands more among subcontractors in 34 states.
The announcement, made in Houston, was welcome news to the domestic oil industry, which in the last year has seen its drilling activity at the lowest level in decades amid falling prices for crude oil and a slowdown in the rate of increased demand for gasoline and other petroleum products.


Group by Group, Dinkins Seeks to Unite Support
Mayor David N. Dinkins went to the Upper West Side one morning last week to mingle with ordinary New Yorkers -- an endeavor that often produces a spontaneity that can be at odds with Mr.
Dinkins's own penchant for preparedness.
A middle-aged man approached the Mayor, asked him what he was doing next Saturday and then invited him to his son's bar mitzvah.
"I'll see if I can make it," the Mayor said politely.


60-Minute Gourmet
MANY foods can be given a compelling new texture by coating them with something crunchy like seasoned bread crumbs, crushed nuts or sesame seeds.
I recently bought some Cornish hens and decided to crush some toasted pecans for a coating.
Pecans are perfect for this kind of cooking because they are delightfully sweet, and having more moisture than most nuts, they blend well in sauces.
If you are going to broil the hens, flattening them will allow them to cook evenly and the coating will stay on.
Before applying the coating, wet the hens with a thick sauce that will adhere to the surface.
The recipe here calls for a zesty sauce that combines Dijon mustard, vinegar and Worcestershire sauce.
For part of the cooking time, the hens are cooked with just the sauce on them, because the pecans would burn if they were added at the beginning.


Florio Didn't Cut Taxes
To the Editor:
"No End to Talk of Taxes" (editorial, Sept. 28) erroneously states that Gov.
Jim Florio of New Jersey, when faced with a grass-roots tax revolt, "reversed field" and joined the Republican Legislature in repealing the 1 percent increase in the state sales tax he enacted in 1990 as part of his $2.8 billion tax package.


In Shift, Bond Dealers Seek To Halt Political Donations
In a move that reflects an unexpected change of sentiment in the municipal bond industry, the Public Securities Association called on municipal bond dealers yesterday to stop making political contributions to state and local officials or candidates for government office in hopes of winning underwriting business.
The moratorium would be in effect until Federal regulators finish approving new restrictions on political contributions by bond dealers.


Safeway Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 11


Hurricanes Are Seeing Red Over That Big Point Spread
A six-foot-high sign hangs in the University of Miami football locker room.
On it is the number 14.
That's the amount of points by which some oddsmakers have favored Florida State University to defeat the Hurricanes on Saturday in Tallahassee.
And it's a source of outrage among Miami's players.


Rams' Henley Gets a Leave of Absence
Los Angeles Rams starting cornerback DARRYL HENLEY, reportedly under Federal investigation for his alleged role in a cocaine-distribution ring, has been granted an indefinite leave of absence from the team.
The Rams issued a statement yesterday, saying Henley had been granted a leave of absence and that they would have no further comment.
A day earlier, the team confirmed that Henley is under investigation for drug trafficking.
"We have been aware for sometime of an ongoing investigation involving various individuals as well as Darryl Henley and a former Rams cheerleader," said JOHN SHAW, Rams executive vice president.


Review/Fashion; A Few Artisans Try To Blow the Socks Off
The modern woman, as she is cast on Milan's runways, rolls out of bed with greasy hair, pulls on her boyfriend's white cotton briefs, a thinning T-shirt that barely covers the tops of her thighs, black ankle socks and her father's loafers, and goes to face the world.
Some of this city's most directional designers -- the pack led by Prada -- are working so hard at creating a woman bored by fashion that it's getting pretty boring for everyone else.
Not that there isn't an important message in disinterested dressing.
It's just been going on too long and is now being done entirely too convincingly.
What is not working here -- never has worked, really -- is back-to-basics masquerading as a runway show.
Designers need to make their peace with fashion and start creating beautiful clothes again.


A Passage to Playoffs Through N.F.C. East
When the Jets get down to the last month of the season, they may look back at last Sunday's 35-30 loss to the Philadelphia Eagles with regret.
For the Jets (2-2), the path to the playoffs goes through the heart of the National Conference East.
They will play an "away" game against the Giants on Oct. 31, then have back-to-back games against Washington and Dallas in December.
Besides the fact that the Jets need as many early victories as possible -- and failed to get one against Philadelphia -- they will probably need to win at least two of their three remaining games against N.F.C.
East opponents to have a shot at winning the their division.
In that respect Buffalo, which is tied with Miami in the American Conference East with a 3-1 record, has already defeated two N.F.C.
East opponents -- Dallas and the Giants.


Pentagon Identifies Fatalities in Somalia
Following are the 12 American soldiers identified by the Defense Department as killed Sunday night in the clash with Somali forces loyal to Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, the fugitive militia leader.
BRILEY, Chief Warrant Officer Donovan L., 33, North Little Rock, Ark.


Review/Film Festival: Ruby in Paradise; Starting a New Life in Florida And Keeping a Diary as She Goes
The best news about tonight's program at the New York Film Festival comes first: "Excursions to the Bridge of Friendship," an irresistible 12-minute Australian short presented without dialogue.
The film's dreadfully pertinent soundtrack consists of wailing, clanging music heard steadily in the background.
The caterwauling highlights the efforts of a Bulgarian folk singer to bring her artistry to Australia, with the help of a reluctant would-be entrepreneur who imagines glowing headlines ("Cultural Visionary Brings Unique Sound to Sydney") should the plan succeed.
Presented in crisp, funny black-and-white images, it is replete with droll subtitles ("Meanwhile, back in the Balkans") and widespread expressions of dismay on all sides.
Christina Andreef, whose cast includes Genevieve Lemon of "Sweetie," shows firm control of her off-the-wall subject and a witty, wonderfully inventive visual style.
Like Jane Campion, who is thanked in this short film's credits, she displays a memorably skewed world view.


Dynamics Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 4


CLINTON REVIEWS POLICY IN SOMALIA AS UNEASE GROWS
President Clinton met with his top advisers tonight to review the American role in the international military operation in Somalia.
He sought to balance the need to remain in Somalia to recover American hostages with mounting calls from Congress for a clear withdrawal strategy and the President's own goal of putting Somalia on the road to recovery.
After a 90-minute meeting, during which the President reviewed options ranging from a quick pullout to a large-scale buildup of American forces in Somalia, Mr.
Clinton told his aides he wanted to think more about the alternatives and asked them to reconvene Wednesday morning.


Critic's Notebook; Upstart and Formal Styles in Montreal
Modern dance from Britain, admittedly in a selective overview, has pride of place at this year's International Festival of New Dance in Montreal.
But already in the first week of the eight-year-old festival, which is presenting 27 companies from seven countries through Oct. 9, the lively Belgian dance scene has, as in the past, come to the fore here.
A fine showing in this respect came from Annamirl van der Pluijm, a Dutch soloist who has continued to work in Belgium after performing there with Jan Fabre's movement-theater troupe, and from the Michele Anne De Mey Company, headed by an original member of Anne Teresa De Keersmaeker's group.


Intermagnetics General Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Bridge
Once each year somebody, somewhere, seems to uncover an ending unlike anything seen before.
The diagramed deal played in a regional tournament in Sturbridge, Mass., is the candidate for 1993.
It was worth "only" an overtrick for the declarer, Bob Jones of Auburndale, Queens, but since it was a pairs contest the overtrick was worth many match points.
The auction proceeded briskly to three no-trump, and West led a spade, his partner's suit.
East put up the king and when South dropped the nine he cashed the ace, giving the declarer some help.
He then shifted to a diamond, and South could have settled for 10 tricks by finessing.
Instead he put up the ace and tried for 11 tricks.
He could have succeeded by cashing two club winners, since the jack falls doubleton and the hearts split evenly, but that would have been foolish play.


Hearing for Troubled Man to Be Dropped
The lawyer for Larry Hogue, the mentally ill, homeless man who for years menaced residents of the Upper West Side, said yesterday that he would withdraw his request for a competency hearing and try to persuade prosecutors to get his client medical treatment instead.
The lawyer, C. Vernon Mason, said he planned to go to court Thursday and withdraw his request for a hearing to determine whether Mr.
Hogue, 49, is competent to stand trial on charges of criminal mischief and possession of a controlled substance.
Mr.
Hogue was scheduled to return to Manhattan Criminal Court Oct. 25.


No $33.5 Million Deal for Coleman
The attorney for Derrick Coleman said that contract negotiations between Coleman and the Nets broke down yesterday after the star forward rejected the team's latest offer, $33.5 million over five years.
If he does not sign a new contract, Coleman will become a restricted free agent after this season and could become an unrestricted free agent following the 1994-95 season.


QVC Tells Paramount Bid Can Be Financed
At 10 o' clock yesterday morning, Herbert A. Allen did something he does not ordinarily do as the head of Allen &amp; Company, an investment bank catering to the entertainment world.
Rather than trusting a messenger, or an underling, he personally delivered some documents to Felix Rohatyn of Lazard Freres aimed at helping his client, QVC Network Inc., win its battle for Paramount Communications Inc.


ICF Kaiser International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Louis Grossman, 76, Judge in Manhattan
Louis Grossman, a former Civil Court judge in Manhattan who served for many years as an acting State Supreme Court justice, died on Monday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 76.
The cause was heart failure, said his family.


Ex-Manager of House Bank Accepts Plea Deal and Admits Embezzlement
Two years after the House bank scandal created deep political embarrassment for dozens of lawmakers, the Justice Department today filed the first formal charges of wrongdoing in the affair, accusing the bank's former manager of embezzling $75,300.
In a plea agreement with the Government that was made public today, the former official, Jack Russ, who supervised the House bank until he was forced to resign in March 1992, admitted that he committed three felonies, including cashing 17 checks at the bank even though he knew his account was overdrawn.
Mr.
Russ is scheduled to formally enter his plea in Federal District Court here on Wednesday.


Corrections
An article and a headline on March 22 about the debate over the costs and benefits of efforts to control acid rain, using South Carolina as an example, referred incorrectly to the makeup of the state's rainfall.
Although there is debate over the extent of damage from the acidity, there is a scientific consensus that South Carolina indeed has acid rain.
Increasingly detailed letters from readers over several months have pointed out the error; this correction was delayed by an editing lapse.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a "Political Memo" article on Sunday, about the political effects of the Mollen Commission's investigation of police corruption, referred incorrectly to the aftermath of televised comments by Eric Adams, head of an organization of black police officers.
Mr.
Adams urged supporters of Mr.
Dinkins to cast ballots, saying that otherwise "we are going to have to consider arming ourselves with bullets to prevent the lynch mob mentality that is coming from this kind of Republican administration."
At a news conference outside City Hall by members of a police fraternal organization called New York Shields, white officers argued that Mr.
Adams's violent oratory was worse than the corruption of Michael Dowd, a former drug-dealing officer who had testified to the commission.
But black officers who were watching disagreed.


Federal Paper Board Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 11


Zanart Publishing Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to June 30


Josephine Jablons, 69, A City Opera Trustee
Josephine Jablons, a board member of the New York City Opera Company, died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 69 and also had a home in Palm Beach, Fla.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


Injury Puts Pacers' Miller Out of Action
REGGIE MILLER, the Indiana Pacers' leading scorer the past four seasons, severely sprained his left ankle in a pickup game and will be sidelined for at least half the preseason.
Miller, the National Basketball Association's leader in consecutive regular-season starts (339), probably will be ready for the Nov. 5 season opener at Atlanta.
The 6-foot-7-inch guard injured the ankle Sept. 24 and recovery will take four to six weeks from that date, Pacers trainer DAVID CRAIG said.


Review/Film Festival; A Taiwan Artist Tells His Island's Story Obliquely
The work of Hou Hsiao-hsien, Taiwan's premier film maker, has been turning up regularly at American festivals since "A Summer at Grandpa's" was shown in the 1986 New Directors/New Films series at the Museum of Modern Art.
With his very fine new film, "The Puppetmaster," Mr.
Hou has come into full control of his talents.
He's an artist who has absorbed all the outside influences he needs and is now speaking with his own voice.
It's a clear, assertive voice, though not exactly loud, which wouldn't be in character either for the director or for his subject.
"The Puppetmaster" will be shown at the New York Film Festival at 6:15 P.M. today and at 9 P.M. tomorrow.


Gerald J. Carroll, 46, Navy Pilot and Author
Gerald J. Carroll, a decorated naval pilot who wrote two novels based on his experiences in Vietnam, died on Thursday at his home in Leonardtown, Md.
He was 46.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Office Towers in 42d St. Project May Be Getting Taller
While public attention has focused on an interim plan to rehabilitate 42d Street with honky-tonk flourishes, New York State officials have also been considering changes to the longer-term redevelopment plan that could lead to office towers far taller than previously envisioned.
For instance, the skyscraper planned on the site of Nathan's Famous restaurant, at Broadway and 43d Street, would grow to 895 feet from 750 feet.
That would make it the eighth tallest building in New York City -- two and a half times taller than One Times Square Plaza, where the ball drops on New Year's Eve.


Jordan, N.B.A.'s Greatest Star, To Announce Retirement Today
Michael Jordan, the Chicago Bulls' superstar who is among the most recognized figures in professional sports, will announce his retirement from basketball today, according to a front-office official of the Bulls.
The team has scheduled a news conference for this morning at its practice facility in Deerfield, a Chicago suburb, to make the announcement.


Sweetness Rewarded In a Tasting
IN a photo finish, an opulent dessert wine was voted No. 1 in this year's New York State wine competition.
A Knapp 1991 late-harvest vignoles ($17.95) won by one point over a 1989 blanc de blancs sparkling wine from Glenora ($14.99), made from chardonnay and pinot blanc grapes.
Both wines are from the Finger Lakes.
Bedell's '90 merlot reserve ($22) from Long Island placed third, and the '92 semi-dry riesling from Lucas ($7.50) in the Finger Lakes region was fourth.


Nynex Seeks Diversity as Core Business Ebbs
The Nynex Corporation's decision to invest $1.2 billion in the entertainment industry is based on a strategy the company began devising in February 1992.
It was 18 months ago that executives of the regional Bell company met to assess the future, in light of stalled growth in the local telephone business, which brings in 86 cents of every dollar of Nynex revenue.


Suddenly It's Spring Again: Rangers Lose
Booed the last time they left the Madison Square Garden ice last spring, the Rangers returned last night with an abundance of enthusiasm, an excess of adrenaline, and more than a few butterflies.
After a remarkably short amount of time, the enthusiasm had waned, the adrenaline disappeared and the butterflies had taken charge.


Reinforcements For U.S. Troops Delayed 9 Hours
American and other United Nations reinforcements took more than nine hours Sunday to reach United States Army Rangers holding off hundreds of heavily armed Somalis, and the delay contributed directly to the deaths of at least a dozen American soldiers, Pentagon officials said today.
The American component of the rescue team, the Quick Response Force, did not have the proper equipment, and their Pakistani and Malaysian counterparts did not have the training or the orders to prepare quickly for a rescue, the officials said. 'Routine' Mission
Pentagon officials said the raid by the Rangers should have been a routine search-and-seizure mission.
How it ended in a fiery debacle is a story of bad luck, faulty intelligence and poor planning, said American and United Nations military officials in Washington and Mogadishu who are still piecing the story together.


Another Great Year for Paris's Vintage
THE 1993 vintage has not generally been much of a success in France.
Bad weather has caused problems almost everywhere.
Except here.
In Paris, every vintage is a success.


Abuse-Prevention Efforts Aid Children
THE first national survey to assess the effectiveness of school-based programs to prevent sexual abuse confirms that they help children in real-life encounters with potential child molesters.
Such programs have become increasingly common in recent years.
A 1990 study found that 85 percent of elementary school districts surveyed offered such courses, with 64 percent mandating them.
But little research had been done on their effectiveness.


On the Plains, a Huge Rail Yard Starts to Hum
Day and night, freight trains up to one and a half miles long rumble past Buffalo Bill Cody's ranch on the outskirts of town and into the world's biggest railroad yard in a rhythm that seems to gauge the nation's economic pulse more plausibly than any Government statistic.
More than half of Union Pacific's traffic moves through the Bailey Yard, a web of 250 miles of track and 800 switches on which cars from all directions pause briefly in cross-country treks carrying plywood, tires, sugar, bicycles, grain and a myriad of other raw materials and manufactures.


What It Will Take to Develop the Super-Car
In recruiting the nation's weapons labs to help create an environmentally correct super-automobile, the Clinton Administration is seeking to protect the American right to a private car.
But the 10-year cooperative project by the Government and Detroit, announced last week, will require radically new technologies for solving the American auto industry's longstanding problems: air pollution, overreliance on imported oil and loss of market share to imports.


WHITE HOUSE TRIES TO CALM CONGRESS
A wave of hostility toward the military operation in Somalia swept Congress today, forcing the White House to send two Cabinet secretaries to Capitol Hill to try to calm critics and plead for additional time to formulate a new policy.
"It's Vietnam all over again," said Senator Ernest F. Hollings, Democrat of South Carolina, who is in a group of conservatives calling for quick withdrawal from Somalia.
"There's no education in a second kick of a mule."


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  MAYORAL RACE IS A TOSSUP
Four weeks before Election Day, the race between Mayor David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani remains a tossup.
Fewer than half of voters trust either candidate to deal with New York City's problems and nearly half are concerned that each might make serious mistakes, according to the latest New York Times / WCBS-TV News poll.
A1.
NO LESS SCHOOL FUNDS FOR POOR
School districts serving poor students in New York City get about the same government resources as middle-class districts in the city, even before special state aid for the poor is counted, according to a study of school budgets.
B3.


New Rules Ease Disclosure of U.S. Data
The Clinton Administration said Monday that it had changed the rules for disclosing Government information to reporters, historians and the public by making it easier for the Government to release its records under the Freedom of Information Act.
Officials from the White House and the Justice Department said the Administration had rescinded a 1981 rule that directed all Federal agencies to withhold information whenever there was "a substantial legal basis" for doing so.
The rule was written by the Reagan Administration.


Clinton to Visit New Jersey
President Clinton will visit New Jersey on Friday to trumpet his health-care proposals, a spokeswoman for Gov.
Jim Florio said today.
The spokeswoman, Audrey Kelly, said the President would make a policy speech during a visit to Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick and the Governor would appear with him.
Though the speech falls in the final weeks of a tough re-election campaign for Mr.
Florio, his aides insist that the President's visit is not political.
"He will be talking about health care reform the Governor has put forth and how we in New Jersey can assist in developing national health care policy," Ms.
Kelly said.
"The President probably will also touch again on how crime affects health care costs."


Giuliani Ads Accuse Dinkins of Using Race Issue
Rudolph W. Giuliani, using his wife and a running mate as surrogates, unleashed new television advertisements yesterday that accuse the Dinkins campaign of playing up the issue of race to distract from questions about the Mayor's competence.
The ad campaign began as Mr.
Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate, virtually completed raising the $8 million he is allowed to spend in the race, freeing him to move into a more intense period of campaigning, his aides said.
A fund-raising dinner last night at the Sheraton New York Hotel in Manhattan was attended by 1,600 supporters, and aides said they expected to take in $1.4 million before expenses.


Using Steinbeck, Hemingway and Others as Parole Officers
When Walter Grajales went to court after he was caught breaking into a car, the judge gave him an unusual choice: he could either go to jail or take a literature class.
Mr.
Grajales, who had already spent two of his 19 years in prison, opted for the novels of Ernest Hemingway, John Steinbeck, Jack London and others in a class for convicts held here on the Dartmouth campus of the University of Massachusetts.


Soldier on a Secret Mission Now a Captive in a Spotlight
The relatives of Chief Warrant Officer Michael Durant have learned not to be too curious about his work as a helicopter pilot with the Army's 160th Special Operations Aviation Regiment.
"We've grown used to not asking a lot of questions," said Mr.
Durant's cousin Nancy Leclerc-Davidson.
"We can only hear about what he does afterward."


Team Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Lincoln Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Spell It Out to the U.N. on Somalia
America's national pride could be injured if the Clinton Administration decides to extricate U.S. troops from the gathering disaster in Somalia.
America's national interests could be injured if it does not.
The latest fiasco in Mogadishu, which left some 12 U.S. soldiers dead, 78 wounded and 1 or more hostage, provides all the evidence the Administration needs.
U.S. troops are now prime targets in a deadly Somali power struggle -- even though Washington never formally decided to take sides and no essential American interests are at stake.


Trade Pact to Give Latin America a Big Boost
To the Editor:
"One Specious Argument for Nafta" (editorial, Sept. 23) misconstrues the Clinton Administration's argument that the North American Free Trade Agreement is in our fundamental foreign policy interest.
You suggest that this Administration's support for the agreement is intended to bolster the Government in Mexico, which faces elections next year.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.07
3.11
3.10
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.99
2.96
2.72
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.11
3.08
2.83
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.90
4.89
5.82
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.01
6.00
7.40
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.01
7.04
8.50
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.43
5.43
6.38
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Random Tasting Tour And the Flavor Is Ethnic
AS EVERYBODY knows, any fool with money can eat scrumptiously in this city, there being no lack of good or fancy restaurants and no shortage of guidebooks or tasteful touters willing to point them out.
But where can you get really good pofpof, moinmoin and iddlies?
Where is there palm wine?
And where can you taste delicious things you have never tasted or even heard of for the price of a movie or less?
Robert Sietsema knows.


After a Year of Tumult, Pakistanis Will Vote
After a year of tumultuous political maneuvering, power plays and constitutional crisis -- all of which have staggered the country's fragile economy -- Pakistanis will vote on Wednesday in what are likely to be the first free and fair national elections in more than two decades.
Two former Prime Ministers, Nawaz Sharif and Benazir Bhutto, have thundered across this country for weeks, rousing the passions of voters in an effort to regain the office both lost after terms marked by charges of incompetence and corruption.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a man who pleaded guilty to having molested children when he was a Roman Catholic priest in the 1960's misstated the first name of the District Attorney of Bristol County, Mass.
He is Paul F. Walsh Jr.


Police Official Will Reopen Graft Cases
A top New York City Police Department official said yesterday that he would reopen 40 cases involving allegations of corruption and misconduct against police supervisors and their relatives that were kept in a secret file and withheld from prosecutors.
The official, Walter S. Mack Jr., who was appointed Deputy Commissioner for Internal Affairs in May, said he would personally undertake the inquiry to determine whether there had been any attempt to cover up or to protect those whose cases, in violation of departmental procedure, were put in the file from 1987 to 1991.


Zanart Publishing Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Year to June 30


Blue Jays Won't Let McDowell Off Hook
Jack McDowell left the mound in the seventh inning after he absorbed a painful pounding from the Blue Jays.
Thousands of fans filled the exit ramps after McDowell's departure and must have wondered: If Toronto buried McDowell so simply, do the White Sox have a chance in this series?
Although the White Sox have a talented pitching staff and could tie the American League Championship Series at a game apiece Wednesday, the hammering that their best pitcher endured probably left an impression on the young pitchers who will follow him.


Mexican Cellular Deal Seen
Hoping to tap into Mexico's cellular telephone market, the Bell Atlantic Corporation is close to a $1 billion deal to buy into Mexico's second-largest cellular telephone company, officials of the Mexican company said today.
One official for the company, Iusacell, one of two significant cellular telephone companies operating in Mexico City, said negotiations between Bell Atlantic and Iusacell were nearly completed and that a deal was expected by Thursday.


George H. Kaplan, 81, Lawyer and Arbitrator
George H. Kaplan, a retired Manhattan lawyer and former arbitrator for the New York dress industry, died on Monday at his home in Teaneck, N.J.
He was 81.
He died of a heart attack a day after the death of his wife of 52 years, the former Marjorie Smith, said his daughter, Helaine Kaplan Prentice.


U.S. OFFICIALS HAIL YELTSIN FOES' ROUT
American officials expressed hope today that the defeat of President Boris N. Yeltsin's opponents in Moscow had swept aside the vestiges of the old Soviet system.
But they said they remained unsure that the opening would make way for true democracy.
With their vision of a democratic Russia still embodied almost solely in Mr.
Yeltsin, the officials said they recognized that the path toward democratization remained littered with obstacles within Russian society and perhaps presented by the Russian President himself.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 1 about the release of classified American documents on the Korean War misidentified the Director of Central Intelligence at the start of the conflict.
He was Adm.
Roscoe Henry Hillenkoetter, not Gen.
Walter Bedell Smith.


Car Renters Biased Against Young Drivers, Lawmaker Says
Most car rental companies still turn away some drivers under 25, despite a state law banning the practice 10 years ago, State Senator Roy M. Goodman charged yesterday.
He called for imposition of stiffer fines against the companies and giving young drivers the right to sue.
But spokesmen for the car rental companies said young drivers are less safe, and that the companies' policies are tied to another state law, one that makes them responsible for whatever damage is done by the cars they own, even if it is the renter's fault.


George DeSipio Jr., 37, Living Proof Founder
George DeSipio Jr., one of the founders of Living Proof, a traveling exhibition of photographs of men, women and children who are infected with H.I.V. or who have AIDS, died on Saturday at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
He was 37.
He died of complications from AIDS, his family said.


The Real Test: With Parliament Gone, Can Yeltsin Reform the Economy?
For 18 months, President Boris N. Yeltsin complained that the Russian Parliament was blocking his Government's efforts to move the Russian economy toward a Western-style free market.
Now that Mr.
Yeltsin has complete control, he is widely seen as having an unprecedented and probably unrepeatable chance to stabilize and reform Russia's economy.
This opportunity is especially important for the West, which has hinged more than $40 billion in aid to Russia on progress toward economic reform.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Lendl's Falling Fast  Todd Martin outlasted three-time champion Ivan Lendl in a marathon three-set battle last night to advance to the second round of the Australian Indoor championships in Sydney.
Martin rallied to down the seventh-seeded Lendl, 4-6, 7-6 (10-8), 6-4, in a first-round match that lasted 2 hours 33 minutes.
It was the ninth time this year that Lendl had lost his opening match of a tournament.
Lendl, who won the Australian Indoor in 1985, 1987 and 1989, made an increasing number of errors as Martin stepped up the pace after breaking in the fifth game of the third set.
Lendl was within 2 points of victory in the second set tie breaker.
Martin, from Lansing, Mich., clinched the victory with an ace that was hotly disputed by Lendl, who stormed angrily from the court.
The defending champion Goran Ivanisevic of Croatia, seeded fourth, scored a 6-4, 6-2 first-round victory over Jason Stoltenberg of Australia.
An American qualifier, Jonathan Canter, making a comeback after an 18-month break from tennis, upset Henrik Holm of Sweden, 4-6, 6-3, 6-4. (AP)


Ecology &amp; Environment Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Cutbacks Hurt, Ad Age Learns
Advertising Age, a trade publication that has been in the forefront of reporting on the advertising recession and its effect on magazines, became a victim of sorts itself this week.
In an effort to make its operations more efficient in the face of declining advertising pages, Ad Age dismissed three editors.
And in January, it will assume publication of Business Marketing, also owned by Crain Communications Inc.
The 75-year-old monthly will be turned into a monthly tabloid known as Advertising Age's Business Marketing.


Yeltsin Uses Decrees to Curb Dissenters
With the Parliament building still smoldering and ringed with armor, President Boris N. Yeltsin moved today to concentrate power in his office and to shatter any possible opposition.
Two weeks after he first opened his all-out campaign against what he called his "irreconcilable opposition," Mr.
Yeltsin and his lieutenants seemed determined not to repeat what they perceived as their major faults in the past two years -- their failure to cash in on political triumphs and their agreeing to illusory compromises with the opposition.


Fran Carlon, 80, Dies; Radio and TV Actress
Fran Carlon, an actress who worked in radio, television, films and theater, died on Monday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 80.
The cause was cancer, said her husband, Casey Allen.


Personal Health; Cold weather means blizzards of dandruff.
IT'S getting to be that time of year when the scalps of millions of Americans become noticeably flaky, prompting people to try a host of sometimes counterproductive measures to avoid embarrassing dandruff.
An estimated 50 million people are plagued by the problem, which not only gets worse with the passing of summer but also becomes more obvious when people don the darker colors of winter.
Although dandruff is very widespread, exactly what goes wrong is still a hotly argued subject.
Only recently have dermatologists begun to understand the likely cause or causes better and to begin to develop more effective treatments.
Mistaken Ideas
Contrary to what some people think, dandruff is not caused by poor hygiene, although infrequent shampooing may make it worse.
And except for people with extremely dry skin everywhere on their bodies, dandruff is usually not the result of dryness.
In fact, treatments intended to add oil to the scalp can make a dandruff problem much worse.


Undermanned Islanders Lose in Hextall Debut
Opening night in the Saddledome began with fire on ice, as a large "C," representing the logo for the Calgary Flames, was set ablaze in the center face-off circle.
When the smoke cleared, the Flames doused the Islanders for a 2-1 victory.
The Islanders had won the previous six games over the Flames in the previous three seasons, but tonight they played without two of their better players.


Hampton Seems Headed For Unwelcome Rest
In a season in which Rodney Hampton was on pace to carry the ball more times than any running back in history, Lewis Tillman, his backup, made an odd request.
"I asked the coach to tape me in practice so I could watch myself," Tillman said.
"I needed to critique myself. I never saw myself in a game."


Pentagon Identifies Fatalities in Somalia
Following are the 12 American soldiers identified by the Defense Department as killed Sunday night in the clash with Somali forces loyal to Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, the fugitive militia leader.
BRILEY, Chief Warrant Officer Donovan L., 33, North Little Rock, Ark.


State Financial Services Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Safeway Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 11


Keep It Safe, Game Is Advised
Football must be made safer for its players.
That was the message underlined last night at the Waldorf-Astoria, where hundreds gathered for the eighth annual Sports Legends Dinner benefitting the MARC BUONICONTI Fund in Support of the Miami Project to Cure Paralysis.
The fund was established in 1985 after Marc, son of the former Patriots and Dolphins linebacker, NICK BUONICONTI, was paralyzed from a neck injury while playing in a game for The Citadel.


Metropolitan Diary
JANET CASELLI, a teacher, sent this one. Try it yourself before you peek at the answer:
"On the first day of school, teachers from P.S. 27 in Brooklyn (a school that had been closed because of the asbestos problem) were assembled in the auditorium of a neigboring school, P.S. 15.


Turn On the Lights in Central Park and Improve the Security; And in Brooklyn
To the Editor:
The many joggers and cyclists who use the recreational lanes of Prospect Park must now face a myriad of obstacles: missing lane markings, broken glass and other debris and overflowing blocked drains.


Bonner 'Best Available'
Physical play, added bench strength and the ability to defend quick forwards are the qualities that Anthony Bonner said he will bring to the Knicks.
"The Knicks are an up-and-coming team on the verge of winning a championship or two," said Bonner, a 6-foot-8-inch forward who signed a two-year deal with the Knicks on Monday.
Bonner, who is expected to be Coach Pat Riley's 12th man, will make $650,000 this season, with the option of becoming an unrestricted free agent after the season.
"This gives me the opportunity to play for the best coach in the N.B.A., and to play with guys who play hard and leave it all on the floor," he said.


Two Killed in Crash Of Aircraft on L.I.
A part-time flight instructor and his student were killed today when a twin-engine aircraft the student was piloting crashed and burned in a wooded area near the East Hampton town airport.
A spokesman for the Federal Aviation Administration, Duncan B. Pardue, said the student was apparently preparing to land the six-seat aircraft when the crash occurred at about 12:45 P.M. near a road about three quarters of mile from the airfield.
He said the two victims were the only passengers aboard.


Review/Dance; Martha Graham Company Opens New Season
For Martha Graham, yesterday was always today.
Among her most quoted aphorisms was "The only constant in life is change," and there was no doubt that the Martha Graham Dance Company took its founder's principles to heart on Tuesday at the hugely successful gala opening of its two-week season at City Center.
The entire evening was rich with novelty, including one that pointed toward a radical new direction in the troupe's future.
Twyla Tharp, represented by "Demeter and Persephone," a premiere starring Christine Dakin, became the first of several choreographers outside the Graham fold to be invited to create works for the company.


Market Place; A new company's process excites investors in waste disposal.
INNOVATIVE technology combined with a careful reading of rules governing the handling and disposal of hazardous waste may turn into a winning combination for a start-up company named Molten Metal Technology Inc. of Waltham, Mass.
Early buyers of its stock have done pretty well, even though the company is not expected to earn any money for at least another calendar year.
Molten Metal made an initial public offering in February at $14 a share.
The price slipped briefly to $10 in April but has been rising, more or less steadily, since July.
The shares passed $20 in early August and have stayed over that level, closing yesterday at $23.125, down 37.5 cents in Nasdaq trading.


Bradley Asks U.S. to Confront Middle-Class Economic Fears
Hoping to prod the Clinton Administration into paying more attention to the economic anxieties of middle-class Americans, Senator Bill Bradley is arguing that the Government should guarantee all workers not just health care but also the opportunity for lifetime education and training and pension protection.
One of the most influential legislators on economic issues, Senator Bradley has been working for weeks on a speech addressing the insecurity that American workers feel in light of changing economic conditions.
This anxiety underlies the strong opposition in Congress, particularly among Democrats, to the North American Free Trade Agreement, which the New Jersey Senator and the Clinton Administration strongly favor.


Parking Rules
Alternate-side parking rules will be suspended in New York City today and tomorrow for the Jewish holidays of Shemini Atzereth and Simhath Torah.
Other regulations remain in effect.


Gun in Home? Study Finds It a Deadly Mix
Instead of increasing protection, a handgun in a home almost triples the chances that someone will be killed there, a study of homicides in three metropolitan areas has found.
The conclusions of the study contradict the popular notion that keeping a gun at home increases personal safety, the researchers said today.


Yellow Van at Center of Trial's First Confrontation
It is not surprising that the first mention of a yellow van brought with it the sharpest confrontation among prosecutors, defense lawyers and a witness in the opening days of the World Trade Center bombing trial.
The van, allegedly rented at a New Jersey Ryder agency by Mohammed A. Salameh, one of the four men now on trial, is at the very heart of the case.
It was the vehicle that, government investigators say, was packed with the explosives that blew a vast crater five stories deep in the underground levels of the trade center in lower Manhattan.
A piece of the van found in the rubble left by the blast is what led the Federal Bureau of Investigation to suspect Mr.
Salameh and, through him, some of the other defendants.


Wyandanch Seeks U.S. Help in Fighting Crime
Desperate for help in waging a war they fear they are losing, civic leaders turned today to a top Federal law-enforcement official for aid in ridding this community of drug dealers and prostitutes.
Zachary Carter, the new United States Attorney for the Eastern District of New York, walked the streets of Wyandanch, seeking to learn more about the community and determine if Federal officials can do anything to help.
Local leaders said they could not remember a United States Attorney visiting their community before.


Israeli-Palestinian Talks Begin in Cairo


Jets' Offensive Line More Like a Dotted Line for Raiders
The Jets' offensive line will have a formidable task on Sunday against the Los Angeles Raiders.
The starting center and right guard will probably not play against a defense that has recorded 16 sacks this season.
"Let's go," said Coach Bruce Coslet. "Crank it up. That's why we have backups."


A Legacy as Jordan Departs: Stars Are Corporate Heroes
Magic Johnson once told of how he tried, early in his career, to persuade the sneaker company he had a contract with to market a basketball shoe in his very famous name.
He said he was told by a company official, with all due respect, that "no basketball player could ever sell a shoe."
"And then," said Johnson, "along came Michael."


New Balance of Power in East Tilts Toward the Knicks
Michael Jordan's sudden retirement has made the Knicks the preseason favorite to win the Eastern Conference, but it also enhances other teams' chances to dethrone the Chicago Bulls as conference champion.
Jordan's announcement shifts the balance of power in the East like the retirement of no other player could.
Cleveland, which has lost in the playoffs to Chicago the last two years, and Charlotte, considered perhaps the fastest-rising team in the league, could contend along with the Knicks and Chicago for the conference title.
Other teams like the Orlando Magic and New Jersey Nets could see their fortunes improve as a result of Jordan's absence.


Settlement In Lawsuit Against De Kooning
A lawsuit that raised questions about the authenticity of a group of sculptures attributed to Willem de Kooning was settled yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan when representatives of the Abstract Expressionist artist and of his late wife's estate agreed to a financial settlement with Philip Pavia, a Long Island sculptor who filed the suit three years ago.
Terms of the settlement, however, were shrouded in secrecy and ambiguity.
The size of the payment to Mr.
Pavia, who was seeking roughly $3 million to cover what he said were his time and expenses in casting sculptures for Mr. de Kooning from 1987 until 1990, was not divulged.


Chase Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Real Estate Investment Trust of Calif.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Higher Alcohol Tax Should Pay for Health
To the Editor:
I agree with the recommendation of President and Mrs.
Clinton that there should be still more substantial taxes on tobacco products to pay for the health care for all Americans that they propose (front page, Sept. 23).


Health Care Spending Is Found to Vary Greatly State by State
The Federal Government issued new data today showing huge variations in health care spending from state to state.
The figures suggest that the Government would have difficulty setting local budgets for health spending, as President Clinton has proposed.
An explicit goal of Mr.
Clinton's health plan is to reduce variations in the level of medical spending and its growth.


Essay; Depart With Honor
The world's humanitarian objective in Somalia was to feed the starving and to make it possible for the population to begin to feed itself.
That objective is being met, and the saving of hundreds of thousands of lives is no small thing.
The more recent U.N. military objective has been to discover the hideout of Mohammed Farah Aidid, to capture him and disarm his hooligan forces.
That forcible pacification -- the euphemism is "peacemaking" -- would lessen the danger of warlordism choking the area again.
In that objective, the U.N. has failed.


Nutrition Management Services reports earnings for Year to June 30


School Board Seeking Help From Albany
The New York City Board of Education decided yesterday to ask the State Legislature to shorten the official school year, if necessary, because of the time lost for the asbestos crisis.
The board turned to Albany for help as it decided to reverse a decision made only three weeks ago and close schools on Columbus Day.
The board had previously voted to keep schools open on that holiday to meet the minimum requirements to get its full share of state education aid.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THE 4-year-old white girl studied the photographs the researcher had given her.
Each picture showed pairs of children -- one black and one white -- in ambiguous, nonthreatening situations, like two children in a playground.
The researcher asked the girl questions about what she saw, such as: "Which child is the bad child?" or "Which child will win the game of checkers?"
"Every time there was something good, she picked the white child," said Dr.
Phyllis A. Katz, a developmental psychologist who conducted this research and who is the director of the Institute for Research on Social Problems in Boulder, Colo.
"Every time there was something bad, she picked the black child.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Dimi Mint Abba  Symphony Space
Dimi Mint Abba's songs are invocations, battle cries, dances and laments.
On Sunday night, performing as part of the World Music Institute's Musical World of Islam series, the Mauritanian singer's voice was by turns righteous and melancholy, flamboyant and delicate, forceful yet attentive to the finest details of pitch and inflection.


For Thatcher, Saint or Not, Barbs Are All
Some would say she is like the beast who will not die, rising up nightly out of her coffin to torment the living.
Others see her as a protective angel, hovering over the landscape to insure that her good works are being carried out.
Whatever she is, specter or saint, Margaret Thatcher just won't go away.
And she is clearly making life miserable for her successor, the amiable accident-prone John Major.


The Islanders' New Line Looks Good Amid Defeat
Sooner or later, Pierre Turgeon and Derek King will return to the Islanders and to the team's top line.
It might be Friday night in Edmonton; it might be Sunday night in Anaheim; it might be Tuesday night in Los Angeles, the end of the four-game road trip that opens the season.
Turgeon has tendinitis in his left wrist and King is in Ontario for his mother's funeral.
Certainly the Islanders missed their scoring power Tuesday night when they lost the season opener by 2-1 to the Calgary Flames at the Saddledome.
But the absence of these two top attackers allowed Coach Al Arbour and everyone else to observe a makeshift line that might endure longer than planned, even when Turgeon and King return.


Television Loses Star Of the Ratings Game
The pining has begun at NBC and TNT for the loss of Michael Jordan.
Viewers will still watch National Basketball Association games.
They will still have Charles Barkley, Larry Johnson and Shaquille O'Neal to astound them.
But NBC and TNT relied on Jordan and the Chicago Bulls to swell their ratings, scheduling as many Bulls games as their N.B.A. contracts would allow.
Both have signed new four-year television deals with the N.B.A. that will begin after this season.
Those deals require them to pay 25 percent more, partly because of the league's success during the nine-year Jordan era.
NBC will pay $750 million and TNT $350 million.


Charles Keating's Lasting Taint
Overdrafts at the House bank unseated more than a few incumbents last year.
Charles Keating is having a similar effect in the Senate, albeit on a smaller scale.
Mr.
Keating is the Arizona tycoon for whom five Senators intervened when Federal regulators cracked down on his big California savings and loan association.
Mr.
Keating is now doing time for fraud.
One of the "Keating five" Senators -- the California Democrat Alan Cranston, apparently the worst offender -- retired last year.
Two others have announced they will go when their terms end next year -- Dennis DeConcini of Arizona and Donald Riegle of Michigan, both Democrats.


COURT AGAIN HEARS A CASE ON SEIZURES
The Supreme Court today picked up where it left off last term in a critical examination of the Government's authority to seize property owned by convicted drug dealers.
At the end of the last term, in June, the Court set a new constitutional limit on Government forfeitures, ruling unanimously that a seizure of property can be so disproportionate to the crime as to amount to cruel and unusual punishment.
The question before the Justices in a spirited argument today was whether the Constitution entitles convicted drug dealers to advance notice and a hearing before the Government can seize their homes.


Mere meets more on the runways of Milan


Broderbund Software Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Review/Fashion; Real Clothes Look Radical
Members of the fashion press and retailers at the Milan ready-to-wear shows are having a problem with much of what they're seeing on the runway: there's just not much for working women to wear.
It's even difficult to imagine the models strolling the street in the states of undress that some in Milan have proposed this season.
Ines Capelli, owner of Serenella, a designer boutique in Boston, for instance, was well blanketed in a navy cashmere jacket and trousers while buying.
"I really feel for the woman who hasn't got the body and confidence to wear these sheer clothes," she said.


About Those Cookies
To the Editor:
"The Annals of Dessert" (Topics of The Times, Sept. 29) notes that Consumer Reports had top-rated chocolate-chip cookies prepared from Hillary Rodham Clinton's recipe.
Then you state Consumer Reports indicated that "Mrs. Clinton's recipe was preferred to Barbara Bush's by 55 percent to 45 percent," adding, somewhat churlishly, "It's so hard to get a straight cookie report these days without consumer writers trying to sneak in their political views."


Southwest by Northeast
ELIZABETH EGBERT and Diane Matyas, Staten Island artists, had a surprising advantage over Southwest designers in a nationwide competition for the first site-specific public art project for the city of Mesa, Ariz., near Phoenix.
"The Southwest was fresh to us," Ms. Egbert said.


RABIN AND ARAFAT HOLD FIRST TALKS
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and Yasir Arafat, the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, met here today to coordinate the transition to Palestinian self-rule in the Gaza Strip and in Jericho, on the Israeli-occupied West Bank.
After the meeting, they said talks on administrative details would begin Oct. 13 in Cairo and in Taba, an Egyptian resort.
"We are committed to whatever we signed, but it is not enough to sign," said Mr.
Rabin, alluding to the pact the two men signed Sept. 13 in Washington.
"You have to translate through negotiations into reality."


Family's Grief in a Daughter's Words
Following is an excerpt from the statement yesterday by Claire Schroeder, the daughter of a Boston police officer killed in a 1970 bank robbery, at the sentencing of Katherine Ann Power:
When Katherine Power and her friends robbed the State Street Bank in Brighton with semiautomatic weapons, my father responded to the call.
One of her friends shot my father in the back and left him to die in a pool of his own blood.
Katherine Power was waiting in the getaway car, and she drove the trigger man and her other friends away to safety.


Nothing Left to Prove
His retirement was shocking. His career was spectacular. And his legacy is secure.
Michael Jordan played the game at such a high level, he ran out of mountains to climb.
His team won three championships.
He won seven scoring titles.
He won three most valuable player awards.
And he won defensive player of the year honors.


Meaning of Clumsiness
To The Home Section:  The Parent &amp; Child column on Sept. 16, describing the problems of the clumsy child in school, was a useful warning to parents and educators to seek intervention as early as possible when such problems are observed.
An important source of this intervention was overlooked, however.


A Victim's Mantle for Mr. Giuliani
The sudden ferocity of the New York City mayoral campaign arises, at least in part, from this fact: To the surprise of people on both sides, the re-election campaign of Mayor David Dinkins is not dead yet.
It will be very hard for the Mayor to hold the narrow lead over his Republican challenger, Rudolph Giuliani, that he has in some polls.
But the tightness of the contest has produced some transparently ugly politics.
Dinkins surrogates have used bigoted statements to rally the black vote; the Rev.
William Jones's comment about "fascist" elements in the Giuliani campaign is an example.
The Mayor's tepid disavowals opened him to the accusation that these statements were coordinated with his campaign.
It is not enough for the Mayor to say mildly that "I do not agree with every statement made by every supporter." As Mayor and candidate, he has been too given to tardiness and half-measures.
What was needed was prompt, outright repudiations of remarks like that of Eric Adams, the black policeman who condemned Herman Badillo, the candidate for Comptroller on Mr.
Giuliani's ticket, for marrying a woman who was not Puerto Rican.


From a Drawing to a T-Shirt
OTHER children may like it and buy it, but Melanie Springhetti-Teppich hardly ever wears the T-shirt she designed.
"I'm embarrassed to," said Melanie, a 7-year-old from lower Manhattan.
"My name is on it. Once I wore it to second grade and everybody said, 'You made that T-shirt?' and I didn't like the attention. Nobody else in second grade makes T-shirts."
How did her shirt come to be?
"I was sitting in my bedroom kind of bored and looked out the window," she said.
"I didn't see waterfalls, but I wanted to draw them."


Whitman Plan to Cut Taxes: Experts Taking It Seriously
By most accounts, Christine Todd Whitman committed a colossal political blunder when she proposed a $1.2 billion cut in income and business taxes for the financially strapped state of New Jersey.
The states' editorial pages have heaped scorn on her plan and, according to polls, 70 percent of the state's citizens -- including a majority of her fellow Republicans -- simply do not believe that she can deliver on her promise to cut taxes.
But there is more to Mrs.
Whitman's plan than an outlandish notion -- even though her Democratic opponent, Gov.
Jim Florio, promptly labeled it a "voodoo re-do," a reference to Ronald Reagan and supply-side economics.
Mrs.
Whitman is not promising something for nothing.


CHRONICLE
JOHN BACKUS, inventor of Fortran, the first general-purpose, high-level computer programming language, has won the $375,000 Charles Stark Draper Prize, the largest award in engineering.
The prize, which is given every two years, will be presented by the National Academy of Engineering at a ceremony in February in Washington.


Cooperative Bank For Savings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Ford Chief Hasn't Bought One, Lately
The next chairman, president and chief executive of the Ford Motor Company, a man with the ultimate responsibility for making and selling more than three million vehicles a year, does not own a car.
Alexander J. Trotman, who will assume his new responsibilities next month, cannot remember the last time he bought a car, Ford or otherwise.
While he has bought cars overseas, he has never had the experience of buying from an American dealer, haggling over price and trade-ins, or fussing with matters like auto insurance or registration.


Library at Time Cut by a Third
Time Inc. informed its library staff yesterday that 43 jobs, about one-third of the library workers, would be eliminated in six months.
The move was described as part of a transition to greater reliance on electronic research.
The corporate library, one of the largest in the world, serves all Time Inc. magazines.
Employees there clip articles from a variety of publications and cross-reference them for use by researchers and writers.


American Exchange Shifts Its Account
The American Stock Exchange in New York said yesterday that it had selected McCann-Erickson New York to handle its account, previously at DeVito/Verdi in New York for three years.
Billings were estimated at $3 million.


ReadiCare Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Gennum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


CHRONICLE
How many celebrities can you fit into one block?
If it's O Street in the Georgetown section of Washington, apparently a lot.
As if enough recognizable names didn't already reside on the block off Wisconsin Avenue, PIERRE SALINGER, and his wife, NICOLE, moved into an O Street home on Friday.
A former press secretary for Presidents John F. Kennedy and Lyndon B. Johnson and a foreign correspondent for ABC News, he is joining the Washington office of Burson-Marsteller, the public relation concern, as vice chairman.


Ex-Radical Gets 8 to 12 Years In 1970 Killing, and a Rebuke
Imposing a negotiated sentence that he said was not adequate to the crime, a state judge sentenced Katherine Ann Power today to 8 to 12 years in a Massachusetts prison for her role in a 1970 bank robbery that resulted in the murder of a Boston police officer.
The judge, Robert Banks of Suffolk County Superior Court, rejected any suggestion that the political views or psychiatric problems of Ms.
Power, a onetime antiwar radical, called for leniency.
And he was openly sympathetic to the police officer's eldest daughter, Clare Schroeder, who captivated the courtroom as she spoke about the suffering of a widow and her nine children left without the man they adored.


And Now, Whoppers vs. Waffles
On the eve of their first face-to-face debate, Gov.
Jim Florio and his Republican challenger, Christine Todd Whitman, spent today prepping while their surrogates participated in a food fight of sorts.
The New Jersey Republican State Committee called a news conference to pelt Mr.
Florio, offering a certificate for a free "Whopper," the Burger King hamburger, to "everyone who spots a Jim Florio lie" in Thursday night's televised debate.


Merry Land &amp; Investment Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sol Kahn; Stockbroker, 90
Sol Kahn, a retired New York stockbroker, died on Monday at Scottsdale Memorial Hospital North in Scottsdale, Ariz.
He was 90 and had moved from Manhattan to Scottsdale two years ago.
He died after a brief illness, his family said.


Teachers' Fund Gets a Taste of Its Own Medicine
The Teachers Insurance Annuity Association and College Retirement Equities Fund, which disclosed guidelines yesterday for evaluating how company executives pay themselves and manage their businesses, is being forced by one of its members to consider whether its own executive pay arrangements should be changed.
In a case of what is good for the goose being good for the gander, Werner Cohn, a retired sociology professor, has won a battle to force the teachers' pension fund to include his criticism of TIAA/CREF's own executive pay in its proxy statements.
They will be mailed to participants in the pension fund before the fund's annual meeting next month.


The records may continue to fall for Michael Jordan's career as a marketing All-Star.
JUST as death turned out to be a career move for Marilyn Monroe, James Dean and Elvis Presley, so, too, could Michael Jordan's spectacular career as a celebrity endorser continue with his sudden end of his spectacular career as a basketball player.
By the book, the annual endorsement income of Jordan, which at an estimated $32 million dwarfs that of all other American athletes, should shrivel as his playing days abruptly conclude.
"I just feel I don't have anything else to prove," he said yesterday in explaining his unexpected retirement from the Chicago Bulls.


Briton Insists He'll Push for Democracy in Hong Kong
The Governor of Hong Kong said today that his yearlong effort had failed to win approval from China for his plan to expand democractic rule before Britain withdraws from the colony in 1997, and that he would proceed with the plan despite Chinese threats.
The Governor, Christopher Patten, said he was weeks away from acting on his own to put the democracy proposals before the 60-member Legislative Council that will rule the colony after it reverts to Chinese sovereignty.


Lemaire-Type Defense Gives Devils a Victory
On the day in June he was hired as the coach of the Devils, Jacques Lemaire made it clear that defense would be his top priority.
In their opening game of the season tonight, the Devils made it clear their coach knew what he was talking about.
With an emphasis on defense offsetting their meager offense, the Devils barely squeezed out a 2-1 triumph over Tampa Bay before a crowd of 12,946 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Review/Fashion; Mere Meets More in Milan
For a time yesterday, as the number of spring and summer showings passed the midpoint, it looked as if fashion had reached the end of the road.
Rifat Ozbek presented models wearing the merest whisp of clothes.
Midriffs were almost always bared.
Dresses covered the torso with hardly an inch to spare.
Fabrics were as thin as possible without being transparent.


Down 2, White Sox Must Battle Jays and History
Jerry Reinsdorf, the man who runs the Chicago White Sox and the Chicago Bulls, sent an apology of sorts to his White Sox players today for any infringement that the Bulls' blockbuster personnel development might have made on the White Sox's time in the spotlight.
The Toronto Blue Jays, on the other hand, expressed no regrets.


Democracy Beckons Boris Yeltsin
The world's hopes for Russia at this fragile moment in history lie with Boris Yeltsin.
That explains the joy in Western capitals when Mr.
Yeltsin shattered the latest effort by parliamentary reactionaries to bring him down.
It also explains the equally palpable dismay when he followed his triumph with a series of decrees designed to suppress any possible opposition.
Those who have invested their hopes and are prepared to invest their money in Mr.
Yeltsin know that he cannot move Russia forward by replacing one autocracy with another.
Hence Washington's relief when he assured President Clinton that he would stick to his pledge to hold parliamentary elections Dec. 12.
Hence too the relief when Mr.
Yeltsin rescinded the press censorship imposed two days ago under the state of emergency.


Allies of Salinas Accused of Muzzling Critics
As President Carlos Salinas de Gortari has moved to raise workers' wages and help poor farmers before crucial elections next year, his aides and supporters are being accused of trying to silence critics of the Government and humiliate its most powerful opponent.
Salinas Administration officials have denied any role in recent incidents that included the parading of transvestite cabaret performers at a campaign event for the leftist leader Cuauhtemoc Cardenas and the resignation of a leading political commentator.


Canadex Resources reports earnings for Year to June 30


Crack Is Found Near Core of a Nuclear Plant
A steel cylinder that directs cooling water to the nuclear core of a North Carolina power plant has developed a crack around its 14-foot circumference, raising the possibility that it could break during an earthquake or other disaster and jam the mechanism that shuts the reactor, Federal officials say.
There are more than 30 reactors of similar design around the country, and the officials, at the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, said last week that they had warned these plants of the problem.
It is the first time such a crack has been discovered in this kind of reactor, the officials said.


Poverty and Callousness in America
The Census Bureau released some ugly data this week: The number of poor Americans rose last year and is now higher than at any time since the 1960's.
Some observers dismiss the new data, saying the increase wasn't large and that year-to-year changes aren't important.
The small increase wouldn't be very important -- except for the fact that last year's experience is part of a disturbing story that's been unfolding for a decade or more.
The proportion of Americans living in poverty -- for a family of four, that means living on less than $14,335 in 1992 -- is now 14.5 percent, which is only slightly lower than it was in the 1960's.
Poverty is not decreasing -- despite Lyndon Johnson's War on Poverty, despite the economic boom of the 60's and despite the longest peacetime recovery ever during the 1980's.
That's no statistical fluke.


A Higher Alcohol Tax Should Pay for Health
To the Editor:
I agree with the recommendation of President and Mrs.
Clinton that there should be still more substantial taxes on tobacco products to pay for the health care for all Americans that they propose (front page, Sept. 23).


Not So Fast on Somalia
The horror of American bodies being dragged through the streets of Somalia and the shock of Army Rangers being ambushed have left Americans furious and numb.The disaster has brought an understandable instant response: get our troops out now.
However, as President Clinton said yesterday, before a hurried pullout, we must think hard about the meaning of what we're doing in Somalia.
Nobody argues we should stay in Somalia any longer than minimally necessary.
But the way we leave is crucial.


For St. Petersburg, It's All Just Politics
The city known in Soviet times as "the Cradle of the Revolution" sat this one out, and there was none of the massed public support for President Boris N. Yeltsin that did much to discourage the coup leaders of August 1991.
While Mr.
Yeltsin disbanded the Parliament in Moscow and finally shelled it, the only demonstrations here were pro-Parliament and pro-Communist, and they were small.


Nutrition Management Services reports earnings for Year to June 30


New Jersey Teen-Ager Convicted of Ritual Slaying
After seven hours of deliberations, a jury today found James P. Wanger guilty of murder and 10 other charges against him in the bizarre ritual slaying of a teen-age friend.
All along, the defense had insisted that Mr.
Wanger was a scapegoat, framed by three other youths who later pleaded guilty to their roles in the slaying of Robert A. Solimine Jr.
There was no forensic evidence linking Mr.
Wanger to the crime, which took place when both he and the victim were 17.


Sports of The Times; The Jordans Talked More Than Hoops
THE press had it backward, Michael Jordan said more than once.
He was not retiring from basketball because his father had died.
He was retiring from basketball because his father had lived.
The father was considerably shorter, and just as bald, and he always fell short of being a caricature of a stage parent.
Just when you thought James Jordan might be hanging around a bit too much, you realized he wasn't waiting in the corridors because he liked it -- although he surely did.
He was also there because his son wanted him to be there.
He was his son's best friend.


Batiste Wobbles Then Shines
The respects were paid with an obligatory politeness in the dugout.
Kim Batiste accepted the sentiments, heard the encouragement, acknowledged it was best to forget the error that had cost his club a 3-2 ninth-inning lead in the most important game this collection of Phillies had played in their lives.
All the voices couldn't drown the screaming he still heard in his mind, the internal dialogue that wouldn't forgive, that kept asking, kept inquiring, kept punishing.


Consumer Group Says New York City Is Failing Its Recycling Goal
A consumer advocacy group said yesterday that recycling by the New York City Department of Sanitation was running far behind the goal promised last year when the city sought state approval for construction of incinerators.
But the City Sanitation Commissioner said that recycling was on target, although she conceded that some of the information-gathering procedures to prove her case did not yet exist.
The New York Public Interest Research Group said yesterday that in 1993 the city would recycle only 53.8 percent of the waste collected by city trucks that it was supposed to, and that overall, only about 5 percent of waste was being recycled.
The city's goal for the end of the decade is 25 percent.


Two Candidates Present Two New Yorks
In the New York City of Rudolph W. Giuliani's television ads, people live in fear.
They worry about drug dealers, high taxes and bad schools.
They are scrappy and strident, and their voice has a timbre that is straight out of Brooklyn.
They resent the implication that a vote for Mr. Giuliani has anything to do with race.
In the New York of David N. Dinkins's ads, people live in harmony.
They favor conciliation and healing, and in times of trouble, they walk the streets together.
They are optimistic and hopeful, yet, paradoxically, they see racial unrest as an ever-present possibility.


Yeltsin Cancels Guards at Lenin's Tomb
At 4 P.M., the usual clutch of onlookers gathered for one of Moscow's most venerable rituals, the changing of the guard at Lenin's Mausoleum on Red Square.
But instead of smartly goose-stepping off to the Spassky Gates as guards had done for 69 years, the two guards there today quietly walked into the mausoleum -- and into history.


Republican Asks Inquiry Into Possible Voter Registration Fraud
The Republican chairman of the New York State Senate Elections Committee called yesterday for a criminal investigation of the Manhattan Borough Board of Elections for possible election fraud, including the validation of thousands of unsigned or duplicate registration cards.
The appeal by Senator Michael F. Nozzolio of Seneca Falls echoed longstanding complaints by aides to Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor, that duplicate registrations could hurt their campaign to unseat Mayor David N. Dinkins.


INSIDE
Penned by a Serial Bomber
Announcing a reward for information, investigators disclosed a clue in the case of a bomber who has struck executives and professors.
Page A18.
Foreign Troops Land in Haiti
Twenty-six American and five Canadian troops arrived to help enforce a U.N. plan to return Haiti's exiled President to power.
Page A12.
Showdown in Cable Dispute
Some ABC, CBS and NBC stations are no longer on local cable systems because of a dispute between broadcasters and cable operators.
Page D1.
Blue Jays Are Up by 2-0
Toronto used the strong pitching of Dave Stewart to beat the White Sox, 3-1, in Chicago in the American League playoffs.
Page B17.


Schintzius and Coleman Are Focal Points of Nets
On the eve of the opening of training camp, the New Jersey Nets matched the Milwaukee offer sheet for 7-foot-2-inch reserve center Dwayne Schintzius, and kept the lines of communication open on the contract extension for Derrick Coleman, their 6-10 starting power forward.
Coleman, who Tuesday turned down the Nets' latest offer of $33.5 million for five years, has told his agent, Harold MacDonald, that he doesn't want to be involved in any talks after Friday, the first official day of workouts at camp.


Polygram
American depository receipts of stock in Polygram N.V., the Dutch record and entertainment giant, have risen 40 percent since the summer, when it acquired Motown Records, the leading rhythm and blues music label in the United States.
Its stock moved up smartly yesterday, at one point trading at a 52-week high.


Corby Distilleries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Virginia Bracker, 86, Foreign Correspondent
Virginia Lee Bracker, a retired reporter and foreign correspondent for The New York Times, died on Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 86.
She had been ill for a long time with a variety of ailments and her death was a suicide, said her friend and executor, Robert Riggs.


Trash Giant Makes Plans To Expand In New York
The nation's second-largest hauler of solid waste served notice yesterday that it intends to expand greatly in the New York City market, a move that could shake up an industry that Federal prosecutors have long said is dominated by organized crime.
The company, Browning-Ferris Industries Inc. of Houston, chose an unusual medium to convey its message.
At a news conference with Mayor David N. Dinkins, Browning-Ferris announced that it had become a major sponsor of the New York Marathon.
It plans to recycle many of the 1.6 million paper cups and 150,000 plastic water bottles left by the 25,000 runners in the Nov. 14 event.


Broderbund Software Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Review/Film; Sound (and Reality) Check For an Underground Band
Even by the forgiving standards that rock critics tend to apply to dedicated underground bands with little commercial potential, the music of Half Japanese, a group from Uniontown, Md., is difficult to admire.
Formed in 1975 by the brothers Jad and David Fair, the band has always prided itself on not being able to play its instruments.
And Jad Fair, its indomitably cheery lead singer and chief songwriter, has a voice that comes about as close as rock singing can to sounding like chalk on a blackboard.
Physically and vocally, Mr.
Fair is the caricature of a nerd.
Wiry, graceless and wearing a tense little smile, he declaims his lyrics in a shrill, neighing monotone that is oblivious to pitch.
His ineptitude seems almost calculated when he interprets blues songs in jerky mechanical phrases that make every beat feel laboriously counted out.


Executive Changes
BANKAMERICA CORP., San Francisco, promoted Jack L. Meyers, chief of credit, to be a vice chairman.


Real Estate Investment Trust of Calif.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tales of Carnage Punctuate Trade Center Bombing Trial
After groping in the dark and stumbling over a lifeless body, peering down into a ghastly pit spewing hot yellow fumes and hearing screams that soon died away, Timothy Lang felt his strength ebb.
"I just lay curled in a fetal position on the ground and began to pray," the stock trader told the jury in the World Trade Center bombing trial yesterday.
"I realized I was completely helpless, and the only way I would get out of there alive would be if I were rescued."


G.S. Klein, 79, Dies; On Board of Regents In New York State
Genevieve Sanchez Klein, a former member of the New York State Board of Regents and an outspoken critic of sex education and busing to integrate schools, died on Monday at her home in Daytona, Fla.
She was 79.
The cause was cancer of the brain and lungs, said Howard Hurwitz, a friend.


Settlement Over Artwork By an Ex-Slave
The descendants of a former slave who was recognized, long after his death, as a great folk artist, have agreed to drop their lawsuit against a white man whom they had accused of taking the bulk of the black man's work.
In a joint statement released yesterday by both sides in the dispute, relatives of the artist, Bill Traylor, said that based on several months of investigation, they now believe that, rather than exploiting Mr.
Traylor, Charles Shannon actually contributed greatly to his support and his later recognition.


Alpha Microsystems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Gennum Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Guiliani on Race
ON THE SCREEN: Donna Hanover Giuliani, wife of Rudolph W. Giuliani, dressed in red plaid jacket and discreet gold earrings, facing camera in office setting with warm wood-toned television cabinet in background.
At one point, footage is interspersed of Mr.
Giuliani in a hard hat and plaid workshirt, talking first with a white construction worker and then a black one at a building site.
As she says her final lines, Ms.
Giuliani first nods, then shakes her head just a bit.
PRODUCER: The Garth Group of New York THE SCRIPT: As a journalist, I thought I'd seen everything.
I was wrong.
I'm Donna, Rudy Giuliani's wife.
My husband was called a fascist by a group of ministers endorsing David Dinkins.
And while people who support the Mayor are called proud, people who support my husband are called racist.
This election shouldn't be about race, it should be about competence.
Of course I want people to vote for Rudy Giuliani.
But I want them to vote for Rudy because he's the best man for the job, not for any other reason.
ACCURACY: In endorsing the Mayor last week, the Rev.
William H. Jones, the head of a black Baptist ministers group, said Mr.
Dinkins had been unfairly branded a murderer in the death of a Hasidic scholar in Crown Heights and that people who made such charges included fascist "elements" that has grown around Mr.
Giuliani.
But he did not call Mr.
Giuliani a fascist.
While some Dinkins supporters have said that some white Democrats are backing Mr.
Giuliani largely because of his race, Mr.
Dinkins has never explicitly ascribed racial motives to them.
The Mayor often says that for blacks to vote for a black or Italians to vote for an Italian is an expression of pride, while voting against someone because of his origin constitutes racism.
SCORECARD: Mr.
Giuliani often contends that Mr.
Dinkins is too willing to paint himself as a victim of racial animosities, and this commercial, and a similar one by Mr.
Giuliani's running mate for Comptroller, Herman Badillo, argues that Mr.
Giuliani is the true victim -- of guilty liberal voters reluctant to oppose a black candidate.
Without saying so, it objects that few politicians or pundits find it troubling that more than 90 percent of black voters back Mr.
Dinkins, while often bemoaning the fact that barely one quarter of whites support the Mayor.
That amounts to a call to arms to Mr.
Giuliani's strongest white ethnic backers to support him with pride, and to white liberals to be offended by appeals to guilt and focus on competence instead.
It trades on Ms.
Giuliani's reputation as a former news anchorwoman for WPIX-TV to make its case in a Checkers meets Diane Sawyer vein, and sorrowful tone as she stands by her man puts a soft edge on a tough message.
But the ad also risks seeming disengenuous: While ostensibly saying that race should not be an issue, it actually goes to great lengths to highlight and trade on racially inflammatory remarks.
TODD S. PURDUM


An Elusive Clan Father Is Peacekeepers' Nemesis
In the Somali language, the surname of Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, the powerful clan leader waging the vicious guerrilla war in the streets of Mogadishu, carries this meaning: "He who will not be insulted."
It is an admonition that United Nations troops have recognized at their cost.


SPRINT VENTURE TO OFFER COMPUTER TELEPHONE SERVICE
The Sprint Corporation, the nation's third-largest long-distance carrier, will team up with Minnesota Supercomputer Center Inc. to market high-performance computer services over its long-distance fiber optic network.
As envisioned, an oil exploration company, for example, could transmit billions of bits of seismic data to a supercomputer, which could then compile it into vivid images of underground geological formations.
Using a technology called Asynchronous Transfer Mode, Sprint will be able to transmit the equivalent of four full-length books a second.
Minnesota Supercomputer, an 11-year-old company with $25 million in sales, operates five supercomputers.


Clinton Sending More Troops to Somalia
President Clinton has decided to order about 2,000 more United States troops to Somalia to try to stabilize the country and has set a deadline of roughly six months for the withdrawal of all American forces, White House officials said today.
By setting a specific withdrawal date, Mr.
Clinton hoped to ease Congressional pressure to end the Somalia operation immediately.
The President also planned to spell out more clearly the precise goals he is setting for the American troops, who have been in Somalia for nine months on a mission that has already been extended and redefined.


Physicians Clinical Laboratory Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


New York May Drop Charges Against Clifford in Bank Case
New York prosecutors indicated for the first time yesterday that they might be willing to drop charges against Clark M. Clifford stemming from the Bank of Credit and Commerce International scandals.
Citing the acquittal of Robert A. Altman, Mr.
Clifford's law partner, on related charges, and Mr.
Clifford's precarious health, his lawyers petitioned in State Supreme Court in Manhattan to have the case dismissed.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Allegheny County, Pa., is offering $75.6 million of general-obligation refunding bonds initially priced to yield from 2.65 percent in 1994 to 5.20 percent in 2010 through Smith Barney Shearson.
The bonds are rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service and AA by Standard &amp; Poor's.
*
Arkansas Power and Light, Little Rock, a unit of Entergy Corp., is offering $155 million of 6 percent first-mortgage bonds due 2003 at a price of 98.75 to yield 6.169 percent through underwriters led by Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
Noncallable for five years, the bonds are rated Baa-2 by Moody's and BBB by Standard &amp; Poor's and Duff &amp; Phelps.


Chase Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


WHERE TO FIND IT
NO one really knows who gets credit for devising the hooked rug.
Some view the rugs, made from fabric strips pulled through a woven base with a wood-handled crochet hook, as true, born-in-America folk art.
Others, notably W. W. Kent in his 1930 book "The Hooked Rug," trace the craft's origins to the sixth-century Copts or Bronze Age Vikings.
Whatever.
During the last decade or so, hooked rugs, once relegated to the attic, have become popular, in part because decorators have featured them prominently in country-style interiors.
"A lot of young collectors who couldn't afford Orientals also started buying hooked rugs," said Jessie Turbayne, author of "Hooked Rugs, History and the Continuing Tradition" (Schiffer Publishing, $39.95).


National Bancorp of Alaska reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


National Bancorp of Alaska reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Station Gets Its Man
BERNIE SMILOVITZ, a sports broadcaster, will join Channel 2 in January, completing WCBS-TV's 18-month push to take him away from WDIV-TV in Detroit.
His salary was not disclosed.
The station has been seeking a high-profile replacement for WARNER WOLF, who left for Washington, in May 1992.


Ise Journal; Sun Goddess's Sojourn (Will Shinto's Star Rise?)
Long before Japan's business and political leaders and its leading Shinto priests arrived in the ancient forests surrounding the Ise shrine here to witness the nation's rarest religious ritual, Kenichi Yano was struggling to answer a 1,300-year-old question.
Why, every 20 years, does Japan rebuild its most sacred shrine, uprooting the sun goddess Amaterasu from her old sanctum and resettling her in a new one?


Now, the Little Prince Can Come to Supper
"THE LITTLE PRINCE" has endured for 50 years.
No one knows if the plates, cup and porringer inspired by the beloved book will last that long, but they are sunny to look at and are sweet without being cloying.
The faience dishes, made by the Gien company in France, are being sold in connection with a show of Antoine de Saint-Exupery's original manuscript and illustrations, at the Pierpont Morgan Library until Jan. 2, 1994.
Saint-Exupery may not have foreseen dishes made from his drawings, but what better way for the lonely Prince to make friends?


Review/Theater; 'Family Secrets': Catskills to California
As a lively but decrepit Jewish grandmother named Rose, one of five fully fleshed characterizations in the one-woman show "Family Secrets," Sherry Glaser tells the story of the octogenarian's botched suicide attempt, which involved a gas range and half a bottle of aspirin.
Her son, Rose recalls, wondered why she didn't just jump out the window, since she lived on the 33d floor.
Rose's complacent answer: it was cold outside.
Now in itself, the story may have the weary resonance of something that has made many rounds on the borscht circuit.
But Ms.
Glaser doesn't play it as an isolated joke.
She charges the anecdote with an energetic empathy that brings into focus both the old woman's truly felt despair and the sharp-edged, absurdist logic that is her best defense.


Credit Clinton in Gay Rights Struggle
To the Editor:
"Nunn 2, Clinton 0" (Op-Ed, Sept. 20), Tom Stoddard's analysis of the fight to lift the ban on gays in the military, is inappropriately harsh to the President and Representative Barney Frank.
It shows a misunderstanding that pervaded his leadership of the Campaign for Military Service.
The contending parties were the President facing the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Senator Sam Nunn.
Compromise was inevitable.
Instead of working to shape that compromise, Mr.
Stoddard's forces reacted harshly to any talk of it by Mr.
Clinton and blasted Mr.
Frank when he expressed alarm at their futile approach.
They denounced the President and the July directive without analyzing its strengths and weaknesses.
Only now, amid further denunciation, do they recognize it had some merit.


Garden Q.&amp;A.
Bark for Canoes
Q.
If it's harmful to strip bark from trees, how did American Indians make their canoes? -- Jeremy Fischer, Manchester, Vt.
A.
A handsome new book, "Bark," by Ghillean T. and Anne E. Prance (Timber Press, $49.95), offers answers.
It notes that many peoples used bark for watercraft, but that none surpassed the skill of American Indians.
And while spruce, elm, hickory and Southern beech were useful for canoe shells, no tree compared with the paper or white birch (Betula papyrifera).


Review/Television; The Effect of Images on Governmental Policy
So now we must add to the nightmarish images of our century the corpse of an American soldier being dragged through dusty streets by an exulting band.
The picture would be painful under any circumstances, but there is a twist of the knife: the young man was in Somalia as part of an effort to feed people.
In reflections written after the Marine landing in December and published on the Op-Ed page of The New York Times last Thursday, George F. Kennan blamed television for the surge of support for what was insistently described at the time as a humanitarian mission.
"The reaction was an emotional one," he wrote, "occasioned by the sight of the suffering of the starving people in question." Now the emotions aroused by a new picture and the deaths it represents are putting pressure on the Administration to end the mission that began with such acclaim less than a year ago.


Bridge
Teams captained by Jeanne Rahmey of Brooklyn and Billy Rosenbaum of Manhattan will contest the final of the Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Team Championship next week.
The event is organized by the Greater New York Bridge Association, of which Rosenbaum is president.
Entries for the 1993-94 season close Sept. 15. (Information is available from Judith Dahlman, (212) 210-6743.)
Playing Tuesday evening at the Manhattan Club, 27 West 72d Street, the Rosenbaum team, which includes Glenn Eisenstein, Jim Sampson and Aaron Silverstein, all of Manhattan; Dave Daly of Fort Lee, N.J., and Robin Kay of Jersey City, won their semifinal by 70 imps against a group headed by Lapt Chan of Woodside, Queens.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Cable television subscribers in several cities woke up to find that their local ABC, CBS or NBC affiliated stations had been dropped by their cable companies.
The stations were casualties of a long-running dispute about whether broadcast stations should be compensated by cable systems that carry them.  [ Page D1. ]
Ford's next chairman does not own a car.
Alexander J. Trotman, like other auto-company executives, can borrow cars from his company, a practice some say perpetuates the insulated nature of Detroit's car makers.  [ D1. ]


4 TEEN-AGERS HELD IN TOURIST KILLING
The authorities have charged four boys -- a 13-year-old, a 14-year-old and two 16-year-olds -- with first-degree murder in the killing of a British tourist last month.
They were also charged with first-degree attempted murder and automobile theft.
The tourist, 34-year-old Gary Colley, was the ninth foreigner to be killed in Florida is less than a year.
The series of attacks has attracted international attention and threatened Florida's $31 billion tourism industry.


4 Heublein Brands Move From McCann
A day after Lowe &amp; Partners' stunning gain of the Diet Coke account from Lintas New York, a sibling Interpublic Group agency, Lowe won another sizable beverage account from a different Interpublic relative, McCann-Erickson New York.
Heublein Inc. said yesterday that it had dismissed McCann from the creative portion of its Smirnoff vodkas account and moved it to Lowe in New York without a formal review.
As a result of losing Smirnoff, McCann resigned its three other Heublein brands, though it will retain the media portion of the account.


Insurer to Pay for Investigation of Its Sales Tactics
The Metropolitan Life Insurance Company yesterday agreed to pay for an independent investigation of charges that its insurance agents engaged in unethical practices in selling tens of thousands of whole life policies around the United States.
Florida's insurance commissioner has charged that Metropolitan's 100-member office in Tampa systematically trained its agents to misrepresent the whole life insurance policies they were selling as retirement accounts.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALCO STANDARD CORP., Wayne, Pa., said it had acquired Western Business Resources Inc. of Rapid City, S.D.
Terms were not disclosed.
ASTROTECH INTERNATIONAL CORP., Pittsburgh, said its HMT Inc. subsidiary had signed a letter of intent to acquire Rubbaglas Petroseals Ltd. of London.


Victims Found Holdup At Market No Joke
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 28 account of an armed robbery at the Fairway market on Manhattan's Upper West Side, in which 40 employees were forced to lie on the floor, while five gunmen held them hostage, states that the gunmen were "oblivious to the finer points of kohlrabi and fresh poblano peppers."


Premier Bancorp Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CST Entertainment Imaging reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Candidates On Television
Gov.
Jim Florio and his Republican rival, Christine Todd Whitman, will hold an hourlong debate tonight at 7.
It will be broadcast live on WABC-TV (Channel 7) in New York City and WPVI-TV (Channel 6) in Philadelphia.


From Russia, a Bid to Increase Arms in Caucasus
Western diplomats said today that Russia asked last month for an increase in the number of tanks and heavy weapons Moscow is allowed to station in the Caucasus, where civil wars are raging in three newly independent countries, under a conventional arms reduction treaty signed three years ago.
Germany and other signers of the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe, signed in Paris at the end of 1990, rejected the Russian request at a meeting in Vienna last month, saying that any change that would require a renegotiation of the treaty was unacceptable, according to the diplomats.


Argentbank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A brief article yesterday analyzing Herman Badillo's latest television commercial carried an incorrect credit line in some copies.
The writer was James Dao.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-17  MORE U.S.
TROOPS TO SOMALIA  President Clinton has decided to order about 2,000 more troops to Somalia to try to stabilize the country.
He will also set a deadline of roughly six months for the withdrawal of all Americans, officials said.
A1  U.N.'S TOUGH SOMALIA ADVERSARY  Mohammed Farah Aidid, a Soviet-trained officer whose forces ousted Mohammed Siad Barre in 1991, is adept at urban warfare.
But his power may lie in his refusal to accept outside efforts to take away what he has won by conquest.
A1


Merry Land &amp; Investment Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Books of The Times; The Trillings: Two Portraits in One
The Beginning of the Journey  The Marriage of Diana and Lionel Trilling  By Diana Trilling  Illustrated. 442 pages.
Harcourt Brace
Well into "The Beginning of the Journey," Diana Trilling's utterly absorbing memoir of her marriage to the critic and teacher Lionel Trilling, the author reports how often she is asked by interviewers, "How did it feel to be Lionel's wife?" She elaborates, "How, they mean, did it feel to be a critic in my own right but married to a better and more famous critic than I?"


Nuggets Sign Rogers
The Denver Nuggets yesterday signed their first-round draft pick, RODNEY ROGERS, two days before the team's training camp is scheduled to begin.


John M. Wallace, 65, An Authority on Poetry
Prof.
John M. Wallace, an authority on 17th-century poetry at the University of Chicago, died yesterday at his home in the Hyde Park neighborhood of Chicago.
He was 65 years old.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Once Again, Children Prove That Some Like It Yucky
A NEW toy and book are not so much beautiful but beastly, which seems to be the trend in children's products.
Adults just don't get its wacky look, but children 4 and up are grabbing doll's called Roomies (above), whose Velcro-backed features -- including train-track mouth and pyramid eyes -- can be endlessly rearranged.
Or exchanged for Lolita lips and bloodshot bug eyes.
Roomies were created by Shelly Meridith, a New Yorker and former product designer for the Walt Disney Company.
"I went to a Picasso-sketchbooks exhibition and was inspired by how he tried to arrange the eyes, nose and mouth in a drawing of a woman," Ms.
Meridith said.


Eric the Unemployed?
ERIC DICKERSON, the National Football League's second-leading career rusher, hasn't been waived after all by the Atlanta Falcons.
Tuesday night, Dickerson concluded he was being released after conversations with assistant coaches JUNE JONES and OLLIE WILSON.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Pinetop Perkins  Village Vanguard 178 Seventh Avenue South (at 11th Street) Greenwich Village Through tonight
Pinetop Perkins takes his time with the blues; he never hurries, but he never lets the momentum abate.
Leading a trio on Tuesday night, the 80-year-old pianist from Mississippi sang with a matter-of-fact amiability.
Whether he was boasting about virility or recalling lost love, his voice was weathered and knowing, its painful memories cushioned by a sense of humor.
In "Hoochie Koochie Man," a song associated with his longtime employer Muddy Waters, he sang as if he took the song's occult powers for granted.


National R.V. Holdings Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


U.S. Looking Ahead to Swell of Cuban Refugees
Acting on reports that the Cuban economy is on the verge of collapse, the Clinton Administration is drafting contingency plans for dealing with a potential wave of Cuban refugees, officials say.
A new task force of representatives of about 40 different Federal agencies met on Tuesday for the first time to "look at possible U.S. responses" to a political crisis in Cuba.


Suddenly, Michael Doesn't Play Here Anymore
Like Alexander the Great, Michael Jordan said he had no more worlds to conquer.
And so, at age 30, the man generally considered the world's greatest basketball player announced today that he was retiring from the game and from the spotlight that had become so uncomfortable for him.
"I have nothing more to prove in basketball," he said, "I have no more challenges that I felt I could get motivated for. It doesn't have anything to do with my father's passing, or media pressure, or anything other than that I had achieved everything in basketball I could. And when that happened, I felt it was time to call it a career."


The Gehry House: A Brash Landmark Grows Up
FRANK GEHRY has remodeled his house, and some people are miserable about it.
Young architects in Los Angeles, including several whose careers Mr.
Gehry has helped to nurture, are having a hard time adjusting to the change.
They grumble, mostly among themselves, that Mr.
Gehry has smoothed away the rough edges that gave the house its character.
To hear them talk, you might think that the house belonged to them.
And it does.
It belongs to everyone who believes that architecture is an art of living.
The house, in Santa Monica, just west of Los Angeles, has been a landmark for 15 years.
The architectural vocabulary it introduced in 1978 -- a precise balance of fragment and whole, raw and refined, new and old -- has inspired a generation of designers.
It helped to establish Los Angeles as America's most vibrant city for architectural innovation.
And it widened the scope of Mr.
Gehry's own practice from a regional to a global sphere.


Cutbacks at Spoleto U.S.A.
The Spoleto U.S.A.
Festival in Charleston, S.C., will cut back on its presentations for the 1994 season because of financial constraints, a spokesman said yesterday.
The festival will run 12 days, from May 25 to June 5, instead of the 17 originally announced, and will present some 90 performances, down from 118 in 1993.
With an accumulated deficit of about $1 million, the festival has reduced its budget from $4.5 million this year to an estimated $3.8 million for 1994.
Among the major productions to be presented is Puccini's "Trittico," in a staging by the festival's artistic director, Gian Carlo Menotti, beginning on May 27.


Braves' Pitchers Aren't Ready to Surrender
During the season, Greg McMichael, the Braves' 26-year-old rookie relief pitcher, preserved 19 of 21 save opportunities and had a 2-3 record with a 2.06 earned run average.
Over his previous 55 1/3 innings in those final weeks of the pennant race he had allowed only 8 earned runs for a 1.30 e.r.a.
But in the 10th inning of tonight's National League Championship Series opener, the Braves lost, 4-3, when McMichael's changeup was smashed for a double by John Kruk and a single down the left-field line by Kim Batiste.


At Visa, New Quest for U.S. Growth
When Carl F. Pascarella abruptly replaced H. Robert Heller as president of Visa U.S.A. in late August, he became the third person to hold that job in less than four years.
Some of the turnover may stem from the difficulties of 63-year-old Charles T. Russell, the president of Visa International, the parent organization, to settle on a successor.
But this latest change clearly stems, too, from the growing pressures on Visa.


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association
CHICAGO BULLS -- Announced the retirement of Michael Jordan, guard.


What Can Be Done for the New South Africa
To the Editor:
We commend the democratic sentiments of "South Africa, Outcast No Longer" (editorial, Sept. 26).
Indeed, if Nelson Mandela's goal of helping to create a "united, democratic, nonracial and nonsexist country" comes to fruition, it will be an example not only for other states, but for the United States as well.


Relatives Recount Dreams of 2 Killed in Somalia
Jamie Smith's brief letter from Mogadishu arrived in his family's morning mail today, three days after he and 11 other United States Army Rangers were killed in a firefight in the heart of the Somali capital.
In it, he expressed disgust about militiamen loyal to Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, the fugitive Somali faction leader, and questioned the willingness of some United Nations troops to back American soldiers in Mogadishu, his father, James Smith, said today.


New 'Woman Friendly' Fund Hits Its First Glitch
Skeptics are calling it the latest marketing gimmick of a mutual fund industry that is going to ever-greater lengths to wow investors.
Believers are relieved to finally have a financial vehicle through which they can reward companies that treat women well and punish those that do not.


Review/Dance; Translating Lofty Goals Into Steps
Coyote Dancers, a new group directed by Maher Benham, gave a polished performance on Sunday afternoon at the Marymount Manhattan Theater.
Two guest artists, Maxine Sherman and Steve Rooks, both former members of the Martha Graham Dance Company, enhanced the occasion.
Yet the matinee was disconcerting because Ms.
Benham's choreography seldom matched the loftiness of her stated intentions.
A press release said "Emanating the Essence," to recorded music of Brahms, had been inspired by the rapport between Graham and the dance photographer Barbara Morgan.
The choreography for Karen Kopf and Ms.
Sherman was in no way specifically biographical.
Rather, using strong, bold movements, Ms.
Benham showed two people totally attuned to each other.
The dance was coherent on its own terms.


NRP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pasqua: From First To Last
All Dan Pasqua wanted to do was fit in.
That is all any reserve who is thrust into the spotlight really wants to do.
Maybe Pasqua thought about smacking a few hits, but he primarily wanted to make the plays at first base and remain anonymous afield as a defensive replacement for Frank Thomas, the ailing White Sox slugger.
But on a day in Chicago when discussion of Michael Jordan's retirement inevitably brought gloom, any mention of Pasqua probably brought frowns.
The White Sox substitute first baseman not only made an error, but he was also guilty of another defensive misplay.
And he stranded five runners while going hitless in three times at bat while drawing abuse from the fans.
He might be anxious to return to a backup role.


A Painful Road Back From a Mail Bombing at Yale
David Gelernter, the Yale University computer scientist who was critically injured in June when he opened a package bomb mailed to his office in New Haven, is putting his life back together.
The bomb, sent by an anonymous person who the Federal Bureau of Investigation believes is responsible for a string of similar attacks going back to 1978, blinded Dr.
Gelernter in one eye, tore off part of his right hand, deafened him in one ear and wounded him in the chest.
He has gone through reconstructive surgery four times and attends physical therapy sessions three times a week.


In Chess Schism, Nobody Will Win
To the Editor:
"Throwing Over the Chessboard" (editorial, Sept. 21) states that the schism between Gary Kasparov and the International Chess Federation is good for chess.
I don't know one chess player who agrees with you.


Cooperative Bank For Savings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Parents of Baby Who Died in Nanny's Care Describe Past Injuries
The parents of a 10-month-old boy who died of head injuries suffered while in a baby sitter's care have told prosecutors that the baby may have been abused on two previous occasions, the parents said today.
The baby sitter, Ann Franklin, 25, of Rye, has been charged with second-degree murder, and a judge set her trial today for Jan. 10.
She is free on $250,000 bail, but wears an electronic ankle bracelet that allows officials to monitor her movements.


Corby Distilleries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Jordan About to Become Last Year's Role Model
Many young basketball players yesterday mourned Michael Jordan's retirement.
It was too soon, some said.
They didn't understand.
But Felipe Lopez, 18 years old, a star basketball player at Rice High School in Harlem, didn't take it so hard.
He said he realized Michael Jordan was more than a basketball player -- he was a man.
And like any other, he has the right to grow tired and move on with his life.


CCA Industries Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Head of New York Police Offers Compromise on Outside Monitor
Saying he had been "revolted" by the testimony of corrupt police officers, New York City's highest police official told a mayoral commission yesterday that the public had a right to expect better and that he would not oppose an outside monitor of the Police Department's anti-corruption efforts, as long as he retained the power to investigate and punish wrongdoers.
Speaking before the Mollen Commission, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly laid out for the first time the conditions under which he would support an independent authority to monitor his 30,000-member department, which has been portrayed over the last 10 days as unable to rein in rogue officers.
Mr.
Kelly's testimony could signal a compromise between the commission, which has urged such a review body, and the Police Commissioner, who until recently has argued that the police should police themselves.


Redskins' Quarterback? It's a Multiple-Choice Test
When the Redskins play the Giants Sunday in Washington, their starting quarterback will probably be Mark Rypien.
Or maybe Rich Gannon.
Or possibly Cary Conklin.
Even Richie Petitbon, the Redskins' coach, isn't sure.
He wants it to be Rypien because he is the best of the three.
In the second week of the season, when Rypien sprained his right knee against the Phoenix Cardinals, the Redskins lost.
They have lost the two games since -- to the Philadelphia Eagles and the Miami Dolphins -- so they will take a three-game losing streak and a 1-3 record in against the 3-1 Giants.


A Limited Showdown Over Cable
Cable television subscribers in several cities woke up yesterday to find their favorite ABC, CBS or NBC programs vanished, casualties of a long-running dispute over whether broadcast stations should be compensated by cable systems that carry them.
Under Federal law, the deadline to resolve that question was yesterday, and in the few cities where agreements could not be reached, viewers paid the price.
In Corpus Christi, Tex., for example, tens of thousands of viewers suddenly found an explanation from their cable operator where programs from ABC, NBC and CBS used to be.
In Portland, Me., cable viewers no longer got programs from NBC or CBS.
And in Grand Rapids, Mich., cable subscribers lost the CBS affiliate.
Scattered Effects
In the New York area, only a few small cable systems did not reach agreements with broadcast stations.
WNBC said it had withdrawn its signal from United Video, which has a few thousand cable subscribers in northern Westchester County.


Overseas Gains Spur U.S. Stock Market
Spurred by major gains in European and Asian markets, the American stock market was mostly higher yesterday in active trading.
The Dow Jones industrial average climbed 11.73 points, to 3,598.99, and the Nasdaq composite index rose 2.50 points, to 764.77.
However, the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 index fell 0.46 point, to 460.74.


The Rush Is On, as Florida State Seeks a Championship
The bitter disappointment of unsuccessful last-second field-goal attempts against the University of Miami is only one basic reality that the Florida State Seminoles must confront this week.
For the Seminoles to extend their perfect season and reverse the frustration of seven losses to Miami in the last eight games, including several that have deprived Florida State of a chance at the school's first national football championship, they will have to find a way to limit Miami's rushing game.


Tele-Communications Seen In Buyout of Liberty Media
At a time when the television industry is growing increasingly wary of the power of John C. Malone, Mr.
Malone, head of the nation's largest cable company, is considering a $3.3 billion stock deal to regain full control of a programming arm he spun off two years ago to please regulators.
According to an executive familiar with the proposed transaction, Tele-Communications Inc., which Mr.
Malone controls, would buy back the roughly 95 percent stake it does not own in the Liberty Media Corporation, a supplier of cable television programming, and reintegrate the two companies.


In the City of Change, Is 'Las Vegas Landmark' an Oxymoron?
OCTOBER is going to be a banner month for demolitions in Las Vegas.
On Oct. 27, the Dunes Hotel and its legendary 18-story sign are scheduled to become a neon-lighted memory in the American psyche.
The demolition, perhaps the most lavishly choreographed architectural blowup in United States history, is being designed to do for demolition what the Folies-Bergere did for legs.
The hotel and its minaret-topped sign will be felled by phony cannon fire from an ersatz British frigate.
The extravaganza is the latest spectacle from Stephen A. Wynn, the casino king who is chairman of Mirage Resorts Inc., which bought the Dunes earlier this year and plans to build another new resort there.


Argentbank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A picture of an American soldier yesterday appeared in some copies without a caption and adjoining an unrelated article.
The picture showed Sgt.
Eugene Williams, who was killed in Somalia on Sept. 25; it should have appeared with the article about American mourning for troops killed in Somalia.


Canadex Resources reports earnings for Year to June 30


Review/Music; 4 Siblings Committed Both to Play And Teach
The Ying Quartet is one of many talented young quartets currently stirring interest in the chamber music world.
What sets these four siblings apart is an exceptional commitment to musical education.
They are quartet in residence in the small town of Jesup, Iowa, where they have aroused enthusiasm for chamber music among young listeners.
The Yings -- Timothy and Janet (violinists), Phillip (violist) and David (cellist) -- also deserve attention for purely musical reasons, as they showed in a recital on Friday night at Weill Recital Hall.
Their sound is integrated and sure-footed, a picture of expressive unanimity.
The highlight of Friday's program was the Brahms Quintet in F minor, with Wu Han at the piano.
Ensemble between strings and piano was tentative at first, but climactic passages of the third and fourth movements barreled along with symphonic force.
It suddenly struck this listener how much the stretto of the last movement influenced the "Rondo Burlesque" of Mahler's Ninth Symphony.


National R.V. Holdings Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Across the Globe, Expressions of Regret and Gratitude
From the "Say It Ain't So, Mike," headline in The Chicago Sun-Times to the special news report on Romanian television, Michael Jordan's abrupt retirement sent shock waves around the globe yesterday.
And in a world where basketball has become a rare unifying force, the world reacted as one, with surprise, admiration, understanding and dismay.
The dismay may have been more pronounced in Chicago, where children cried and grown-ups groped for words, but Jordan's retirement was major news in virtually every international capital, confirming that Jordan is the world's most famous and admired athlete.


New Pact for Rice
JERRY RICE signed a three-year contract extension with the San Francisco 49ers yesterday, solidifying his status as the National Football League's highest-paid wide receiver.
Rice, a ninth-year pro who already has become the league's career leader in touchdown receptions with 106, will get at least $8.425 million and possibly as much as $9.625 million during the extension, which begins in 1995.


CST Entertainment Imaging reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Review/Music; American Song as an Art Form
For exactly 20 years, William Bolcom and Joan Morris have been stealthily erasing the line that separates art song from popular song.
Max Morath, sometimes as a singer but more prominently as ragtime pianist, has been similarly subversive at the keyboard.
The three came together on Sunday afternoon in the Sylvia and Danny Kaye Playhouse at Hunter College.
Benefiting was the Institute for Studies in American Music at Brooklyn College.
Cited was H. Wiley Hitchcock, its founding director, who is retiring.
And noted, too, was the Bolcom and Morris anniversary: The team's first concert, in 1973, was under the auspices of the institute.
Musical values have been so influenced by ideas and progress -- in other words, by the politics of style -- that the American popular song is by and large the recipient of affectionate pats and subsequent dismissal from serious scrutiny.
Its harmonic language has not kept pace with the Schoenbergs of 20th-century music and, at its most sophisticated, goes very little past turn-of-the-century Ravel.
The June-moon-croon school of lyrics sounds somehow more legitimate in Schumann's German than in 1920's Americanese.


COMPANY NEWS: The New Technologies; Americans See Future and Say, 'So What?'
The companies seeking fortunes in whiz-bang high-tech goodies we are constantly told are just over the horizon have their work cut out for them, according to a public opinion poll commissioned by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
The new technologies -- the data superhighway, interactive television, video-on-demand, virtual reality -- promise a revolution in personal communications and entertainment, but only a small percentage of Americans think advanced electronics and computer developments will have a big impact on their lives during the next 10 years.


Economic Scene; The wisdom of managing trade is coming under scrutiny.
WHEN it comes to trade, everybody knows that the Japanese are different, and that the only way to make economic peace with them is to dispense with the vague promises and insist on specific trade results.
Well not quite everybody.
Last week an elite, mostly American group of economists (including four Nobel Prize winners) wrote to President Clinton and Prime Minister Morihiro Hosokawa in preface to the Japanese leader's official visit, deploring America's drift toward a "results oriented" trade policy and pleading for a return to what might be called internationalism by the rules.


Royal Encounters, on the Stage and in Real Life
Nicholas Hytner has a cache of stories about his encounters with the royal family at the Royal National Theater in London.
He tells them at gatherings and in private, with great glee, in nasal-voiced, Monty Python-esque parodic style.
There's one about the Prince of Wales, for instance, who went to the National last year to see Alan Bennett's play "The Madness of King George III" and discussed it with Mr.
Hytner, the director, afterward.


With Polls Tight, Giuliani Pounds Pavement and Mingles
Rudolph W. Giuliani moved his campaign to the shoe-leather stage yesterday, hawking his hopes on the streets of Manhattan as Mayor David N. Dinkins countered with a string of stinging attacks.
While Mr.
Giuliani mixed with commuters on the Upper East Side and the lunch crowd in Bryant Park, the Mayor condemned him for refusing to participate in debates that include the conservative candidate, George Marlin.
Mr.
Dinkins said the Republican-Liberal candidate would destroy a program intended to help women and members of minorities win city contracts.
He said Mr.
Giuliani offered New Yorkers government "by decree" and "a tense, terse style."


Surgery for Webber
CHRIS WEBBER, the former Michigan star, underwent a routine appendectomy yesterday afternoon after undergoing tests for stomach pain, a hospital spokeswoman said.
Webber, due in California tomorrow for the opening of the Golden State Warriors' training camp, was taken from his Detroit home to Henry Ford Hospital about 7 P.M.
Tuesday.


AT HOME WITH: Niki de Saint Phalle; An Artist, Her Monsters, Her Two Worlds
LUNCH is about to be served at the country home of Niki de Saint Phalle, and there is a worm on her chair.
"Yeuuch," the French-American artist says, recoiling in horror.
"Do you think you could remove that?"
It is a modest worm, quite still in the summer sun.
When one remembers that this is an artist who created a sensation in the early 1960's by firing a gun at her canvases in performances (sometimes joined by Robert Rauschenberg and Jasper Johns) and who has since sculptured myriad serpents and many-headed monsters, the creature appears risibly innocuous.
But there is genuine alarm in Ms.
Saint Phalle's cavernous blue eyes.
"I tend to paint things I am terrified of," she says.
"Worms, snakes, spiders, that kind of thing."


ReadiCare Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


A Major Record Album: Only a Phone Call Away
The making of Frank Sinatra's new album with 13 other big-name artists, including Barbra Streisand, Carly Simon and Bono, was no "We Are the World" type of celebrity jam session.
Thanks to the latest in fiber optic technology, recording it was more like "We Are All Over the World."
For the album of duets, Mr.
Sinatra remained in Los Angeles as most of his partners literally phoned in their performances: Aretha Franklin from Detroit, Tony Bennett from New York, Charles Aznavour from London and Liza Minelli from Brazil.


Alpha Microsystems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Corrections
An obituary on Sept. 29 about William Ballard, an architect who guided New York City planning from 1963 to 1966 and who died on Sept. 27, referred incorrectly to his second wife.
She is Martha Moore Ballard, the former Martha Moore Muzzey, and she survives him.
The couple were divorced in 1945.


YELTSIN, IN SPEECH, APPEALS FOR CALM AFTER 'NIGHTMARE'
In his first address to the nation since army tanks crushed an uprising against him, President Boris N. Yeltsin called on Russians today to put the "nightmare of these black days" behind them, and affirmed that elections to a new Parliament will be held Dec. 12.
Mr.
Yeltsin also called for a purge of Russia's regional councils, many of which had sided with the Parliament's defiant leaders during the political crisis that led up to this week's violence.
He said the local councils, or soviets, should peacefully dissolve themselves, and also prepare for new local elections, possibly in December.


Consider Vision Problems
To The Home Section:
Lawrence Kutner's discussion about clumsiness in children (Parent &amp; Child, Sept. 16) surprisingly omits a logical first step in assessing a child's seemingly "klutzy" movements: an eye examination.


Study Doesn't Prove Press Has Gotten Religion
To the Editor:
A new study from the Freedom Forum First Amendment Center at Vanderbilt University, you report, challenges "a widely expressed view," based on earlier research by ourselves, that most United States journalists are "irreligious" (news article, Sept. 8).


Premier Bancorp Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Another Vote
While the Mayoral race captures the attention of most of New York City, another campaign is taking place this week.
For the first time in the history of their migration to the continental United States, mainland residents of Puerto Rican ancestry will have a chance to voice their preference on the island's future -- whether it should remain a commonwealth, form an independent nation or become the 51st state.
The vote will begin today in polling places in schools, community centers and storefronts in New York, with other cities to follow over the next few weeks.
It was organized by a group of mainland Puerto Rican politicians and advocacy groups who were angered by their exclusion from the island's Nov. 14 nonbinding plebiscite on Puerto Rico's political status.


Executive Leaves Y. &amp; R. for Ammirati
Helayne Spivak, the high-profile creative executive, said yesterday that, as expected, she would leave Young &amp; Rubicam New York to rejoin Ammirati &amp; Puris in New York, effective Nov. 8.
For the last three years, Ms.
Spivak, who is 41, has been executive vice president and executive creative director at Y. &amp; R. New York, overseeing creative work on accounts like Dr Pepper, KFC and Xerox with estimated billings of $1.3 billion.
Her return to Ammirati is seen as a graceful exit from her many problems at Y. &amp; R., which included frequent turnover in the creative ranks, several large account losses and clashes with the agency's sedate corporate culture.
And in June, Ted Bell, a top creative executive at Leo Burnett, was named to a higher creative post than hers, as vice chairman and worldwide creative director at Y. &amp; R. Advertising.


Treasury Bonds Trade in Tight Range
The bond market was on hold again yesterday, with prices and yields bouncing around in a narrow range.
But the hold may be lifted tomorrow, when the Labor Department releases its September employment report.
That data may give traders and investors an indication of whether interest rates should remain in their current trading range or break out in one direction or another.


Bee Schenken Is Dead; Bridge Champion, 77
Bee Schenken, a leading contract bridge player who won seven national titles, died on Tuesday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 77.
The cause of death was a stroke after a long illness, said her daughter, Sandra Bandler of Manhattan.


Excerpts From Testimony By the Police Commissioner
Following are excerpts from the testimony yesterday of the New York City Police Commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, before the panel investigating police corruption.
The people of New York City must know they can count on the members of their Police Department to be as honest as they are brave and able.
They must know they can count on the Police Department to track down and drive from our ranks those who violate their oath and break the law.


Tests Added for Women in Health Plan
Responding to complaints from women's advocates, the Clinton Administration announced today that its health plan would pay for more frequent mammograms than it had originally recommended.
Donna E. Shalala, Secretary of Health and Human Services, told the Senate Labor Committee that in addition to free mammograms every two years for women over the age of 50, the Administration had decided it wanted additional breast X-rays for women in high-risk categories, like those with a family history of breast cancer, to be fully paid by the program.
Worried About Bureaucracy
When it gets the Administration's final proposal, Congress is expected to alter many details, and more liberal benefits for women's health concerns are politically inviting to many lawmakers.
Last week, 36 women in the House urged Hillary Rodham Clinton to see that more generous standards were adopted.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
3.04
3.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.96
2.99
2.80
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.08
3.11
2.90
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.88
4.90
5.99
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.01
6.01
7.48
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.03
7.01
8.58
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.44
5.43
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Ex-Leaders Await Pakistan Vote Tally
Two former Prime Ministers battled to regain power today, but no clear leader emerged as paper ballots were counted from Wednesday's elections, Pakistan's third national vote in five years.
The vote pitted Benazir Bhutto against Nawaz Sharif, her successor, in an election in which less than 40 percent of the voters cast ballots, an indication of the depth of cynicism over the country's political process and its politicians.


Safety Concerns Limit the Ability Of Reporters to Work in Somalia
Delays and confusion over information on the major battle between United Nations forces and Somali militiamen over the weekend has underscored the difficulties for journalists operating in Mogadishu.
Most major news organizations have withdrawn from the Somali capital for safety reasons in the last month and only a handful of reporters are left in the capital.
United States news organizations, including The New York Times, have withdrawn American citizens from the city.
In recent weeks there have been increasing threats by supporters of Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid to take American citizens hostage.


CCA Industries Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


On Both Sides: Disarray and Indecision
In the night before the final and fateful assault on the Parliament center, both the White House and the Kremlin, the headquarters of competing claims to Russia's power a scant three miles apart, seemed caught in illusion and indecision.
In the Kremlin, a sparse weekend staff seemed to be caught entirely off guard by the eruption of an armed insurgency on Sunday led by extremists.
President Boris N. Yeltsin flew in by helicopter only shortly before 7 P.M., when the cordon around the White House, as the Parliament building is known, was already breached and gunmen were setting off to attack the headquarters of the state television.


Phillies Take Series Lead By Winning In the 10th
The Philadelphia Phillies, a team that is used to living on the edge, especially with Mitch (the Wild Thing) Williams around, almost fell off the precipice tonight.
Too much wildness from the reliever, as well as too much wildness from the defense, nearly doomed the Phillies in the first game of the National League Championship Series against Atlanta.
But the Phillies perservered over the Braves, who won more games than any other team in the major leagues, because on this night redemption incongruously walked hand-in-hand with many a Phillie on the high-wire act.


Ear to the Universe Is Plugged by Budget Cutters
An ambitious program to monitor the heavens for possible radio signals from extraterrestrial civilizations, begun with much fanfare last year on Columbus Day, has been canceled by Congressional budget cutters, and astronomers are looking for private financing to continue their cosmic eavesdropping.
The $12 million needed to keep the program alive for the next year was eliminated from the NASA budget last Friday by a House-Senate conference committee.
The action was spurred on by Senator Richard H. Bryan, Democrat of Nevada, who derided the program as a "great Martian chase" and a waste of taxpayer dollars.


Giants' Moore Is Back, But His Future Is Murky
The nameplate over Eric Moore's locker was blank, but Moore was there, sitting, talking extensively about his four-game suspension from the National Football League for violating its substance-abuse policy.
Moore looked relieved to be back with the Giants.
How long he'll be back is unclear, but for now he has been given a second chance.
Many professional athletes are given second chances, and third, and fourth.
What matters is what they do with those chances.
Moore, on top of the world after he was picked in the first round of the draft in 1988, must now wade through one of the lowest points of his life.


METRO DIGEST
GUILTY VERDICT IN RITUAL SLAYING After seven hours of deliberations, a jury found James P. Wanger guilty of murder and 10 other charges against him in the bizarre ritual slaying of a teen-age friend.
A1.
KELLY REVERSES ON POLICE MONITORING New York City's highest police official reversed his opposition to the creation of an independent monitor to review the Police Department's anti-corruption programs as long as he retained the power to investigate and punish wrongdoers.
A1.


Former State Senator Admits Illegal Use of Money
A former state senator admitted today that she had illegally used money from her employer, Rockland County's only gas and electric company, to gain political advantage for the utility, to suppress negative coverage of it in a local newspaper and to pay some of her personal expenses.
The admissions by the former senator, Linda Winikow, came as part of a plea agreement and represented the first conviction in an embezzlement scheme that has left residents angrily wondering how the utility has been spending their money.
Prosecutors have charged that the scheme, engineered by Mrs.
Winikow and two other former employees of Orange and Rockland Utilities, involved in excess of $250,000 paid by consumers.


U.N. Fails to Stem Muslim Rebellion in Bosnia
United Nations-sponsored efforts to bring peace to the northwestern corner of Bosnia appeared to falter today, 10 days after the region's leader, a Muslim businessman, proclaimed autonomy from the Muslim-led Government in Sarajevo and set off what has become a war within a war.
The rebellion by Fikret Abdic, a longtime rival of Alija Izetbegovic, the Bosnian President, has raised fears that Bosnia could fragment further in the absence of a peace accord to end the 18-month-old war.
Mr.
Abdic has said he favors an international peace plan that Mr.
Izetbegovic's Government has rejected.


Cruise Line Will Cut a Disney Link
Premier Cruise Lines, the longtime official cruise line of Walt Disney World, announced yesterday that it had a new agreement with Warner Brothers Consumer Products.
As a result, its fleet will soon put to sea with a new cast of characters -- namely, that wascally wabbit Bugs Bunny and the rest of the Looney Tunes menagerie, including Daffy Duck, Porky Pig and the Tasmanian Devil.
While Mickey Mouse, Donald Duck and other Disney characters will not be made to walk the plank, they will not be appearing on the Premier line after next March.
Their long-term seafaring fate apparently depends on whether Disney comes to terms with either Carnival Cruise Lines Inc. or Royal Caribbean Cruises Ltd., both of which have acknowledged holding discussions with Disney.


No Headline
"I have nothing more to prove in basketball. I have no more challenges that I felt I could get motivated for. It doesn't have anything to do with my father's passing, or media pessure, or anything other than that I had achieved everything in basketball I could. And when that happened, I felt it was time to call it a career." MICHAEL JORDAN.  [ B17:2. ]


McGirt Talk Becomes Tirade
If you were among those glad-handing, big-talking well-wishers who couldn't promise enough to James (Buddy) McGirt when he was preparing to fight Pernell Whitaker last March, and then deserted him after he lost the welterweight bout and underwent shoulder surgery, McGirt had a few words for you yesterday.
Unfortunately, none of them are printable.


Starbucks to Taste New York, at Last
The Starbucks Corporation, the nation's largest retailer of specialty coffee, is expected to announce on Thursday that it is moving farther from its base here into several new Eastern markets -- including New York City and Boston.
The company, which has aggressively expanded, now has 253 stores in the United States.
It features Italian-style coffee bars selling fresh-roasted beans, pots to brew them in, and drinks like latte (pronounced LAH-tay), a shot of espresso topped with hot milk but less foamy than cappuccino.


NRP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Pop and Jazz in Review
Daniel Schnyder  Visiones 125 Macdougal Street Greenwich Village
Fifty years ago, the Swiss composer and saxophonist Daniel Schnyder could have had a flourishing career writing film scores for Hollywood.
Mr.
Schnyder, performed with a septet on Sept. 29, writes music that incorporates the bleakness of modernist classical music with elements of jazz to create moody, dissonant pieces, darkened by shadows, that would have been perfect for film noir.


Panel Passes Council Plan For Building On Shoreline
Far-reaching new waterfront zoning rules, which would require the developers of large private projects in New York City to build public space along the shoreline, were approved yesterday by the City Council's Land Use Committee.
Vital to passage were several compromises sought by the real-estate industry and agreed to at the 11th hour by city planners.
These would reduce or eliminate legal liability and maintenance obligations for the builders of public spaces.


Events: Walking Tours In City and the Country
Ellington's New York  Museum of the City of New York, Fifth Avenue at 103d Street; (212) 534-1672.
The museum is offering three walking tours in conjunction with the exhibition "Beyond Category: The Musical Genius of Duke Ellington," which continues through March 20, 1994.
On Sunday, from 1 to 3 P.M., there will be a walking tour in Manhattan of the Upper West Side neighborhood where Ellington lived.


Public &amp; Private; We're Outta There
It began with the pictures. And now it will end with them.
A year ago there was the news footage of children, skeletons with black-hole eyes, starving in the villages of Somalia, dying and being buried where they had fallen because there were so many dead.
It touched the heart.


Review/Dance; Folklore Right in Step With the Abstract
Aman World Music and Dance opened an engagement at the Joyce Theater on Tuesday night with a program that featured venerable folk dances as well as the world premiere of Laura Dean's "Light," an up-to-the-minute piece that nonetheless has roots in the past.
It may at first seem odd that this Los Angeles-based troupe of dancers, singers and musicians turned to Ms.
Dean.
Aman, which is celebrating its 30th anniversary, specializes in folk dances from around the world performed in traditional costumes and accompanied by traditional instruments.
Ms.
Dean is a rigorous abstractionist who has worked with both ballet and modern-dance companies.
Her love of patterning has led some theatergoers to call her a minimalist, although that designation in no way does justice to the intricacy and beauty of her choreography.


Keenan Is on the Defensive
Mike Keenan came to the Rangers' practice facility at Rye Playland in Rye, N.Y., yesterday morning convinced that a few of his original starting six defensemen would be on the bench tonight when New York is host to the Tampa Bay Lightning at Madison Square Garden and a few of his rookies would get a chance to play.
Five hours later, he wasn't so sure.


Calendar: Architects and Antiques
Architects on Television  Museum of Television and Radio, 25 West 52d Street; (212) 621-6600.
A screening of "The New Modernists: Nine American Architects," a documentary by Michael Blackwood, followed by a panel discussion, will be offered Wednesday, from 6:30 to 8:30 P.M.
The program is co-sponsored by the Architectural League of New York.
Tickets, $8; members, $5.
An American Architect  Equitable Gallery, 787 Seventh Avenue (51st Street); (212) 554-4818.
"Thomas Jefferson and the Design of Monticello" starts today and continues through Jan. 8, 1994.
The exhibition covers the design and building of Jefferson's home in Charlottesville, Va., over a 40-year period, and includes notes written by Jefferson, models, drawings and photographs.
Open Monday through Friday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Saturday, noon to 5 P.M.
No charge.


Clue and $1 Million Reward In Case of the Serial Bomber
Unable to track down a serial bomber who has terrorized executives and college campuses for 15 years, Federal investigators today reached out to the public for help, disclosing a tantalizing clue and offering a $1 million reward.
The bomber last struck in June after a six-year hiatus.
He sent two innocent-looking parcels from Sacramento, Calif.
When opened, they maimed a genetics scholar at the University of California at San Francisco and, two days later, a prominent computer science professor at Yale University in New Haven.


Physicians Clinical Laboratory Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


First Foreign Troops Arrive Under Peace Plan for Haiti
Twenty-six American and five Canadians troops arrived here today in a climate of widespread violence to help begin the final push to carry out a United Nations accord calling for the return of the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
The 31 soldiers, wearing the blue berets and arm patches of the United Nations, are the first of about 1,300 military and police personnel who are to be deployed here before Father Aristide's scheduled arrival on Oct. 30.
About 50 Canadian Mounties are expected on Thursday, and 250 more American soldiers by next week.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Panthers Tie in Opener  Chicago's Chris Chelios scored two power-play goals and assisted on two by Jeremy Roenick to rally the Blackhawks to a 4-4 tie at Chicago Stadium with Florida in the Panthers' National Hockey League debut last night.
Brian Skrudland had given the Panthers a 4-3 lead by beating Ed Belfour from point-blank range at 13 minutes 40 seconds of the third period. (AP) Jets 6, Capitals 4: Teemu Selanne, who had 76 goals and was the N.H.L. rookie of the year last season, scored three goals to rally Winnipeg over Washington.
The Jets, playing before a season-opening record crowd of 15,363 at the Winnipeg Arena, led 3-0, but fell behind, 4-3, a little more than three minutes into the final period on Dimitri Khristich's second goal of the game. (AP)


A Safety System, and Inexplicable Failure
The crash of two subway trains in Brooklyn yesterday should have been prevented by a safety system that is intended to stop a train from ever running into the back of another train, transit officials said last night.
It was not immediately clear what went wrong.
But the officials acknowledged that the system is not foolproof.


2 Restaurant Chains Name New Agencies
Two restaurant chains changed their agencies yesterday.
White Castle System Inc., the fast-food chain in Columbus, Ohio, selected J. Walter Thompson Detroit to handle its account, which had been at Gunder &amp; Associates in Dublin, Ohio, for the last four years.
Billings were estimated at $10 million to $15 million.


Review/Fashion; Armani Brilliance, Soft and Flowing
Without question, Giorgio Armani is the jewel in the crown of the Italian fashion industry.
The collection he introduced Wednesday evening, as the spring and summer fashion shows here approached the end, glowed with special splendor.
Retailers came to praise, not only for the esthetics but also because Armani clothes are actually selling to customers.
He is a hot name, but most did not expect the brilliance they saw on the runway.


Top Drug Lord Aide Is Slain in Colombia In a Police Shootout
The man considered the ranking lieutenant of the fugitive cocaine trafficker Pablo Escobar was gunned down on Wednesday night in a shootout with the police, officials said.
A police spokesman said that Alfonso Leon Puerta, who is believed to have been responsible for Mr.
Escobar's personal security, died in a shootout with police in Medellin, Colombia's second city.
Also killed was Mr.
Puerta's brother, Jaime.


Musician Union Ratifies Pact With Producers
The membership of Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians voted yesterday to ratify a new contract with Broadway producers, averting a strike that could have shut down nine Broadway musicals and kept 11 more from arriving this season.
The vote was 284 to 140.


Anderson &amp; Lembke To Expand Network
Anderson &amp; Lembke Inc. in New York said it would expand its network by opening an office in Amsterdam, effective Jan. 1, to serve international clients.


Mets' Coleman Is Likely to Request Delay of Case
Vince Coleman, the Mets' outfielder who faces a felony charge stemming from a firecracker incident outside Dodger Stadium last July, is expected to appear in Superior Court on Friday morning and request a delay in his arraignment proceedings.
"Vince is on his way here tonight," Coleman's lawyer, Robert Shapiro, said today.
"I don't anticipate anything happening in court, though. We may just set the matter for a prelim for some date in the future and continue exploring our options."


New York Poll Sees Grim View Of Life in City
A majority of New Yorkers say the quality of life in the city has declined over the last four years, and they generally have a bleak view of the state of the local economy, race relations, crime and the public schools, according to the latest New York Times/ WCBS-TV News Poll.
But in the midst of an election campaign in which Rudolph W. Giuliani has made the quality of life a major issue, the poll also found that most New Yorkers do not think either he or Mayor David N. Dinkins is likely to change things significantly.


Agnes de Mille, 88, Dance Visionary, Is Dead
Agnes de Mille, who helped change American dance with her ballet "Rodeo" in 1942 and musical comedy with her choreography for "Oklahoma!" a year later, died yesterday in her Greenwich Village apartment.
She was 88.
The cause was a stroke, said Dr.
Fred Plum, the head of neurology at New York Hospital and a close friend.


No Headline
A highly fortified air base deep in the Upper Huallaga Valley that serves as the center for United States counter-narcotics operations here has become obsolete and should be abandoned, American narcotics experts say.
The base, which is known as Santa Lucia, has cost American taxpayers more than $100 million over the last six years.
From its inception in late 1987, it has represented the forefront -- however ineffective -- of the United States effort to stop the cultivation in Peru of coca leaf, the raw material for cocaine.


Review/Film Festival; Action, History, Politics And Love Above All
Chen Kaige's "Farewell My Concubine," the Chinese epic that has proved so troublesome to the Communist authorities at home, is one of those very rare film spectacles that deliver just about everything the ads are likely to promise: action, history, exotic color, multitudes in confrontation, broad overviews of social and political landscapes, all intimately rooted in a love story of vicious intensity, the kind that plays best when it goes badly, which is most of the time.
"Farewell My Concubine," which shared the top prize at this year's Cannes International Film Festival with "The Piano," by Jane Campion, is a vastly entertaining movie.
It's also one of such recognizably serious concerns that you can sink into it with pleasure and count it a cultural achievement.


Excerpts From the Debates of the 2 New Jersey Gubernatorial Candidates
Following are excerpts from a gubernatorial candidates' debate last night in Trenton between Gov.
Jim Florio and Christine Todd Whitman, as recorded by The New York Times.
The Economy
Q.
Mrs.
Whitman, your economic plan calls for a 30 percent income tax cut over three years.
Will the cuts be in human services, welfare?
Will money for state colleges be on the block?
Please tell us specifically what you plan to cut.


No Headline
"There was never a sand-papering of the edge of her curiosity." -- DR.
FRED PLUM, a close friend, of Agnes de Mille.  [ A1:2. ]


Albert Smith Bigelow, 87, Pacifist Who Tried to Halt Nuclear Tests
Albert Smith Bigelow, a pacifist who tried several times to sail into a nuclear testing area near the Marshall Islands in 1958 in a protest against nuclear weapons, died on Wednesday at a retirement home in Walpole, Mass.
He was 87.
His family said he had had a long illness.


L.I. Officials Urging Olympus to Stay
They are rolling out red carpets from county offices and town halls across Long Island for the Olympus Corporation, the Japanese camera and medical-equipment maker spurned in its efforts to build a new American headquarters on state land here.
Since the collapse of a deal brokered by the State Urban Development Corporation to bring Olympus to 53.7 acres of the Long Island Developmental Center, a former center for the retarded, government officials and business leaders have been in a frenzy to find another site for the company.


Critic's Notebook; The Crossroads Of Film and Art
FOR most people, a video is something to rent if you missed the movie at a theater.
Video means MTV, and a camcorder to preserve the family birthday parties.
But the ease and relative cheapness of video has also made it a favored technique of avant-garde artists, hopeful amateur film makers, and nonprofessionals who now create their own versions of history (personal and political) as routinely as authors once kept written diaries.
One way to catch up with these ever-expanding possiblities is offered by "Video Visions," a program of international work presented by the Film Society of Lincoln Center.
The series, which begins today at the Walter Reade Theater, is the second annual video festival presented as part of the New York Film Festival.
Like last year's program, this one is determined not to be mainstream.
You won't find the increasingly common path from music-video director to Hollywood feature-film maker here.
But then you can discover tomorrow's Hughes brothers, who used rap videos as their training ground for "Menace II Society, on television.


U.S. Lawyer Died as Hero For Russians
Among those who died Sunday in the firefight at the Russian radio and television station was an American lawyer who spent his last hour trying to save others.
Witnesses said Terry Michael Duncan, 26 years old, repeatedly went to the front of the building that was under assault, pulling as many people as he could to safety.


For Black Caucus, Farrakhan Embrace Marked Independence; Fingers on a Hand
To the Editor:
Re "The Black Caucus Gets Mugged" (editorial, Sept. 25): I am a black Republican and you did not speak for me or thousands of my black brothers or sisters.
I am not a fan of Louis Farrakhan, but he does represent a large percentage of blacks in America, and we do not intend to ignore them now or in future for you or anyone else.


Review/Film Festival; Pregnant, Unmarried And Smiling
With "The Snapper," a small, joyful lark of a film, Stephen Frears rediscovers the essence of the comedy of mundane situation, a perfectly respectable genre before television took it over and turned it into the mass-produced, wafer-thin, low-calorie entertainment called the sitcom.
As demonstrated by Mr.
Frears and Roddy Doyle, who adapted his own novel for the screen, there are still wonderful comedies to be made when care is taken and attention is paid.
The situation in "The Snapper" is this: Sharon Curley (Tina Kellegher), a supermarket checkout clerk in Barrytown, a north Dublin working-class suburb, becomes pregnant.
Or, as it's put more colloquially throughout the film, "Sharon Curley's up the pole." The trouble is that the unmarried Sharon refuses to identify the father.


HELMS FILIBUSTERS AGAINST A NOMINEE
Taking aim at a longtime opponent, Senator Jesse Helms today tried to block the nomination of Walter E. Dellinger 3d to a senior Justice Department position.
Mr.
Helms tied up the Senate for much of the day in a filibuster that he began Wednesday evening over the nomination of Mr.
Dellinger to become Assistant Attorney General for the office of legal counsel.
A vote to break the filibuster narrowly failed, and Senate Democrats said they would try again next week for a final vote.


Blissful Ignorance in Detroit
Neither the next chairman of the Ford Motor Company, Alexander J. Trotman, nor the man he is to replace, Harold A. Poling, owns an automobile.
They drive company cars.
This revelation does not explain Detroit's slump in the 1970's, nor its buoyant comeback in the 1990's.
But it bespeaks an alarming indifference to one of the basics of consumer research -- namely, to know something about consumers, it helps to be one.
For those unfortunates who don't have a company car, here's how it works.
You get a new one every year.
If it goes on the fritz, another one magically appears.
You never have to visit a showroom, haggle with a dealer or face the awful truth that what you thought would be a simple tune-up is, in fact, a $500 transmission job.


For Children
Columbus Day Events
South Street Seaport
Pier 16, at 19 Fulton Street  Lower Manhattan  (212) 732-7678  Recommended for all ages  Sunday
So what if Christopher Columbus didn't actually land in what is now the United States, and no one's arguing about whether he was greeted with fireworks.
In the year 1993, at least, his 1492 arrival in the New World will be celebrated with a 19-minute, 11-second display of Grucci fireworks at the South Street Seaport at 8 P.M. on Sunday (two days before the actual holiday on Tuesday).


The Essence of Toni Morrison
In citing Toni Morrison for its Prize in Literature, the Nobel Committee of the Swedish Academy said she "gives life to an essential aspect of American reality" in novels "characterized by visionary force and poetic import."
Toni Morrison is quintessentially an African-American female writer.
But she has always insisted that those characteristics have been liberating, not confining.


Woman's Death by Arson Leaves Neighbors in Shock
She was a lovely old woman, the devastated relatives and neighbors said after the terrible fire yesterday, a tiny widowed grandmother who had once been a nurse and lived alone in simple dignity on the edge of the volcanic city, tending her dog and her flower beds and her memories in the autumn of life.
Her name was Regina Shehee and she had lived for many of her 83 years in the cheery, two-story yellow-and-white frame home at 110-49 167th Street in St.
Albans, Queens, on a block of good friends and caring neighbors who dropped in regularly.
A resolute and kindly woman, she rarely needed help.


Somalia: Time to Get Out
American casualties in Somalia have been steadily rising, political support at home has evaporated and an emotionally wrenching hostage crisis has begun.
The mismatch between modest American means and ambitious political goals was painfully clear.
President Clinton had to do something.
And he did.
But rather than make a decision either to cut American losses and withdraw now -- the preferable course of action -- or tough it out until those goals are achieved, the President succumbed to the tempting illusion that he could manage a little of both.
Mr.
Clinton announced a six-month target date for complete American withdrawal but ordered the number of U.S. troops more than doubled, to 10,000.


Pension Group Lists 50 Companies as Financial Laggards
The Council of Institutional Investors, a group that represents government and union pension funds, yesterday released a list of 50 large companies it found to be laggards in financial performance.
But the council stopped short of saying that those companies should be the targets of shareholder pressure to do a better job for their shareholders.
"The list was intended as a way to help smaller funds identify companies who are not performing well," said Carol O'Cleireacain, New York City's budget director and chairwoman of the council's executive committee.


Teddy Ballgame Tube?
TED WILLIAMS, now 75, has long been immortalized in the city where he hit .406, compiled a .344 lifetime batting average, won two Triple Crowns and hit the last of his 521 home runs in his final at-bat in Fenway Park.


Art in Review
'Carl Andre' 'Words, 1960-1980'  Paula Cooper Gallery  149 and 155 Wooster Street (at Houston Street)  SoHo  Through tomorrow
This exhibition is a major undertaking, if not always a satisfying one.
Painstakingly and somewhat relentlessly, and using handsome vitrines, the show presents the major portion of the poetry of the Minimalist sculptor Carl Andre, an artist better known for arranging squares of copper and aluminum or common bricks into low-lying lines, squares and rectangles.


Phone Order Is Rescinded
Because of allegations of improprieties against Pacific Bell employees, California's Public Utilities Commission has rescinded a decision that would permit competition for local phone service in the state.
In taking the highly unusual step, the P.U.C. reopened the decision for further comment until Oct. 26.
At the least, the action delays the ruling's effective date, which had been Jan. 1, and temporarily halts the expected entrance of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company and the MCI Communications Corporation into the local toll call market.


NBC Goes Bonkers Over Jordan
When perspective was required on Michael Jordan Wednesday morning, NBC lit the tilt light.
Its Jordan retirement scoop Tuesday night on "Dateline NBC" must have emboldened its news hounds to launch into overkill on the story.
Although I love "The Jerry Springer Show," I can accept NBC truncating it to air the first 30 minutes of Jordan's news conference.
NBC is the home of the National Basketball Association and Jordan has brought ratings and money to NBC by dint of his very existence.


Now Hear This: It's Peete
RODNEY PEETE's reign is back on again.
Determined not to be swallowed up in a developing quarterback crisis, Detroit Lions Coach WAYNE FONTES yesterday named Peete as the starter for the remainder of the season.
"Rodney Peete is the guy," Fontes said.
"We're going to put a saddle on him and ride him for the rest of the season."


Inside Art
Another Round of Golf
Even nonprofit galleries have to figure out ways to make money.
In the summer of 1992, Artists Space, a nonprofit gallery in TriBeCa, mounted "Putt-Modernism," an installation of 18 playable holes of miniature golf created by prominent contemporary artists and architects, and the show was a wild success.
The gallery earned $85,000 in two months by charging a $5 putting fee.
The golf course attracted visitors from 12 states, Europe, Australia and Asia, as well as a broad cross section of New Yorkers who would otherwise not have been found hanging around an art gallery, much less an alternative space.


Art in Review
'Peter Saul'  'New Paintings . . . and Old'  Frumkin/Adams Gallery  50 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through Oct. 16
Peter Saul's acerbic paintings have never been for the faint of eye, and his latest efforts are no exception.
The two best, composed in the artist's contorted, cartoon-inspired style, trespass into areas where few will want to follow.
They present horrific fantasies: one concerning the execution of the convicted murderer John Wayne Gacy (who continues his life of crime from the electric chair); the other, the eating habits of Jeffrey Dahmer, another convicted murderer.
Rather than being sympathetic or unsympathetic to their subjects, these scenes depict a grim world in which there are only villains of one degree or another.


Never Mind Health Insurance, How About Some Car Insurance?


Review/Music; New Milieu for Monroe: City Opera's 'Marilyn'
Before the opera "Marilyn" received its world premiere on Wednesday night by the New York City Opera, it seemed headed for a renown only slightly less grand than its movie-star subject's.
With music by Ezra Laderman and a libretto by the poet and playwright Norman Rosten, this portrait of Marilyn Monroe's final months has been one of the most publicized new operas in years.
All three performances (the others are tomorrow and Tuesday) were sold out in advance.
The work, a City Opera commission, opened a world-premiere festival in honor of the company's 50th anniversary, in which three new works are being presented on consecutive evenings.
But unless one comes to "Marilyn" already obsessed by Monroe's mixture of come-hither glances and childlike behavior; unless one finds her death tragic rather than merely sad, there will be very little in this opera to justify three hours of dutiful attention.
This is primarily an opera for the already converted.
And even then, I wonder.


The Spoken Word
JOYCE CAROL OATES, New York University School of Law, Tishman Auditorium of Vanderbilt Hall, 70 Washington Square South, Greenwich Village.
Ms.
Oates reads from her work.
Tonight at 7.
Free.
Information: (212) 998-8800.
"THE NEW DEAL FOR PUBLIC ART: RESCUE AND CONSERVATION," Bronx Museum of the Arts, 1040 Grand Concourse, at 165th Street, Melrose.
A slide lecture by Gladys Pena, curator of the New York City Health and Hospital Corporation Public Art Program, in conjunction with the exhibition "A New Deal for Public Art: Murals From Federal Work Programs." Saturday at 2 P.M.
Free with museum admission: $3; $2 for students; $1 for the elderly.
Information: (718) 681-6000.
"BLYTHE DANNER IN CONVERSATION WITH CHARLIE ROSE," 92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue.
Sunday at 8 P.M. $16.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
TALKS AT THE WHITNEY, Whitney Museum of American Art, 945 Madison Avenue, at 75th Street.
"Hand-Painted Pop: American Art in Transition, 1955-62," tomorrow and Sunday at 2 P.M.; "Vija Celmins," tomorrow and Sunday at 3:30 P.M.
The lectures, by Vivian Bobka, are free with museum admission: $6; $5 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 570-3676.
ART AT THE MET, Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82d Street.
Free with museum admission: $6; $3 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 535-7710.
"JOHN YAU ON ANDY WARHOL," the Poetry Project, Second Avenue and 10th Street, East Village.
John Yau discusses his book "In the Realm of Appearances: The Art of Andy Warhol." Tonight at 10:30 P.M.
Admission: $6.
Information: (212) 674-0910.


THE SOMALIA MISSION: Prisoners; U.N., Urged by U.S., Refuses to Exchange Somalis
At the urging of Washington, the United Nations is refusing to exchange any of the 32 Somalis it is holding in Mogadishu for the two soldiers, one American and one Nigerian, whom Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid's forces captured last weekend, United States officials said today.
They said that neither the United States nor the United Nations wanted to start swapping prisoners because to do so would only encourage General Aidid's followers to take more hostages.


A. Philip Nelan, 87, Monk Who Headed Manhattan College
Brother Augustine Philip Nelan, who was the 15th president of Manhattan College from 1953 to 1962, died on Tuesday at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Yonkers.
He was 87 and lived at the Christian Brothers Center in Riverdale.
The cause was complications from heart surgery, the college said.


THE SOMALIA MISSION: Diplomacy; U.S. Envoy to Somalia Is Known for Frank Style
Robert B. Oakley, selected today as President Clinton's special envoy to Somalia, is a blunt-speaking diplomat whose style and views have often irritated United Nations officials.
Mr.
Oakley, 62, who served as President Bush's envoy to Somalia from December to March, has made no secret that he disagrees with the policy pushed by the United Nations of seeking to capture Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, the Somali leader.
The Security Council voted to target General Aidid after his forces killed 24 Pakistani peacekeeping soldiers in June and raids aimed at catching Mr.
Aidid or his aides have produced most of the American casualties since then.


Review/Film; When War Was All Glory and Bands and Death
Ronald F. Maxwell's four-hour cinematic re-creation of the battle that was the turning point of the Civil War has a stately tone and meticulous attention to historical detail that make it feel more like an epic documentary than a dramatic film.
"Gettysburg," adapted by Mr.
Maxwell from Michael Shaara's novel "The Killer Angels," limits itself to the first three days of July 1863, when 150,000 soldiers threw themselves into a battle in which more than a quarter of them became casualties.
Probably no American movie has devoted more time to discussions of battlefield strategy than "Gettysburg," which is a film to warm the cockles of a military tactician's heart.
Its battle scenes, which used more than 5,000 Civil War re-enactors surging over the actual site of the original conflict, are impressively choreographed.
In their sweep and grandeur, these scenes convey a strong visceral sense of what fighting a war used to be like.
With the pageantry of marching bands and flag-waving, entwined with powerfully held notions of honor and glory, a battle resembled a lethal football game in which the stadium was emptied onto the playing field and the fans organized and handed rifles and bayonets.


Seminole With a Surprisingly Flat Foot
The problem with having experience is that it comes with a past.
At Florida State University, that can be a problem when the football opponent is the University of Miami, the stakes include the preservation of a perfect season and the immediate world remembers Seminole heartbreaks when footballs were kicked wide of the right upright in the last two seasons.
Which is where the strength of Scott Bentley comes in.
He arrived here two months ago, a freshman with a right leg powerful enough to kick field goals from record-setting distances and a mind-set bold enough to accept the challenge of becoming the final piece in a championship puzzle.


Suffolk Debate Ploy: Threat of Prosecution
The race for Suffolk County district attorney took a bizarre turn today when the incumbent, James M. Catterson Jr., announced that he had discovered a new potential subject for prosecution -- his opponent.
During a debate in a cable television studio here, Mr.
Catterson, a Republican, accused his Democratic opponent, Kevin P. Brosnahan Jr., a Babylon lawyer, of taking a $10,000 contribution from a Long Island company.
Under state election law, he said, corporations are prohibited from contributing more than $5,000 to any political campaign in a given year.


Stocks Are Mostly Lower; Employment Data Awaited
Stocks were mostly lower yesterday as investors remained cautious ahead of today's unemployment data for September.
There was also uneasiness about third-quarter corporate earnings and pre-earnings announcements, which was heightened when Corning Inc. warned that third-quarter profits were falling short of expectations and that it would take a restructuring charge to cover cost-cutting.


Corpus Christi Journal; Viewers Held Hostage in TV Dispute
A dispute between a cable company and the three network affiliates has caused about 50,000 homes to lose programming on ABC, CBS and NBC, leaving this South Texas city in an angry uproar over the prospect of life without Dallas Cowboys football, David Letterman or "60 Minutes."
"I would compare this to having your home hit by a hurricane," said Priscilla Berlanga, who trooped out with her roommate Joann Lerma on Wednesday night to EJ's Sports Bar in search of familiar television fare after their apartment lost network programming.
"This is like a big wind blowing all of our TV shows off the air."


Review/Photography; The French Character, Picture Perfect
With their wry and knowing humor, Robert Doisneau's photographs seem the very essence of Frenchness.
Mr.
Doisneau's subtle but distinctive brand of whimsy is everywhere to be seen at the Witkin Gallery, in a retrospective of work from the last 50 years that is almost as much of a treat as a trip to Paris.
Many of Mr.
Doisneau's best-known images are here, including the picture of the proper matron who covers her mouth in shock as she confronts a painting of a nude in a shop window.
Elsewhere is a scene on a Paris bridge, where a man at an easel paints a model lounging on a bench; in the painting, the woman is nude, but in reality both she and the man are bundled in heavy winter coats.


CHRONICLE
Kennedy-wedding watchers who are tired of waiting for John F. Kennedy Jr. and Darryl Hannah to tie the knot may be assuaged by this bit of news: EDWARD M. KENNEDY JR., a son of the Senator, and Dr.
KATHERINE ANNE GERSHAM will marry on Sunday on Block Island, R.I.
The ceremony at Saint Andrew's Catholic Church is to be followed by a reception at the Spring House Hotel after a round of weekend celebrations including a square dance and a fireworks display.
Some 300 people, including the Senator, his former wife, Joan Bennett Kennedy, and his current wife, Victoria Reggie Kennedy, and other Kennedy relatives are expected.


Do Something to Fix Our Wasteful Jury System; Peremptory Challenges
To the Editor:
As a judge presiding over criminal jury trials in Manhattan, I appreciate your Sept. 26 front-page article deploring the shortage of trial jurors in Manhattan and elsewhere.
In setting forth the reasons for this shortage, you make passing reference to the possibility of reducing the number of peremptory challenges, those for which no reason need be given.
That point deserves amplification.


Capri Journal; On the Isle of Big Spenders, It's Lonesome Now
Surrounded by her jeweler's wares -- diamonds and gold and baubles beyond the paycheck -- Margherita Russo has a pretty good idea of what Italy's troubled times have meant for those on this luxurious isle like her, whose living depends on the transfer of wealth from the very wealthy to those who would like to be very wealthy too.
Patiently -- and in the absence of customers consuming her time by crowding her up-market store -- she explained to a reporter that "we had these political problems in Italy" and so "the jet-set Italians don't come so much any more."


Education of a Writer
To the Editor:
"Puritans in High-Top Sneakers" (Op-Ed, Sept. 27), Richard A. Shweder's essay on openmindedness, refers to Kurt Vonnegut's education at the University of Chicago, as described in "Slaughterhouse-Five." Mr.
Vonnegut was taught that it isn't humans, but rather their society that is "ridiculous or bad or disgusting."


Gingrich Stakes Claim to House Minority Leadership
Accompanied by more than 60 Republican lawmakers, Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia said today that he had more than enough votes pledged to insure his election as House Republican leader in the next Congress -- assuming he and most of his supporters win re-election next year.
Mr.
Gingrich, who as the Republican whip holds the No. 2 position in the House, would replace Representative Robert H. Michel of Illinois, whose style has been more accommodating to Democratic Congressional leaders.
Mr.
Michel announced earlier in the week that he would not seek re-election.


Gonzalez Intensifies Battle With Fed
Representative Henry B. Gonzalez, chairman of the House Banking Committee, began a push today to change the Federal Reserve System so that the President would be given more power to appoint the central bank's officials.
Mr.
Gonzalez, a Texas Democrat, focused in particular on the presidents of the Federal Reserve's 12 regional banks, who are now chosen by boards dominated by local bankers and business executives.
Calling the practice undemocratic, Mr.
Gonzalez said these officials, who help shape the nation's monetary policy, should be named by the President.


Home Video
You may not have spotted one yet, but this week the first 3DO Interactive Multiplayers reached some electronics outlets around the country.
The seven-pound, $699 device, made by Panasonic, plays video compact disks on television, and together the player and disks make up a long-anticipated new home video system put together by the 3DO Company of San Mateo, Calif.
The concept is the brainchild of Trip Hawkins, 3DO's president.
In a recent interview, Mr.
Hawkins said that to support the idea that 3DO represented a technology and not just a single product, the company planned to link hardware from several manufacturers (Panasonic, Sanyo and A.T. &amp;T.) with a range of interactive software from games to movies created and sold independently by many companies licensed by 3DO.


Breeders' Cup Countdown Begins
Belmont Park started its countdown to the Breeders' Cup yesterday when a dozen of the leading contenders for 1993 championships were entered in this weekend's major stakes here, one month before they gather again with all of the horse clans for the main event.
Two Grade One stakes will be run tomorrow at Belmont, the $200,000 Vosburgh for sprinters and the $500,000 Turf Classic, followed on Sunday by the $200,000 Rare Perfume for 3-year-old fillies.
All three races will serve as dress rehearsals for the Breeders' Cup.
They will also lead to Belmont's second super Saturday of the autumn season next weekend, when the $850,000 Jockey Club Gold Cup leads a program of six stakes.


House and Senate Agree to Raise Fees for Grazing on Federal Land
Breaking a decades-old deadlock over the management of public lands in the West, Democrats in the House and Senate today agreed to raise the fees that ranchers pay to graze cattle and sheep on about 260 million acres of Federal land in 16 western states.
The agreement appeared to represent an important political victory for Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt, who has staked his tenure on developing a new "land ethic" that puts protecting the environment on equal footing with developing resources.


INSIDE
Within Seconds, a Disaster
Offering a much narrower timeline, investigators said the Sunset Limited roared off a bridge just seconds after it was hit by a towboat.
Page A22.
Subway Accident in Brooklyn
A Manhattan-bound subway crashed into a train that had stopped in a Brooklyn station, slightly injuring scores of rush-hour riders.
Page B1.
Bhutto to Seek a Coalition
Benazir Bhutto's party captured the most seats in Pakistan's elections, but she must build a coalition to regain the Prime Minister's post.
A3.
Whitman and Florio Debate
In their first debate, New Jersey Gov.
Jim Florio and his opponent, Christine Todd Whitman, clashed over economic issues.
Page B1.
Braves Tie Series
Atlanta hit four home runs to defeat the Phillies, 14-3, and set a National League playoff record for most runs scored in a game.
Page B11.


Accounts
*
Midas International Corp., Chicago, to West Advertising and Marketing, Tampa, Fla., to handle its local advertising responsibilities in Florida, previously handled by Wells Rich Greene BDDP, New York, which will continue as Midas's national agency.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Bombardier Inc., Valcourt, Quebec, to Ogilvy &amp; Mather Detroit, to handle its North American Ski-Doo snowmobiles account, previously at Young &amp; Rubicam, Montreal.
Ogilvy's Toronto office will work on the account for English-speaking Canada while L'Academie-Ogilvy, Montreal, will do so for French-speaking Canada.
Billings were estimated at $2 million.


Greene's Perfect Record In Tatters
The body language spoke of a sad and total surrender.
The power pitcher was overpowered, his fastballs exploding into hits, his night flaming out into ashes.
There is no escape for a pitcher without options.
And so Tommy Greene kept throwing and kept taking it, one fastball after the next, one insult after another.
"Up, up, up," Greene said of his fastball. "You get hurt up."


New York Tightens Law On Community Lending
Can good deeds and civic responsibility be totaled on a calculator?
The New York State Banking Department says they can.
Yesterday, it introduced a complex formula to determine how many dollars a bank should invest in its community.
The Federal Community Reinvestment Act and a similar state law require that banks meet the credit needs of the areas they serve.
But until now, state and Federal regulators have used vague qualitative criteria to grade bank performance.
Banks and community groups have criticized this as inconsistent and ineffective.





Nets Prepare to Open Camp As Coleman Talks Hit Snag
One day after witnessing the retirement of one of the greatest players he ever coached, Chuck Daly had to begin assessing a more practical question: What's in store for his New Jersey Nets this season?
"We're going to have as many as seven new faces, which is a major change for our club," said Daly, who coached Michael Jordan on the 1992 Olympic Dream Team.
As Daly talked today, 18 players wearing Nets uniforms mingled around him in Jadwin Gym for Media Day on the eve of the opening of training camp here.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about an Administration task force drafting contingency plans on Cuba misstated the day of its first meeting.
It was Wednesday, not Tuesday.


RESULTS PLUS
COLLEGE FOOTBALL  Osborne Gets No. 200  No. 7 Nebraska righted itself after a sluggish first half, getting big plays from its offense and special teams to beat Oklahoma State last night in Stillwater, Okla., and give coach Tom Osborne his 200th victory.
Nebraska (5-0 over all, 1-0 in the Big Eight) hasn't lost to the Cowboys since 1961.
There was a tie in 1973.
The Cornhuskers fell behind by 13-3 in the first half as Oklahoma State (3-2, 0-1) took advantage of good field position and held tailback Calvin Jones in check.
Jones and the rest of the offense got going in the second half, when field position swung in the Cornhuskers' favor.


Tampa Bay Strikes Like Lightning, but Rangers Thunder Back
The Rangers were two goals down to the Tampa Bay Lightning and the game was barely three minutes old.
The goals had been ugly, and the Madison Square Garden crowd was restless and ready to boo.
Behind the New York bench, the new coach, Mike Keenan, looked remarkably calm.
He had a mouthful of ice -- his preferred method of maintaining coolness -- but he carefully restrained himself from spitting it out.
And he barely spoke a word.


RISE OF TB LINKED TO A U.S. FAILURE
Tuberculosis has increased 20 percent since 1985, creating an urban epidemic out of a manageable disease, a Congressional report said today.
The report said the Federal Government had failed every year over that period to supply the money needed to curtail the epidemic.
"All three of the last Administrations, on a bipartisan basis, have ignored the warnings of public health experts," Representative Henry A. Waxman, Democrat of California, said at a bipartisan news conference today.
His criticism of the Clinton Administration was no less severe than that of the Bush and Reagan Administrations.


New Leader For Thinking Machines
Just weeks after she brought a new president and chief operating officer to the Thinking Machines Corporation, Sheryl Handler, the company's founder and chairman, has given up the title of chief executive at the request of the board.
Ms.
Handler had personally wooed Richard P. Fishman from his post as managing partner of the Washington law office of Milbank, Tweed, Hadley &amp; McCloy to run the day-to-day operations of the privately held supercomputer maker.
She had made it clear in introducing Mr.
Fishman, however, that he would report to her and that she would remain in firm control of the company.


Holiday on Monday
The Columbus Day holiday will be observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK PARADES: Sunday, the Hispanic Columbus Day Parade begins at 12:30 P.M. at Fifth Avenue and 44th Street, going north to 72nd Street and east to Third Avenue.
Monday, the Columbus Day Parade begins at 10:15 A.M. at Fifth Avenue and 44d Street, going north to 86th Street and east to Third Avenue.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal, state and municipal closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Alternate-side rules suspended today for Simhath Torah and on Monday for Columbus Day.
SANITATION: No collections, street cleaning or recycling.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Open.
TRANSPORTATION: Subways, buses, Metro-North and Long Island Rail Road on regular schedules.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal and state offices closed; municipal option to close.
POST OFFICES: Closed.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Local option.
TRANSPORTATION N.J.
Transit trains on regular schedules, bus schedules vary, holiday or regular.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Closed.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Local discretion.
TRANSPORTATION: New Haven Line on regular schedule.
Traffic Alert TOMORROW  Broadway between 66th and 72d Streets will be closed from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Broadway Mall Festival; Third Avenue between Sixth and 14th Streets will be closed from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M. for the Cooper Square street festival; Park Avenue between 29th and 56th Streets and the circle of Grand Central Terminal will be closed from 9 A.M. until the completion of the Corporate Challenge finals.
SUNDAY Second Avenue between 42d and 53d Streets will be closed from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Second Avenue Festival; Amsterdam Avenue between 77th and 86th Streets will be closed from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Victim Services Festival.


Bhutto Wins Plurality and Faces a New Struggle
After battling for more than two years to regain the job that was taken away from her in 1990 on charges of corruption and incompetence, Benazir Bhutto appeared today to be on the brink of triumph to return as Prime Minister of Pakistan.
Ms.
Bhutto's Pakistan People's Party captured the most seats in the nation's new 217-member Parliament that was elected on Wednesday, although she fell short of a majority and now faces the task of wooing small parties into joining her in a coalition government.


Robert A. Parola; Editor, 35
Robert A. Parola, an associate editor of Daily News Record, the men's fashion newspaper in New York, died yesterday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 35.
The cause was AIDS-related pneumonia, said a spokesman for the paper.


Acura Plant May Be Built In the U.S.
Acura, the Honda Motor Company's luxury car division, is considering building an assembly plant in the United States within the next three to five years, the general manager of the division said today.
The official, Rich Thomas, said the company had made no final decision.
But, he said, "If we bring something here, it will probably be a new model, and it will probably be an exportable model."


METRO DIGEST
MORATORIUM ON CONTRIBUTIONS
On Wall Street, one could hear the sound of the political contribution pipeline closing down, as underwriters announced that they were joining a moratorium on contributions to politicians or candidates who could give them business.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  POLL FINDS PESSIMISM
Most New Yorkers say the quality of life in the city has declined over the last four years, and they generally have a bleak view of the state of the local economy, according to the latest New York Times/WCBS-TV News Poll.
A1.
PHOTOS SHOWN IN BLAST CASE
Ignoring the objections of defense lawyers, prosecutors in the World Trade Center case had the jury examine morgue photographs of the six people who were killed in the explosion that rocked lower Manhattan.
B3.
POLICE-MONITOR PLAN IS ENDORSED
The mayoral commission investigating police corruption concluded two weeks of hearings with the city's five district attorneys endorsing the creation of an outside monitor of the department's efforts to stanch corruption.
B3.
INQUIRY FOCUSING ON SAFETY SYSTEMS
The crash of two subway trains in Brooklyn should have been prevented by a safety system that is intended to stop a train from ever running into the back of another train, transit officials said.
B8.
ELDERLY WOMAN KILLED IN FIRE
An 83-year-old woman was killed in a fire in St.
Alban's, Queens, that was called suspicious by officials.
B3.
An 83-year-old woman was killed in a fire in St.
Alban's, Queens, that was called suspicious.
B3.
Mayor Dinkins urged the Board of Education not to shorten the school year. B3.
The Dinkins campaign hired a lawyer to investigate his opponent, Rudolph W. Giuliani.
B4.
Mr.
Giuliani, in a speech, repeated his assertion that the Dinkins campaign has tried to paint him as a right-winger.
B4.
REGION  TAX FOES LESS ACTIVE
Today Hands Across New Jersey has splintered into feuding, name-calling factions.
And less than four weeks before the election, the chat on 101.5 (only rarely referred to by its call letters, WKXW-FM) turns more to beefs about driving conditions on state roads than to politics.
B5.
A dispute with political overtones broke out over a special fund at the Westchester County Medical Center.
B6.
The incumbent Suffolk County District Attorney threatened to prosecute his opponent over a campaign contribution.
B6.
All across Long Island, communities are trying to lure the Olympus Corporation after Melville, L.I., turned down the company's plan to build its headquarters there.
B6.
New York State introduced a new formula to determine how much a bank must invest in its community.
D1.
Traffic Alert B3  Our Towns by George Judson B6  Chronicle B8


White Sox Leading Series, In Cliches
Lance Johnson, the Chicago White Sox center fielder, was asked today whether the team's 0-2 deficit in the American League pennant playoff would prompt the players to utter the proverbial cliches.
"No," Johnson replied.
"We're going to play one game at a time, take it one day at a time."


Review/Art; On Top With Pop: A Virtuoso Of Irony
BACK in the early 1960's, when Roy Lichtenstein was scavenging comics like "Winnie Winkle," "G.I. Combat" and "Secret Hearts" ("I don't care! I'd rather sink -- than call Brad for help!"), not even his most ardent admirers could have predicted how rich a creative vein he had tapped.
Everyone saw at the time -- how could they have seen otherwise? -- the giant pin that was Mr.
Lichtenstein's art aimed at the hot-air balloon of Abstract Expressionism.
He was regarded as a saboteur and a provocateur, but how far could he go with those big, cartoonish spoofs?
Very far, it turns out.
So far, in fact, that the end is still not in sight.
What makes the gigantic Roy Lichtenstein retrospective opening today at the Guggenheim Museum so particularly remarkable is this almost miraculous sense of unfolding possibilities.
Ideas tumble out of his work like circus clowns out of a Volkswagen.
By the time you reach the top of the museum's ramp you may well wonder how the same artist who in 1961 was cribbing from an advertisement for Mount Airy Lodge in the Poconos to come up with an image of a girl holding a beach ball could have conceived in the 1980's and early 90's vast compositions that seamlessly weave references to Picasso and Magritte, the Futurists and Expressionists, not to say to Mr.
Lichtenstein himself.


Review/Dance; Graham's Gothic Romance, in Turbulent Motion
Whoever said the tragic and the comic were two sides of the same coin had obviously spent a lifetime watching Martha Graham's dance works.
The darker human passions allowed her to let loose; she could also treat the very same emotions with a lighter touch.
Certainly, one of the most turbulent pieces of Graham's dance theater is "Deaths and Entrances," a 1943 masterpiece powerfully revived on Wednesday night in the Martha Graham Dance Company's current season at City Center (131 West 55th Street, Manhattan).
Ostensibly inspired by the lives and writings of the Bronte sisters, Graham's own Gothic romance is actually a study in human self-realization.


Review/Theater; 'She Loves Me' Bounces to Broadway
"She Loves Me," initially presented by the Roundabout Theater Company, has reopened at the Brooks Atkinson Theater, 256 West 47th Street, Manhattan.
Following are excerpts from Frank Rich's review, which appeared in The New York Times on June 11.
Diane Fratantoni has succeeded Judy Kuhn in the role of Amalia Balash.
The first time I ever walked out of a Broadway show was to see "She Loves Me" a second time.
It was Christmas week of 1963, and "She Loves Me," a sensitive flower among hard-edged comic blockbusters like "A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum" and "How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying," was surely a goner with the New Year.
It was now or never.
I bolted out of the 2 o'clock matinee of another flop (remember "Jennie," anyone?) to take one last look at "She Loves Me" at 3.


A Coast-to-Coast Convoy Using Natural Gas


Reviews/Film; A Director Who Directs A Life Drama, His Own
Frank Perry's prostate cancer is famous.
He describes exactly how it became well known in "On the Bridge," the autobiographical film he began directing after being diagnosed as terminally ill.
When Mr.
Perry and his small film crew went to a party in East Hampton, L.I., they were spotted by a gossip columnist and became headline news on Page Six of The New York Post ("Director Lensing Own Cancer Fight?").
For this, Mr.
Perry was duly congratulated by his doorman.
"So, how's the cancer?" he was later asked by a reporter from "Entertainment Tonight."
Mr.
Perry, the director of "David and Lisa," "Mommie Dearest" and many other films, could be accused of fomenting this kind of publicity if his film were not so obviously heartfelt.
He seems to have made "On the Bridge" as a means of both fighting his illness and communicating the things he has learned in the process.
As "On the Bridge" follows the frustrating ups and downs of Mr.
Perry's cancer treatment, he pauses at one point after learning some good news.
"I know I'm not out of the woods," he tells his oncologist, "but being in the woods has been wonderful for me." This film, a brave and helpful chronicle of Mr.
Perry's experience, succeeds in making that statement ring true.


Art in Review
Andrea Zittel Andrea Rosen Gallery 130 Prince Street SoHo Through Oct. 16
Andrea Zittel is trying to change the way people live, or at least the way they think about it.
Her new sculptures, which she calls prototypes, include a dishless dining table, sleekly modern chamber pots, and all-purpose covers made of velvet and flannel that can serve as capes or blankets.
One work in progress is a muesli-like mixture of fruits, grains and vegetables that she intends to be a perfectly balanced food.
There are also austere little chambers (not unlike the old-fashioned privy) in which one can sit and be cooled or warmed.
And the coup de grace is the glass-and-stainless-steel "Cleansing Chamber," which can accommodate dishes, vegetables and humans, as well as the family pet.


Economy Seen Growing at 3%
A joint report today by 16 economists for the nation's largest corporations predicted that the American economy would grow 3 percent for the second half of this year and through all of 1994.
The survey was presented at the semiannual meeting here of the Business Council, a group comprising the chief executives of 100 of the nation's largest corporations.


Art in Review
Bill Scott  Prince Street Gallery  121 Wooster Street  SoHo  Through Wednesday
Bill Scott, a 37-year-old painter and art historian from Philadelphia who is having his first one-man show in Manhattan, works in acrylic on paper with what seems to be the greatest of ease.
His beautifully colored semi-abstract landscapes and garden scenes aren't in the least original; they descend from a long line of improvisational decorative painting that starts with Monet, continues through Bonnard and Joan Mitchell, and includes more realistic lovers of pure color like Lois Dodd and Nell Blaine.


RUSSIA IN MOURNING FOR MOSCOW DEAD
Flags flew at half-staff across Moscow today, even from atop the charred Parliament building, as Russia observed a national day of mourning and families held funerals for those who died in the violence that engulfed the capital on Sunday and Monday.
"Russia, its people and its leaders, must learn a solemn lesson from the bloodshed and do everything in their power so that the tragedy cannot happen again," President Boris N. Yeltsin said in a statement.


Review/Art; The Comic Underground, Where the Funnies Aren't
Comics and cartoons are an indelible fact of American life, and consequently of American art.
At the moment, evidence of their influence can be found, quite literally, all over town, in the Roy Lichtenstein retrospective opening today at the Guggenheim Museum, in Peter Saul's paintings at the Frumkin Gallery on West 57th Street and in the SoHo shows of the young painter Christian Schumann at Postmasters and the sculptor Daniel Weiner at Germans van Eck.
But enough about influence.
A sizable portion of the real thing is now having its say in "Comic Power," a sprawling survey organized by John Carlin and Carlo McCormick, with the assistance of Melissa Rachleff, at Exit Art/The First World, in SoHo.
Admittedly, the comics under scrutiny are not, for the most part, the all-American kind that influenced Pop artists like Mr.
Lichtenstein and Andy Warhol or the lapsed Abstract Expressionist Philip Guston, although a historical section devoted to newspaper comic strips from 1898 to 1945 includes examples of Chester Gould's "Dick Tracy" and George Herriman's "Krazy Kat."


Sacca Quits Penn State
Penn State quarterback JOHN SACCA, who threw for four touchdowns in the Sept. 4 season opener against Minnesota but was benched in favor of KERRY COLLINS two weeks later, has quit the team, Coach JOE PATERNO said yesterday.


Ron Brown's Evasions
For months Ron Brown has issued assurances that the nasty stories weren't true.
No, he said, he wasn't mixing his private business with his duties as Secretary of Commerce.
Now it emerges that Mr.
Brown not only knew a Vietnamese businessman who was angling for Government favor, but that he actually met the supplicant before and after joining the Administration.
Whether Mr.
Brown discussed payment for helping the businessman by working to lift the U.S. trade embargo against Vietnam is a question put before a Federal grand jury in Florida.
The allegations have not been corroborated, and come from a source whose motivation is not clear.
But whatever their truth, Mr.
Brown's evasions have heightened their importance by casting doubt on his willingness to help President Clinton maintain a high moral tone in government.


Willard A. Hanna, 82, an Author And an Expert on Southeast Asia
Willard A. Hanna, an author, teacher and expert on Southeast Asia, died on Tuesday at his home in Hanover, N.H.
He was 82.
The cause was pneumonia after he suffered a stroke, his family said.


Unser Jumps to Penske
AL UNSER JR., the 1992 Indianapolis 500 winner, will join EMERSON FITTIPALDI and PAUL TRACY as its drivers for 1994, the Penske Racing team announced yesterday.


Books of The Times; Kennedy as President (Stick to the Facts, Please)
President Kennedy  Profile of Power  By Richard Reeves  Illustrated. 798 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $30.
Nearly 30 years have passed since the assassination of President John F. Kennedy, and the dozens of books that have been produced in the wake of his death have left us with wildly divergent readings of both his Presidency and his character.
While his former associates Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. and Theodore C. Sorensen worked hard to cement the myth of Camelot, revisionist historians have gone at that myth with sledgehammers.
To Garry Wills ("The Kennedy Imprisonment"), Kennedy was a compulsive risk taker, obsessed with image and style.
To Thomas C. Reeves ("A Question of Character"), he was a liar and a hypocrite, who lacked "a moral center" or any "reference point that went beyond self-aggrandizement."


CHRONICLE
Meanwhile in London, Queen Elizabeth's nephew, VISCOUNT LINLEY, was left standing at the altar yesterday when his aristocratic fiancee, SERENA STANHOPE, failed to show up for the rehearsal of their wedding, which is to take place this afternoon at St.
Margaret's Church in Westminster Abbey.
The viscount, the son of Princess Margaret and Lord Snowdon, delayed the practice run for 20 minutes with the hope that she would show up, but to no avail.
The rehearsal eventually proceeded with an unidentified female friend standing in, Reuters reported.


Giuliani Says Dinkins Aides Conduct a Smear Campaign
A week after a black minister suggested that Rudolph W. Giuliani was supported by some "fascist" elements, the Republican-Liberal candidate made his most impassioned counterattack of the campaign yesterday, painting a picture of a yearlong, well-orchestrated effort by supporters of Mayor David N. Dinkins to depict him as a dangerous right-wing fanatic surrounded by supporters of the Ku Klux Klan.
Drawing upon remarks as diverse as a year-old editorial in the black-owned Amsterdam News to comments made by several of Mayor Dinkins's top campaign aides in recent months, Mr.
Giuliani appeared visibly angered as he offered instances suggesting that he was a victim of a smear campaign in which nothing had been left to chance.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; In 'Demolition Man,' a car could be your grandson's Oldsmobile.
AN auto maker with a glorious past is using a film of the present to reassure consumers that it has a future.
When Warner Brothers opens "Demolition Man" today at more than 2,000 theaters nationwide, moviegoers watching Sylvester Stallone and Wesley Snipes play cop and robber in the year 2032 can see the results of an unusual product placement promotion by the Oldsmobile division of General Motors.
Rather than simply helping to sell more cars, the promotion is intended to burnish the images of Oldsmobile and G.M. by linking them to the presumed technological wonders of tomorrow.


Not All Knicks Are Happy Campers
Tony Campbell said he will request a trade if his playing time remains as limited as last season.
And while Charles Oakley vowed that he would play with the same intensity, he would not say that he had forgotten the concerns he raised with management during the off season.
These are some of the internal questions facing the Knicks as they begin training camp Friday in Charleston, S.C.
Many teams would love to have the Knicks' problems.
They are coming off a 60-victory season, they are deep and talented, and Michael Jordan's retirement makes New York the consensus favorite to win the National Basketball Association's Eastern Conference championship.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL
Army
When quarterback Rick Roper, completed all six of his passes for 160 yards in the first half against Akron, there was reason to be stunned at Michie Stadium.
The passing game had long been put aside as a weapon by the Cadets, who were devoted to their infantry-like wishbone offense.
Roper, the most versatile quarterback the Army wishbone has had, was 1 for 2 in the second half, and his 171 total passing yards were the most since Tory Crawford had 158 in a 1986 loss to Holy Cross and the most since a former coach, Jim Young, introduced the wishbone in 1984.


Vacant Lots, Except for Red Tape; New York Tries to Improve Management of 14,000 Parcels
For the last six years, Rudolph Graves has been trying to buy the patch of dirt -- a haunt for drug addicts, prostitutes and car thieves, who slip in at night to strip vehicles -- that sits next to his restaurant in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn.
He wants to convert it to an outdoor dining patio.
But, he says, during most of that time the city, which owns the lot, has presented him with a maze-like bureaucracy that often didn't answer or return his calls.
The city had no particular policy for what to do with such land, but it did have one rule -- it could not sell the land directly to anyone.


Clinton Confers Awards On 18 Cultural Figures
With quips, quotations and personal reminiscences, President Clinton today honored 18 distinguished Americans, including the singer Ray Charles, the playwright Arthur Miller, the novelist William Styron, the film maker Billy Wilder and the artist Robert Rauschenberg, for their contributions to the nation's cultural life.
It was the ninth annual presentation of the National Medal of Arts and the fifth presentation of the Charles Frankel Prize in the humanities, which were awarded together for the first time.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend
"THE MADNESS OF GEORGE III," Brooklyn Academy of Music, 30 Lafayette Avenue, at Ashland Place, Fort Greene.
A drama by Alan Bennett; featuring the Royal National Theater of Great Britain; starring Nigel Hawthorne and directed by Nicholas Hytner.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Remaining tickets are $10 to $30 (Ticketmaster: 212-307-4100).
A bus leaves from Manhattan (southwest corner of Lexington Avenue and 51st Street) one hour before each performance; round-trip fare, $8.
Bus reservations and other information: (718) 636-4100.


Business Leaders Voice Skepticism on Health Plan
The chief executives of some of the nation's largest corporations expressed strong skepticism today about President Clinton's plan to overhaul the nation's health care system.
The executives predicted a 3 percent growth in the economy next year but warned that the cost of the health care plan could undermine such a fairly robust rate.


Tailhook Aviators Trying to Regroup
Shunned by the Navy and abandoned by most of its active-duty members and corporate sponsors, the Tailhook Association will gather here this weekend for its first convention since a four-day bacchanal in 1991 transformed a little-known band of aviators into a notorious organization whose name is now synonymous with sexual misconduct.
Gone from this year's convention, organizers say, will be the hospitality suites, where scores of women were assaulted and where fliers exposed their testicles, drank from a dispenser shaped like a rhinoceros penis and wore "Women Are Property" T-shirts.


Art in Review
Jason Rhoades David Zwirner 43 Greene Street (near Broome Street) SoHo Through Oct. 16
If you like art that feels like the inside of someone's head, then "Cherry Makita: Honest Engine Work," Jason Rhoades's messy, impressive debut at the David Zwirner Gallery, is just the thing.
The latest addition to the kitchen-sink school of installation art (not to mention the history of collage and assemblage), this free-association mix of the industrial and personal, the touchingly handmade and the mass-produced, is the work of a young California artist who earned a master of fine arts degree from U.C.L.A. only last spring.


Executive Headquarters Alter an Old Farm Stand
AS Harriet Tice says, in her lifetime she has gone from getting around Bergen County by horse and buggy to crossing the Atlantic on the Concorde.
So the changes that have taken place on the Tice farm in her 92 years don't seem that startling to her.
Tices still grow apples and peaches, and tomatoes and cucumbers, and peppers and pumpkins.
They still sell their produce and their cider from a stand on Chestnut Ridge Road.
She still lives in the fieldstone bungalow next door that her husband, Frank, built all those years ago.


On My Mind; Who's in Charge Here?
Corruption oozes out of New York City's Police Department again.
This time it is corruption plus head-smashing -- cops marauding through tenements, hunting drugs to snatch and sell.
Who's responsible around here?


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-16  U.S.
DOUBLING SOMALIA FORCE  President Clinton said he will double the U.S. ground forces in Somalia for a final six months, to enable U.S. troops to bring the mission to a successful conclusion.
A1  A QUESTION OF IMAGE  News analysis: In making his decision to keep American troops in Somalia, President Clinton appeared to be keeping in mind the need to maintain America's image as a strong world leader.
A1


South Africans Fight Over National Symbols
As South Africa haggles over how it will be ruled, an almost equally ferocious debate has begun over how it will be decorated.
What flag should flap above the inauguration of the country's first black President?
What anthem can whites and blacks possibly sing with shared enthusiasm after centuries of hostility?
What coat of arms will grace the buttons on the tunics of the new, post-apartheid army?





Phone Calls Bring Pitcher's Best Advice
The telephone calls have been a routine every five days for eight years.
Matching the frequency of a starter's schedule in the rotation, the son would call the father after each professional outing to talk about pitching, people or politics.
It was Pat Hentgen Jr. chatting with Pat Hentgen Sr.
Hentgen will not need spare change for the phone after Friday night's game because his father will be at the Skydome to watch him pitch for the Blue Jays against the White Sox in Game 3 of the American League Championship Series.
While Hentgen will save some quarters, the White Sox will try to rattle the 24-year-old and save their diminishing chances in a series they trail two games to none.


Outside Monitor Endorsed In Police Discipline Effort
The mayoral commission investigating corruption in New York City's Police Department concluded two weeks of hearings yesterday with the city's five district attorneys endorsing the creation of an outside monitor of the department's efforts to stanch corruption.
The endorsements came a day after the Police Commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, said he would not oppose an outside monitor.
The district attorneys' comments, coming as the commission begins to consider its conclusions, added momentum to the concept, which appears likely to be the commission's lasting legacy.


Art in Review
Eugene Druet  Sander Gallery  19 East 76th Street  Manhattan  Through Oct. 30
From 1896 until his death in 1916, Eugene Druet worked as a photographer for Auguste Rodin, the great French sculptor.
The value that Rodin placed on Druet's pictures of the sculptures, as well as the collaborative nature of the images, is suggested by the fact that both sculptor and photographer signed the negatives.


Vietnam Official Denies Brown Was Offered Money for Trade Help
A senior Vietnamese official today denied accusations that his Government had approved payments to Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown or anyone else for lobbying in Washington on behalf of Vietnam.
The official, Ha Huy Thong, Deputy Director of American Affairs at the Vietnamese Foreign Ministry, also said in a telephone interview from Hanoi that he knew of no special relationship between the Vietnamese Prime Minister, Vo Van Kiet, and a Vietnamese businessman who met Mr.
Brown on three occasions before and after he joined the Clinton Cabinet.


CHRONICLE
An odd couple in the name of a cause?
BARBARA JORDAN, the former Congresswoman from Texas, and TOM SELLECK, the actor, are joining forces in Washington today to announce the formation of the Character Counts Coalition, a consortium of 27 organizations that will try to impart a code of ethics to young people.
The coalition comprises organizations involved in educating or training young people, such as Little League Baseball, the Boys and Girls Clubs of America and 4-H.
It is being put together by the Joseph and Edna Josephson Institute of Ethics.


Dinkins Gets A Researcher On Giuliani
A lawyer who investigated the Nixon White House 20 years ago has been hired by Mayor David N. Dinkins's re-election campaign to research his opponent, Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate.
Campaign aides to Mr.
Dinkins said they retained Terry F. Lenzner of Washington for $35,000 in early August to look into Mr.
Giuliani's record when he was the United States Attorney in Manhattan, an associate attorney general under President Ronald Reagan and a lawyer in private practice.


Abroad at Home; Liberty or Autocracy?
There is an instinctive autocrat in Boris Yeltsin.
When the bloody showdown with his parliamentary opponents came, one of his first moves was to close down Pravda and other opposition papers and impose censorship on the rest of the press.
The old Soviet system of silence was recreated with worrying ease.
Bureaucrats appeared at each newspaper, announced that they were censors and demanded office space.
Vladimir Solodin, who had had the job of defending freedom of the press in the Yeltsin Government, switched to be chief of censorship without a visible qualm.


A Legal Advertisement, a Slaying And Then a Free-for-All Over Ethics
When he was killed in a volley of gunfire outside his parents' suburban home, Bernardo Gonzalez, a convicted cocaine trafficker, was a prospective Government witness in a major drug conspiracy trial scheduled here this fall.
Soon afterward, police officers investigating his death came across his name in an advertisement that had been placed last spring, and a new debate on legal ethics erupted.
The advertisement, under the heading "Information Wanted," listed the names of 31 potential witnesses in the drug case and was published in The Champion, the magazine of the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers.


9 BIG BOND FIRMS CURB THEIR GIVING IN POLITICAL RACES
Nine Wall Street firms that make the most money from selling state and city bond issues around the country said yesterday that they would temporarily abstain from making contributions to public officials or candidates who could give them business.
The curb on contributions comes amid increased scrutiny into how the lucrative business of selling bonds is awarded to financial firms.
These firms have long made generous contributions to candidates for state and local offices around the country.


Bosnian Calls for New Approach to End Civil War
Saying current Geneva peace talks have left him with a choice between "a just defensive war and an unjust peace," the President of the Muslim-dominated Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina called today for a new approach to negotiating an end to the civil war.
In talks with members of the Security Council and subsequently at a news conference, the Bosnian leader, Alija Izetbegovic, said he was tired of negotiations that after a year still have not produced an agreement acceptable to the Muslims.
He said he favored a new round of talks similar to those held by representatives of more than 20 countries in London last August and which authorized the Geneva peace initiative.


Clinton's Serious About Declassification
To the Editor:
"Secrets and More Secrets" (Op-Ed, Sept. 30) by Tom Blanton and Steve Aftergood leaves the impression that the first draft of an executive order on Government classification policy is more restrictive than even President Nixon's order during the cold war.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
Although the 1972 Nixon order limited the life span of classified information to 30 years, as opposed to 40 in the current draft, it contained exceptions so broad that in practice they became the rule.


THE SOMALIA MISSION: The Families; Anger and Confusion and Fort Benning
Here at the headquarters of the 75th Ranger Regiment, where the base is preparing for a memorial service on Friday to honor its soldiers who died fighting in Somalia, family members speak of a deep well of anger at the taunting public displays of the dead and confusion about where United States policy is headed.
Families of servicemen serving in Somalia listened to broadcasts of President Clinton's speech on Somalia with a veneer of decorum and devotion to duty.
Several said they were reassured by his promise that the American troops would leave by April.
Others were by turns anxious and relieved about the President's decision to send as many as 2,000 more troops to assist the 4,700 there now -- anxious that more troops would be exposed to danger and relieved that the men there will now have the reinforcements they need.


Russia Has 'Doomsday' Machine, U.S. Expert Says
Russia has a computerized system that can automatically fire its nuclear arsenal in wartime if military commanders are dead or unable to direct the battle, a leading American expert on the Russian military says.
The Russians call it the "dead hand," according to the expert, who personally characterizes it as a doomsday machine.
If the system in fact exists -- and some American intelligence analysts say it is unlikely but possible -- it would mark the first known time in the nuclear era that a machine has been readied to press the button.


Angolans Agree to Revive Talks With Rebels
The Angolan Government agreed today to revive stalled peace talks with rebels in an effort to end the country's 18-year-long civil war.
There was no official word on when or where the talks would take place, but a senior official with the rebel group known as Unita, the acronym in Portuguese for the National Union for the Total Independence of Angola, said they were expected to begin next week here in the capital of the Ivory Coast, which was also the venue of the last round of peace talks.
The previous negotiations collapsed in May after the warring factions were unable to agree on a cease-fire.


Jurors Deliberating in Denny Beating Trial Have a Question


Nazi Hunter's Record of Success Questioned
To the Editor:
Simon Wiesenthal had no part in bringing the Nazi henchman Adolf Eichmann to trial, as he claims in "New Accusations About Waldheim Recycle Old Bitterness" (letter, Sept. 29).
Eichmann was seized in Argentina in 1960 by agents of the Israeli Secret Service, the Mossad.
Isser Harel, chief of Mossad, who headed the operation, told The Jerusalem Post (May 7, 1991), that Mr.
Wiesenthal "had no role whatsoever" in Eichmann's apprehension.
He added: "Information supplied by Wiesenthal before and in anticipation of the operation was utterly worthless."


Lott Lays Into Raiders, Assistant and Schroeder
No one was surprised when Ronnie Lott left the 49ers to sign with the Los Angeles Raiders as a Plan B free agent in 1991.
He had always played Raiders football, even at Southern Cal.
With Lott it was always reckless abandon, full speed ahead and just win, baby.
The shock came when Lott left the Raiders last March to sign with the Jets as an unrestricted free agent.
It was a strange transition for a player who seemed ideally suited for the Silver and Black.
But as it turns out, Lott and the Jets might be a better fit than Lott and the Raiders.
Lott plans to offer proof when the teams play Sunday at the Los Angeles Coliseum.


Lorenzo Gets One More Try At His East Coast Airline
Frank A. Lorenzo's on-again, off-again effort to start a low-cost airline on the East Coast is on again.
The former chairman of Continental Airlines and Texas Air, who has stirred up controversy throughout his career as owner and executive, will get another chance to make his case before an administrative law judge, who ruled a month ago that Mr.
Lorenzo lacked the "proper compliance disposition" to start an airline.


Richard and Gretchen Needham, Chicago Civic Leaders, Are Killed
Richard Henshaw Needham and Gretchen Fentress Needham, both prominent civic leaders in Chicago, died on Monday in an automobile-truck collision near Ankara, Turkey, where they were vacationing.
He was 66 and she 47.
Mr.
Needham was a retired executive of the advertising agency DDB Needham Worldwide Inc., and Mrs.
Needham was a senior vice president of LaSalle Partners, an international real estate and investment firm.


Jury Sees Photos of Trade Center Blast Victims
Despite the objections of defense lawyers, prosecutors in the World Trade Center case yesterday had the jury examine morgue photographs of the six people who were killed in the mammoth explosion that rocked lower Manhattan seven months ago.
The jurors listened attentively and, in at least one case, with tears, as they viewed the photographs and listened to witnesses describe how each of the dead was found and identified.


THE SOMALIA MISSION: Congress; CLINTON GATHERS CONGRESS SUPPORT
Members of Congress rallied strongly behind President Clinton tonight after he pledged to end the American military deployment in Somalia by the end of March, although a few lawmakers expressed concern about his plans to deploy more troops.
Even the harshest critics of the President expressed relief that he had set more clearly limited goals in Somalia and was abandoning his reliance on the United Nations for setting the United States agenda.
Several lawmakers said they hoped the troops could be withdrawn before March 31, but there was general praise for the decision to send Robert Oakley, a diplomat experienced in Somali affairs, to seek a diplomatic solution to the combat in Mogadishu.


A Sex Discrimination Trial Begins for Goldman, Sachs
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company was accused of sex discrimination in a trial that began in Federal court in Manhattan yesterday.
The plaintiff, Joanne T. Flynn, filed the lawsuit against the securities firm in January 1991, nearly two years after she was dismissed from a $180,000-a-year job in Goldman's management and training development department.
She had joined Goldman in 1980.


Jones Seeks Official's Removal
Roy Jones Jr., the International Boxing Federation's middleweight champion, was elated when big-time boxing, thanks to casino gambling, came to Mississippi in the past year.
"The way I drive, it's only 90 minutes from my front door in Pensacola," the Floridian said yesterday.
"It's like having my own Atlantic City or Las Vegas to fight in."


THE SOMALIA MISSION: Forces; How Powerful U.S. Units Will Work
President Clinton's decision to double the American ground force in Somalia is intended to address what the military viewed as basic flaws in the existing arrangement: its lack of adequate power, its vaguely defined mission and its tangled chain of command.
Stung by criticisms of the Pentagon's leadership on all three counts, senior officials said today that from now until the mission ended, they wanted it to be unambiguously directed and unambiguously powerful.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a nanny charged with killing a baby in Rye, N.Y., referred incorrectly to comments by the baby's parents.
The comments were not their first public ones; the mother, Peggy Leahy Dunne, previously discussed the case in a June interview in The Irish Voice.


Sports of The Times; McGriff's Explosive Homer
THE night Fred McGriff joined the Braves in July, there was a fire.
Last night he ignited an explosion.
With two out and Otis Nixon on second base in the first inning of the second game of the National League Championship Series against the Phillies, the Braves' lean first baseman swung at Tommy Greene's first pitch, a fastball.
The sound resembled that of a rifle shot.
The ball was hit so hard that many spectators never saw it crash into the upper deck in right field.


People
Marc A. Williams was named executive vice president and executive creative director at Stone &amp; Simons Advertising, Southfield, Mich., succeeding Paul Stevens, who left.
Mr.
Williams previously served in a similar capacity at Young &amp; Rubicam Detroit. *
Michael Gaffney was named to the new position of executive vice president and chief operating officer at Earle Palmer Brown, Philadelphia.
He was previously president and chief operating officer at the Joey Reiman Agency, Atlanta.


On Stage, and Off
Musing Over a 'Sunset'
The rumors that Patti LuPone will not make it to New York next fall as the star of Andrew Lloyd Webber's musical "Sunset Boulevard" remain just rumors, at least for now.
A statement this week by Patrick McKenna, chairman of the Really Useful Group, the show's producers, called the debate over Ms.
LuPone's future in the role of the fading movie queen Norma Desmond "a non-issue." In what amounts to not quite a guarantee, he added: "We are very happy with Patti and look forward to seeing her play the role of Norma on Broadway."
In a voluble interview on Tuesday, Ms.
LuPone herself said Mr.
McKenna and Mr.
Lloyd Webber had said similar things to her, though truth be told she didn't exactly sound reassured, and admitted to being shaken by the media's apparent conviction that she is on short time.





FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Bank of Delaware Corp., Wilmington, a subsidiary of PNC Bank Corp., is offering $100 million of bank notes due in 1994 and initially priced at 100 to yield 3.40 percent through underwriters led by CS First Boston.
The noncallable notes are rated Aa-3 by Moody's and A+ by S.&amp; P. *
Carnival Cruise Lines Inc., Miami, is offering $250 million of debt securities through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co., divided into two parts.
One part includes $125 million of 6.15 percent noncallable notes due in 2003 priced at 99.945 to yield 6.157 percent, and $125 million of 7.2 percent noncallable notes due 2023 priced at 99.885 to yield 7.209 percent.
The offering is rated Baa-1 by Moody's and A- by S.&amp; P.


Harvest Moonshots: Braves Hammer Phillies to Tie Series
When a team has the luxury of starting its league's probable Cy Young Award winner and then the team scores eight runs by the end of three innings, chances are the game is over.
The Atlanta Braves did just that for 20-game winner Greg Maddux against the Phillies tonight.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an obituary yesterday about Sol Kahn, a retired New York stockbroker who died on Monday in Arizona, omitted part of his career.
He worked for three brokerage houses -- Orvis Brothers, Neuburger Loeb and Evans &amp; Company -- before joining Jessup &amp; Lamont, from which he retired in 1991 at 88.


Amid the Tension, a Rush to Repose
Murky, tortuous play led to a tense draw by Gary Kasparov and Nigel Short in Game 14 of their world championship match yesterday in London.
Short had been pressing hard, yet toward the end Kasparov had what was probably a slight advantage and could have continued to try for a victory.
Of course, with a 5-point lead, with the score now at 9 1/2-4 1/2, the Russian had no need to take any risks.
Kasparov will win a prize of $1.43 million out of a $2.55 million purse by gaining 3 more points in the 24-game match.
A novel feature this time is that all games are to be played out, even if Kasparov decides the series in less than the maximum.


Do Something to Fix Our Wasteful Jury System
To the Editor:
Re: "New York Casts for Solutions to Gaping Holes in Juror Nets" (front page, Sept. 26):
You seem more concerned about the "gaping holes" than in using well those of us who have been caught in the juror net -- of whom I am one.
True, I have had deferments because I am self-employed and was called when to serve would have required me to break contractual obligations that would have seriously jeopardized my career and earning ability.


At the Bar; Now available to law students: the low-down on the most highfalutin firms.
For top law graduates, selecting a law firm is a bit like finding the prize in a box of Cracker Jack.
First you have to sift through all the sticky sweet stuff.
Then what you find, hidden inside a wrapper, always looks the same.
When you open it up, you are often disappointed by what is there.
Now two enterprising Harvard Law School students -- whose classwork was evidently dull enough to leave them itching for a challenge and easy enough to let them pull it off -- have set out to demystify the process.
They have produced an informative, irreverent Baedeker to the nation's largest law firms, filled with the candid comments of young moles inside them.


THE SOMALIA MISSION: Analysis; An Old Cold War Refrain
The phrases resounded through political Washington all week in an insistent, Kissinger-esque echo of an era that had supposedly ended.
"We can't just cut and run," the policy makers said again and again after Sunday's battle in Mogadishu.
"It would send the wrong signal."
In his speech today, President Clinton joined the chorus.
If the United States left Somalia now, he said, "our leadership in world affairs would be undermined at the very time when people are looking to America to help promote peace and freedom in the post-cold-war world, and all around the world, aggressors, thugs and terrorists will conclude that the best way to get us to change our policies is to kill our people."


Gunmen and Police Brutally Enforce Strike in Haiti
One day after United States and Canadian forces started to arrive, plainclothes gunmen opposed to the restoration of democracy in Haiti sprayed automatic-weapons fire at street merchants and successfully shut down this city.
The gunmen collaborated openly with uniformed Haitian police, the very forces who are supposed to be retrained by international police experts as part of a diplomatic settlement of Haiti's political crisis.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the stage director Nicholas Hytner misstated the surname of the actor playing the title role in "The Madness of George III" at the Brooklyn Academy of Music.
He is Nigel Hawthorne.


Dinkins Opposes Shortening School Year Below 180 Days
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday urged the Board of Education not to shorten the school year below the 180-day minimum set by state law and warned that he would hold the school system financially responsible for the potential loss of $10 million a day in state aid.
Mr.
Dinkins's statement followed a decision on Wednesday by the board to reverse itself and close city schools on Columbus Day -- a closing that the Mayor himself and his two appointees on the seven-member Board of Education supported.


Restaurants
"What's the difference between restaurants here and in Los Angeles?" is a question I am often asked by people who know I have spent the last 20 years thinking about California food.
"La Grenouille" is my answer.


Columbia Healthcare Reaches New Accord
The Columbia Healthcare Corporation, continuing its aggressive move to form alliances and broaden its reach, today announced an agreement to jointly provide services with Medical Care America Inc., the nation's largest outpatient surgery center.
The affiliation comes after Columbia Healthcare and the HCA-Hospital Corporation of America on Saturday announced a merger to form the world's largest for-profit hospital company.
The new company, to be called the Columbia/HCA Healthcare Corporation, would have more than 48,000 licensed beds in 26 states and annual revenues of more than $10 billion.


Art in Review
Gary Simmons  Metro Pictures  150 Greene Street (at Houston Street)  SoHo  Through Oct. 23
Gary Simmons's show consists primarily of large paintings on unstretched tarpaulins that set words and images in the center of a monochromatic field to look like advertising logos.
In fact, the words are derived from rap music and street lingo, and most of the emblems are of Mr.
Simmons's own invention.
"Phillie Blunt Land" refers to marijuana, as a painted wreath of leaves suggests, and "Ill Street Blues" is the title of a song whose angry message is reflected in the image of a police badge emblazoned with a Ku Klux Klan figure.


Retailers' September Sales Rose
A gust of cooler weather propelled sales at many stores around the country last month, as shoppers turned out to buy coats, sweaters, wool socks and other fall and winter gear.
The improvement in sales reversed August's poor showing, but retailers remain cautious about their prospects for the holiday season.


For Black Caucus, Farrakhan Embrace Marked Independence
To the Editor:
"The Black Caucus Gets Mugged" (editorial, Sept. 25), in scolding Representative Kweisi Mfume of Maryland, chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus, for embracing Minister Louis Farrakhan at the caucus's annual legislative conference, betrays the attitude that white people have the right to tell black leaders -- in this case, leading members of Congress -- with whom they may and may not associate.
Unfortunately, this attitude is endemic in the editorial boardrooms of the corporate-owned white news media; recently, The Village Voice attempted to pillory State Senator David A. Paterson for accepting financial and political support for his campaign for New York City public advocate from me, another independent black leader deemed unacceptable by the mostly white Democratic Party and those who speak for it.


Whitman and Florio Spar in a Civilized Gubernatorial Debate
In a debate civilized in its tone but full of pointed attacks, Gov.
Jim Florio, the Democratic incumbent, and Christine Todd Whitman, his Republican rival, sparred tonight before a statewide television audience.
The debate was the first time since the general election campaign began in June that voters statewide had the chance to compare the candidates side by side and to get more than the one-sided information that could be gleaned from either candidate's ads.


A Man Given to Lofty Highs And Subterranean Lows
"Mr. Jones" finds Richard Gere working at full throttle to play the manic-depressive of the title, a man who has so few ties to ordinary life that he doesn't even admit to knowing his real name.
Soaring on a high that appears endless, Mr.
Jones is someone who can pick up a pretty bank teller (Lisa Malkiewicz), whisk her away on a spree involving a hotel room, a limousine and concert tickets, and only get into trouble when he tries to conduct a symphony orchestra as it plays Beethoven's "Ode to Joy." It turns out the symphony already has a conductor.
Behavior like this, and his habit of trying to fly off a rooftop when he becomes excited by airplanes overhead, lands Mr.
Jones in the care of Dr.
Libbie Bowen (Lena Olin), a psychiatrist who can best be described as dedicated.
Libbie is also lonely, having recently been separated from her husband, and she is not immune to Mr.
Jones's charms.
Regardless of whether it is easy to flirt while remaining strapped to a hospital bed, Mr.
Jones finds a way to do so.
He and Libbie share a couple of warm, friendly outings that would hold great romantic promise if Mr.
Jones were not constantly ricocheting in and out of hospital wards.


What Happens When The Storyline Retires?
The capacity for self-examination among "you guys" in the media is bottomless.
But enough about us.
Let's talk about Michael Jordan.
How did we cover him?
Was it as good for you as it was for us?
There are people who will say, c'mon, this is about a 30-year-old multimillionaire taking early retirement.
It's not as if the Grateful Dead stopped touring.
Do we have to be so serious?


Health Insurance Data Called Faulty
The White House estimates of insurance costs for individuals and families in President Clinton's health plan were sophisticated guesses based on incomplete and largely outdated information.
That is the conclusion of actuaries from several large accounting organizations who reviewed the estimating process for the Administration.
The actuaries said the estimates were probably as accurate as possible, given the surprising dearth of up-to-date information on medical costs for various groups.
But health care experts warned that the nation should be aware of the uncertainty over future insurance costs as it debates how to extend universal coverage and overhaul the health care system.


Diner's Journal
Latin American Cuisine
Phil Suarez and Bob Giraldi are running a mini-melting pot.
These producers of videos and commercials, who own the Italian restaurant Positano on Park Avenue South, are co-owners, with Jean-Georges Vongerichten, of Jo Jo (French) and Vong (Thai-French), and they are about to add yet another cuisine to their collection.
They have become partners with Douglas Rodriguez, who until recently was chef and co-owner of Yuca, a highly acclaimed nouvelle Cuban restaurant in Miami.
The new Manhattan restaurant, as yet unsited, unnamed and not due to open before February, is to feature Latin-American food.


Rolls of Voters Close Tonight
The deadline for registering to vote in the Nov. 2 general election in New York City is midnight tonight.
Applications must be postmarked by midnight or brought in person to the administration office of the City Board of Elections at 42 Broadway, on the seventh floor.


Toni Morrison Is '93 Winner Of Nobel Prize in Literature
Toni Morrison, the author of "Song of Solomon" "Beloved," "Jazz" and other lyrically narrated novels of black American life, has won the 1993 Nobel Prize in Literature.
The announcement was made yesterday in Stockholm by the Nobel Committee of the Swedish Academy, which stated that Ms.
Morrison "gives life to an essential aspect of American reality" in novels "characterized by visionary force and poetic import."
Calling Ms.
Morrison "a literary artist of the first rank," the academy statement went on to say: "She delves into the language itself, a language she wants to liberate from the fetters of race. And she addresses us with the luster of poetry."


Review/Film; Waking Up In a Future Of Muscles
The ads for "Demolition Man" feature head shots of Sylvester Stallone and Wesley Snipes as they face each other across a short expanse of space, much like the recent ads for "Rising Sun" in which Mr.
Snipes faced Sean Connery.
Don't be put off, though.
"Demolition Man," though sleazy, is better than "Rising Sun."
For one thing, its antecedents are more impressive.
"Demolition Man" is a futuristic action-melodrama that looks as if it had been conceived by film students who adore Woody Allen's "Sleeper." That classic, you may remember, is about the part-owner of the Happy Carrot Health Food Restaurant who goes into the hospital for minor surgery in 1973, only to awaken 200 years later after being accidently frozen.


A New Breed of Merger Banker
Way back in the 1980's, when mergers were all the rage on Wall Street, the names of those involved in the deals occasionally eclipsed the companies that were being combined.
Today, even though business could scarcely be better -- last quarter was the busiest ever in terms of the number of announced transactions -- there is less focus on the personalities behind the deals.


A Last Chance for a Place in the Sun Until Spring


Special Fund At Hospital In a Dispute
As countywide elections draw near, a dispute broke out today over a special fund at the Westchester County Medical Center that is supposed to be spent primarily for research and equipment but that was apparently used to pay for catered parties, tickets to charity dinners and retirement gifts.
Trying to reduce the political fallout, Andrew P. O'Rourke, the County Executive who is seeking re-election next month, asked for three county employees who serve as officers of the special fund to resign their fund positions.
One employee is Mack L. Carter Jr., whom Mr.
O'Rourke appointed Hospitals Commissioner.


Agassi Is Docked a Match In Next Year's Davis Cup
ANDRE AGASSI yesterday was barred from playing for the United States in its next Davis Cup match as punishment for pulling out of his final singles match against the Bahamas last month.
The International Tennis Federation also fined the United States Tennis Association $1,500 for Agassi's withdrawal, which came on the final day of the United States' 5-0 sweep Sept. 24-26 in Charlotte, N.C.


Trotting for the Triple Crown
American Winner, an even-money co-favorite in today's 101st Kentucky Futurity at the Red Mile in Lexington, Ky., will attempt to become the first trotter in 21 years to win the triple crown.
Leaving from Post 7 in the nine-horse field, American Winner, driven by Ron Pierce, must bounce back from a recent upset to his chief nemesis, Pine Chip, who is the other favorite in today's big race.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
2.98
3.04
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.96
2.96
2.77
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.06
3.08
2.87
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.88
4.88
5.97
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.01
6.01
7.44
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.02
7.03
8.55
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.43
5.44
6.40
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Corrections
An obituary on Wednesday about William A. Corley, former chief of the NBC News bureaus in Chicago, Saigon and Moscow, who died on Sunday, misstated his age.
He was 77.


Lifting the Memory of Slavery Into the Realm of Myth
Violent, heart-wrenching events occur in Toni Morrison's fiction: a fleeing slave cuts the throat of her baby daughter with a handsaw; a cosmetics salesman hunts down his mistress and shoots her dead; an old woman burns her own son to death for having become a junkie.
These are not random, senseless deaths, but deaths wrought by history, by decades of familial disappointment and pain and an ineradicable racial memory of slavery and betrayal.
In fact, for Ms.
Morrison's characters, "caught midway between was and must be," innocence does not exist.


Union Texas
Shares of Union Texas Petroleum Holdings were unchanged in active trading yesterday after a sharp decline on Wednesday.
Salomon Brothers issued a buy recommendation, saying overreaction by investors to disappointing drilling results off Alaska had created a buying opportunity.
Salomon added that positive developments in the company's Indonesian properties could lead shares higher in the next few months.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BRITISH AEROSPACE P.L.C., Farnborough, England, will sell its Dutch dredging and construction unit, Ballast Nedam B.V., to Royal Boskalis Westminster N.V., of the Netherlands, for $262 million.
PHILLIPS PETROLEUM CO., Bartlesville, Okla.,had agreed to sell the yeast-based flavor ingredient line of its Provesta Corp. subsidiary to Integrated Ingredients, a division of Burns Philp &amp; Co., Sydney, Australia.
Terms were not disclosed.


Hampton (and Giants' Offense?) Out After Surgery
It looks as if the only thing standing between Rodney Hampton and the Pro Bowl is his knee.
The Giants' main offensive weapon and the National Football League's second-leading rusher had arthoscopic surgery on his left knee today and will miss the next two big division games against the Redskins and Eagles.
The surgery was to remove cartilage in the knee, and the good news for the Giants is that he could return in three to four weeks.
Nevertheless, the Giants' backfield is beaten up.
Fullback Jarrod Bunch probably won't play in Washington on Sunday because an infection from pneumonia that has plagued him for over a week has left the lining of his throat so irritated he can hardly breath without coughing.


Report Revises Times in Train Wreck
The nation's worst train wreck in decades occurred just a few minutes after a towboat pilot, lost in a predawn fog, mistook a railroad bridge for a barge and inadvertently rammed it as Amtrak's Sunset Limited was bearing down on the span, Federal investigators believe.
The bridge collapsed as the train sped onto it, the investigators said, plunging three engines and four cars into a Mobile River backwater, the Big Bayou Canot, near Mobile, Ala., at 2:50 A.M. on Sept. 22.
Forty-seven people were killed in the crash.


Subway Crash In Brooklyn Injures 45
A Manhattan-bound subway train that had just rounded a sharp curve rear-ended another train that had stopped in a Brooklyn station last night, jolting dozens of startled passengers out of their seats.
At least 45 people were taken to hospitals with what officials described as minor injuries, mostly cuts and bruises.
A Transit Authority spokesman, Jared Lebow, said the tracks in the Graham Avenue station on the L line did not appear to have been damaged, and the wreckage would be cleared in time for the morning rush today.
Crash Cause Is Unknown
The crash raised questions about safety and the signal system on the L line, especially how the second train got close enough to ram the first one and whether there were any similarities to the fatal derailment of an IRT No. 4 train at the Union Square station in Manhattan in 1991.
Soon after that accident, transit officials changed safety procedures and began installing automatic braking systems to stop trains traveling too fast near dangerous curves.
In response to that accident, officials also said they were equipping trains with speedometers and "black box" recorders like those on airplanes.


Corrections
An obituary headline yesterday about Prof.
John M. Wallace, an authority on 17th-century poetry at the University of Chicago, misstated his age in some copies.
He was 65.


Cup Tickets to Be Rationed
First the good news.
There will be tickets available for the later rounds of the 1994 World Cup, which will be played in the United States next summer.
The bad news is they are available in limited numbers and are expensive.
World Cup U.S.A. yesterday announced that there will be 150,000 tickets available for public sale for the quarterfinal, semifinal and final rounds.
That's only an average of 18,750 tickets to be sold domestically for eight games.
Tickets will be distributed in May.


Earnings at Dow Jones Climbed by 51.5% in Third Quarter
While the slow rate of economic recovery continues to hamper many American businesses, Dow Jones &amp; Company appears to be benefiting.
The publishing company yesterday reported a 51.5 percent gain in third-quarter net income, to $29.65 million, an unusually high jump for publishing companies at this point in the recovery.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Nine Wall Street firms -- including Merrill Lynch, Lehman and Goldman, Sachs -- will abstain from making contributions to politicians or candidates who could give them business in state and city bond issues.
The curb comes amid increased scrutiny into how lucrative bond-selling business is awarded to financial firms, which have long made political contributions.  [ Page A1. ]
New York State banking regulators introduced a complex formula to determine how many dollars a bank should invest in its community.
The system focuses on actual dollars of lending and de-emphasizes paperwork and other factors like community outreach efforts highlighted in the previous system.  [ D1. ]


The Dead Sea Scrolls: Fragile and Remarkable
IT was easy to agree with the curator of the new exhibition on the Dead Sea Scrolls at the New York Public Library.
As he showed some visitors around, Dr.
Leonard Singer Gold, the curator and chief of the library's Jewish division, remarked, "You'll see these scroll fragments are small, difficult to read and not particularly interesting visually."
That they are, all 12 of the small fragments of those precious documents from the time and place where the foundations of rabbinic Judaism were laid and where Christianity was born.
They are faded with age, almost to the point of illegibility.
They are so fragile they look as though they might crumble to dust before your eyes.
How could anything so unprepossessing provoke such scholarly controversy and succeed as the centerpiece of a major cultural exhibition?


TV Weekend; Lemmon and Broderick in Early, Gentle Mamet
David Mamet was 25 when he wrote his basically two-character play "A Life in the Theater." With Gregory Mosher as director, the play had its premiere at the Goodman Theater's Stage 2 in Chicago in 1977.
Now, several stage productions later, Mr.
Mamet, continuing his long collaboration with Mr.
Mosher, has adapted "A Life in the Theater" for television.
It begins an extensive run on TNT tomorrow night at 8, 10 and midnight.
The stars are Jack Lemmon and Matthew Broderick, who, working splendidly in tandem, are each at peak best.
The stage play takes place almost entirely in a shared dressing room of a rundown theater way off Broadway.
For television, it has been, as they say, opened up, the camera wandering around the outside world of streets and restaurants, modest apartments and shabby hotel rooms.
Robert (Mr. Lemmon) is a veteran actor on the way down; John (Mr. Broderick) is a young man who could be on the way up, possibly to a film career.
Robert offers a characteristically haughty take on movies: "As the old whore said, another great profession ruined by amateurs."


Teaching Tolerance in Workplaces: A Seattle Program Illustrates Limits
When the nation's largest ferry system started a costly training program to promote greater tolerance among employees, it was intended to be "shock therapy," as one official called it -- a sort of cultural boot camp for the deckhands, seamen, captains and mates steeped in sailor traditions.
One by one they came off the boats and into the training room, all 1,500 employees of the Washington State Ferry System.
They were told not to say "gals" or "ladies," instructed to call blacks "people of color" and reminded that while some traditional maritime terms may be nautically correct on Puget Sound, they are offensive to some people.


Pentagon and State Dept. at Odds Over Sending of Soldiers to Haiti
As the Clinton Administration struggles to find a way out of Somalia, the Pentagon and State Department are locked in a last-minute dispute over the deployment of hundreds of American military trainers and engineers to Haiti during the next two weeks, senior Administration officials said today.
Under a United Nations-brokered agreement reached with Haiti's military leaders last summer to restore the exiled President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, to power by Oct. 30, the United States promised to send troops as part of a United Nations force.
American and Canadian troops are to retrain Haiti's military, while police officers from France, Canada, Madagascar, Tunisia, Algeria and other French-speaking countries are to help create an independent police force.


Fewer Florio Foes Take to the Air
The voice had the high-pitched quality of a wail, the sound heard in hospital emergency rooms or combat zones, filled with anguish and incomprehension.
"What's the matter with people?" asked a middle-aged woman calling in to New Jersey 101.5 talk radio.
"Don't they remember what Jim Florio did to this state? Now they're going to vote for him? Am I going crazy?"


Melvin Jacobs, Former Executive At Saks Fifth Avenue, Dies at 67
Melvin Jacobs, the merchant whose fashion savvy propelled him from a job in the bargain basement at Bloomingdale's to the chief executive's office at Saks Fifth Avenue, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 67.
The exact cause of death was uncertain; doctors said it could have been a heart attack or an aneurysm.


Uruguay Has History Of a Free Judiciary
To the Editor:
"Chile Refuses to Forget Crimes of Past" (The Week in Review, Sept. 26) makes two comparisons disparaging to Uruguay on the subjects of judicial independence and amnesty laws.
Uruguay has a long history of an independent judiciary firmly rooted in a constitutional tradition.
Judges are appointed by the Supreme Court, which is appointed by Congress.
In almost every case this century, Congress has drawn from the senior judges on the Courts of Appeal to make their appointments to the Supreme Court.


Market Place; The Brooke Group thinks more of a spinoff than the market does.
SOME appraisals turn out to be a bit optimistic.
Shares of Skybox International Inc., a sports and entertainment trading card company, traded yesterday at prices from $3.75 to $4.125 a share, according to Jefferies &amp; Company, a brokerage firm.
It was the first day of trading for the stock, and with Nasdaq rules temporarily prohibiting firms from making markets in the stock, there was little trading.


THE SOMALIA MISSION: Overview; CLINTON DOUBLING U.S. FORCE IN SOMALIA, VOWING TROOPS WILL COME HOME IN 6 MONTHS
President Clinton said today that he was doubling the size of the United States ground forces in Somalia to protect American troops there, and he promised to have all forces out in six months.
Between now and March 31, he said in a television address, the troops would try to lay a foundation for stability in the anarchic country.


Irish Chief Backs Peace Plan and Will See British
The Prime Minister of Ireland, Albert Reynolds, endorsed a new peace initiative for Northern Ireland today and said he would discuss it with the British.
The initiative was advanced by the two most influential Roman Catholic leaders in Northern Ireland, John Hume, head of the moderate Social Democratic Labor Party, and Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the outlawed Irish Republican Army.
If successful, it would lead to the first direct negotiations between Sinn Fein and the British since the mid-1970's.


Harvard Journal; All-Male Club Opens Its Door Warily
You could almost feel sorry for them.
There they were, Harvard men at the Fly Club, surrounded by stuffed moose heads and dusty bound volumes of English magazines, discussing their hopes that the alums will allow a few women into their 157-year-old once-fashionable institution.
And yet even as they express eagerness to take this giant stride into the 20th century, the young club men have to bear the scorn of those on campus who think, wrongly perhaps, that they are all rich elitists.
One young member, who said he is on financial aid, said he was afraid to tell people that he has two middle names.


Two Large Waste Haulers Call Off Proposed Merger
Shares of Western Waste Industries plunged 38 percent today after the company announced the collapse of its proposed $500 million merger with Browning-Ferris Industries.
Western Waste stock fell $6.75, to $11, in heavy Big Board trading, while Browning Ferris shares rose 62.5 cents, to $24.


Printronix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Prisoner Gets a Visit
An American helicopter pilot captured by Somalis five days ago joked about the food but was in strong mental condition, said a Red Cross worker who visited him.
Somali elders apologized for the abuses inflicted on the bodies of two G.I.'s.
Article, page 6.


What, Me Envy?
SHAQUILLE O'NEAL understands the importance of being surrounded by talented players, he said yesterday, so he is not about to lose sleep over no longer being the most highly paid member of the Orlando Magic.
With a seven-year, $40 million basketball contract of his own, plus millions of dollars more in endorsements, the 7-foot-1-inch All-Star center said it mattered little to him that the rookie ANFERNEE HARDAWAY signed the second-richest deal in pro team sports Thursday night.


THE SOMALIA MISSION: Victims; 2 Wounded Rangers Tell Of an Ordeal Under Fire
A few hours after arriving here from Mogadishu with a sliver of shrapnel in his brain from Sunday's battle there, Sgt. 1st Class Richard Lamb heard that President Clinton had decided to double the size of the American force in Somalia.
Despite his pain, Sergeant Lamb, 34, an Army Ranger from Des Moines, Iowa, was cheered.
"The situation's changed," he said today at the Army's Second General Hospital, where he is recovering.
"The United States has got a little more focus now, on how to make the city safe."


Voting on Future of an Island Home; New Yorkers of Puerto Rican Heritage Cast Their Ballots
Petra Almodovar, 62, walked into a Manhattan center for the elderly clutching a birth certificate yellowed from age but still legible.
In another center, Rafael Cintron, 71, brought a plastic bag with his honorable discharge papers from the Army.
They offered the records as proof that they were of Puerto Rican heritage so they could could participate in a vote that, although symbolic, gave them a say for the first time in the political future of the island they each left more than 30 years ago.


Abbott Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Alcoa reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Palestinians Rule Jericho, at Least in Soccer
In this ancient city destined to be an early bastion of Palestinian self-rule, thousands of Palestinians poured out their hopes today for a future state in the way that people express nationalism around the world.
They cheered on their soccer team.


Review/Film Festival; A Boy as the Metaphor For His Homeland
In his deceptively easygoing film, "Wendemi," S. Pierre Yameogo, a film maker from Burkina Faso, uses the story of an abandoned child as a metaphor for a society that is drifting in a kind spiritual and political limbo.
When Cecile (Sylvie Yameogo), an unwed mother-to-be, refuses to identify the father of her child, she is thrown out of her parents' home and eventually leaves her baby in a field, where another family finds him and takes him home.
Michel (Alassane Dakissaga), the head of the household, reluctantly assumes responsibility for the baby after going to the police, the local priest and the traditional village chief, each of whom advises him to seek the counsel of another authority.


Turkey Has Good Claim to Gold of Troy
To the Editor:
In "Who Owns the Gold of Troy?" (Editorial Notebook, Sept. 26), Karl E. Meyer attempts to distinguish proper ownership of the Schliemann treasure, which the Russian Government has acknowledged it has hidden since World War II, from that of the Parthenon sculptures, in the British Museum since the early 1800's.


Turkey Has Good Claim to Gold of Troy; Yeltsin in Athens
To the Editor:
Corriere della Sera reports that, according to Dora Bakojanni, Greek Culture Minister, the gold of Troy will be first exhibited in Athens in 1995 in the Villa Schliemann.
Nice touch by the Greeks to put the dispute to rest where the amateur archeologist Schliemann spent his last days.


Acclaim Entertainment Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Judge Considering Offer of Bail To Defendant in Bomb-Plot Case
The judge in the case of the foiled plot to bomb New York City targets said yesterday that he was considering releasing one of the 15 defendants on bail.
All have so far been denied bail and remain in jail on the ground that they pose a danger to the community and might flee.
At a bail hearing at Federal District Court in Manhattan for the defendant, Earl Gant of Philadelphia, his lawyer, Andrew Patel, argued that Mr.
Gant had become involved with the other defendants under the impression that he was being recruited to fight for Muslims in Bosnia.
Mr.
Patel said that secretly recorded tapes of conversations between Mr.
Gant and a Government informer showed that Mr.
Gant had been unaware of any plot to bomb the United Nations and Hudson River tunnels. 'A Close Issue'
A Government prosecutor, Robert Khuzami, contended that Mr.
Gant had agreed to provide guns for the plot and had taken part in paramilitary training in a Brooklyn safe house.


News Communications Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Sherwood Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Bell Gripes But Still Rides Pine
Maybe George Bell should criticize Manager Gene Lamont before every game.
Sounds silly?
Well, one day after Bell berated Lamont, the White Sox toppled the Blue Jays, 6-1.
Incidentally, Bell did not play for the third straight game.
One pertinent question filling the Skydome before the game was this: Have the White Sox been more embarrassing on the field or off it in the first two games?
Because of Bell and Bo Jackson, the answer was arguable.


Clinton Sounds A Rallying Cry: Security for All
President Clinton said today that the Democratic Party should seize the theme of personal security, which he is already using to promote his health care package, as a way of persuading Americans to rally behind his proposals on everything from the economy to crime to trade.
In an address to the fall meeting of the Democratic National Committee, Mr.
Clinton made only a passing reference to the American military deployment in Somalia, saying it was most important that the public focus on matters at home.


It's Ward's World When Florida State Has the Ball
It's Charlie's ball.
When the remarkable football rivalry between Miami and Florida State is stripped to the basics of the here and now, when the latest in a memorable series of championship-deciding meetings takes place Saturday at noon, the high-profile business can be reduced to one simple question:


Coleman Case Delayed
The case against Vince Coleman, the left fielder the Mets say will never play for them again because of a fireworks incident outside Dodger Stadium in July, might be headed for trial.
Coleman was scheduled to be arraigned in Los Angeles Superior Court this morning on felony charges, but his attorney, Robert Shapiro, asked for a two-week delay and was granted it.
At issue are the size and power of the explosive device Coleman admits to throwing from a car in the Dodger Stadium parking lot.
The device injured three bystanders, including a 3-year-old girl.
Shapiro contends Coleman dropped "a large firecracker, not dynamite, TNT or a bomb," and should be charged with a misdemeanor.


Space Deal Seen as Near For Marietta
The Martin Marietta Corporation has been negotiating for several weeks to buy the space division of the General Dynamics Corporation, and a formal agreement could be announced as early as next week, aerospace industry executives familiar with the talks said today.
The executives, who spoke on the condition that they remain anonymous, did not disclose specifics of the deal, which would represent a significant consolidation of the commercial satellite-launching business in the United States.
Analysts estimated that the General Dynamics unit could sell for $250 million to $350 million.


OEA Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Sherwood Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Traveler Fees May Rise To Pay for Trade Accord
The Clinton Administration is planning to raise $500 million a year to help pay for the North American Free Trade Agreement, primarily by raising fees on travelers entering the United States, Congressional officials say.
Mickey Kantor, the United States Trade Representative, said at a news conference here this morning that Administration officials were in the final stages of drafting the plan with members of Congress, and would announce the plan in a few days.


Gearing Up for Trading The Computerized Way
COMPUTERIZED trading and research, long the domain of Wall Street money managers, has become democratic.
A host of computer data services lets smaller investors join in.
Getting to know the services -- Compuserve, Dow Jones, Prodigy, Genie and America On-Line -- can be like scanning a large crowd at a party.
Dizzying, but one or two are bound to make staying in touch worthwhile.


Ian Burn, 53, Artist, Writer and Founder Of an Artists' Union
Ian Burn, an Australian Conceptual artist, writer and unionist who worked and exhibited in the United States and Europe in the 1970's with the Art and Language collective, died on Sept. 29 in Milton, Australia.
He was 53 and lived in Rozelle, a suburb of Sydney.
Mr.
Burn drowned in rough seas while swimming with his daughter and her friends, one of whom he was apparently trying to rescue at the time of his death.
The incident involved no other deaths.


Benazir Bhutto's Long Road Back
In 1988, Benazir Bhutto became the first woman to lead a Government in an Islamic country.
But in nearly two years as Pakistan's Prime Minister, she impressed neither friend or foe.
Her People's Party failed to enact a single measure of any consequence.
Dismissed from office by a hostile President on charges of abuse of power, Ms.
Bhutto was beaten at the polls by Nawaz Sharif.
Now, in a dramatic comeback, her left-of-center party has just outvoted Mr.
Sharif's business-oriented Pakistan Muslim League.
This is sweet vindication for Benazir Bhutto, and for the most part, good news for Pakistan.
The big losers were militant Islamic parties, which won only 9 seats in the 217-seat Parliament.
After years of dictatorship and turbulence, Pakistan seems to be evolving a stable two-party system.
Mr.
Sharif has emerged as a leader in his own right, and can no longer be dismissed as a tool of the military.
If Ms.
Bhutto can cobble together a majority coalition, and if her party runs well in today's provincial elections, she will have a promising fresh shot at power.


Hytek Microsystems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


After China's Nuclear Blast
President Francois Mitterrand of France had the right response to China's reckless test of a nuclear warhead this week: he urged other nuclear-armed states to "keep their cool" and not follow suit.
President Clinton would be wise to take his advice.
The spread of nuclear arms to states that don't yet have them would pose much more menace to U.S. security than would a new Chinese warhead.
That's why ending the U.S. moratorium on testing would be a mistake; it would only weaken worldwide support for tighter restraints on proliferation.


3 Belmont Trainers Set Down
Three trainers were suspended at Belmont Park yesterday after their horses had tested positive for cocaine, but two of them appealed the decision by the stewards and the penalties were deferred until their appeals are heard.
Peter Ferriola and John Mazza were suspended for 60 days each, as they had predicted last week when the test findings were reported.
They have both denied giving cocaine to their horses, but the stewards noted that trainers were ultimately accountable even if their horses absorbed drugs being used by stable workers.


Numbers Show Contract Plan Works Well, Mayor Reports
Mayor David N. Dinkins released statistics yesterday that he says prove that his affirmative action program has doubled minority and female contractors' share of city business at almost no cost to the taxpayers.
He also used the occasion to attack the plan of his opponent, Rudolph W. Giuliani, to dismantle the program.
The Mayor said the city has increased the dollar amount of city contracts awarded to female- and minority-owned companies from 9 percent in 1989 and 1990 to 17.5 percent last year.
This was achieved, city officials said, primarily through aggressive recruitment and by splitting contracts into smaller sizes that the typically smaller, minority- and female-owned companies are better able to compete for.


Stock Group Does Well and Gold Still Leads
The stock market perked up in the third quarter.
The average American stock fund rose 5.3 percent, a bigger gain than in the entire first half.
The result: a respectable return of 10.9 percent for stock funds through Oct. 1.
Despite a bad stumble in the last three months, gold remains in the lead for the year to date.
Among the 16 stock fund categories tracked by Morningstar Inc., gold was the only loser in the third quarter, dropping 10.1 percent.


Survival Technology Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Rally Sends 30-Year Yield Below 6%
Bond market investors interpreted the September employment report as strong evidence of a weak American economy, and they sent the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond plunging to 5.92 percent yesterday.
More than any other security, the 30-year bond reflects the opinions of millions of bondholders concerning inflation, and yesterday by buying the bonds in big quantities -- driving up the price and driving down the yield -- they voted that inflation was unlikely to rise in the foreseeable future.


Review/Film Festival; Young and Gay, and Opinionated About It
"Everything that homos are supposed to like -- disco music, drag shows, Joan Crawford -- I hate," says one of the characters in "Totally F***ed Up," Gregg Araki's fractured, corrosive portrait of a group of gay comrades.
Mr.
Araki, who has described his film as a "ragtag story of the fag-and-dyke teen underground," brings an angry intelligence to bear upon disaffected characters, so that his work plays vigorously as part movie, part manifesto.
"Formally, the picture's use of an exploded, free-associative narrative and direct-to-camera address is as radical as the 60's French New Wave (or its rip-off, 90's MTV)," Mr.
Araki has also written, none too bashfully, about his film.
In its closing credits, where friends and sponsors are usually thanked, he also includes a colorful "no thanks" to "you all know who you are." And the asterisks in the title amount to more of the same.


Marcel Marien, 73, Associate of Magritte
Marcel Marien, a publisher, artist and writer and one of the last of the circle of Belgian Surrealists who gathered around the painter Rene Magritte, died on Sept. 19 in Schaerdeeck, a suburb of Brussels.
He was 73.
Mr.
Marien was born in Antwerp, Belgium, in 1920, into a poor family, and apprenticed to a photographer at age 15.
In 1937, he encountered Magritte's paintings in an exhibition and sought out the artist.
Within the year, he had his own work included in an exhibition of the close-knit Belgian Surrealist group.
Although he worked as a photographer, collagist, film maker and critic, his main achievement was as a chronicler of the Belgian Surrealists' activities and a publisher of their writings.


Surety Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


WD-40 Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Acclaim Entertainment Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Robbins &amp; Myers Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Corrections
An article in Your Money on Oct. 2 about investment in developing markets misstated the birthplace of J. Mark Mobius, director of the Far East division of Templeton Funds.
He was born in Halle, Germany, not New York City.


THE SOMALIA MISSION: Analysis; The U.N.'s Glow Is Gone
After embracing the United Nations as the global peacemaker of the future, President Clinton has broken sharply with it over Somalia, signaling the Administration's intense displeasure with Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali and complicating United States participation in peacekeeping operations elsewhere.
In his television address on Thursday, Mr.
Clinton said in effect that after scores of Americans were killed or wounded in a United Nations-led raid in Mogadishu on Sunday, the United States would have no choice but to go it alone.
Although he did not say it out loud, another message came through loud and clear: the United Nations is not up to the job.


Officer Is Struck by a Thrown Bucket and Killed
A housing police officer was killed last night after he was struck in the head by a five-gallon bucket of spackling compound thrown off a roof in Washington Heights, the police said.
The plastic bucket of plaster was thrown, by an unidentified assailant, after a confrontation over a car-towing operation on West 175th Street.
The officer, identified as John Williamson, 25, died at 11:25 P.M. at Columbia Presbyterian Hospital, said Amanita Duga-Carroll, a spokeswoman for the housing police.
He had been on the force for three years, she said.


U.S. Inquiry On Delta's Commissions
The Justice Department said yesterday that it was investigating Delta Air Lines and its agreements with travel agents in Salt Lake City because of concern that those deals may give the carrier an unfair advantage over a smaller competitor.
The investigation centers around so-called commission overrides, essentially bonuses for travel agencies that sell a certain number of tickets.
While this is a common practice in the airline industry, Delta was apparently also rewarding agents for not booking on rival Morris Air, which is based in Salt Lake City and serves cities in the Midwest and West, people familiar with details of the investigation said yesterday.


Mrs. Clinton Takes Health Plan to Rhode Island


Winn-Dixie Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 22


Boitano on Schedule
He is juggling injuries to his knee, back and groin.
He is two weeks away from turning 30.
And he is aware that not all of his male figure-skating peers are happy to have him competing for a spot in the Olympics at Lillehammer, Norway, in February.
But BRIAN BOITANO said yesterday from his home in Los Altos, Calif., that he is forging ahead with his return to the amateur ranks he abandoned shortly after winning the Olympic gold medal at Calgary in 1988.


Review/Film Festival; First the Murders, Then the Merchandising
In January 1991, Aileen Wuornos, a prostitute in her late 20's, admitted to the murders of seven men, each picked up on a Florida highway, which was her usual venue.
Some months later, after pleading no contest to the murders, Ms.
Wuornos was sentenced to six life sentences, though she had been tried for only one of the murders.
The press and especially the television tabloid shows had a field day with the story about what they called "the man-hating murderer," apparently because Ms.
Wuornos was an admitted lesbian.
It was Tyria Moore, her lover, who tricked Ms.
Wuornos into a confession during a telephone call monitored by the police.
One immediate result of all this public interest: "Overkill," the television feature in which Jean Smart played Ms.
Wuornos.


Gag Reflex Is Sprague's Only Reflex
Reflexes.
Ed Sprague said the pivotal play amounted to reflexes.
If Sprague had reacted quickly to Frank Thomas's sizzling grounder in the third inning, he would have notched the third out and the sputtering White Sox would have remained scoreless.
No reflexes.
Sprague did not react properly to the playable grounder.
The third baseman inexplicably thought about backhanding the one-hop grounder that was hit at him, instead it slithered through his legs to score Chicago's first run.
What was generously scored as a single kept the inning alive and also kept the White Sox breathing as they scored five runs in the third and breezed to a 6-1 victory over the Blue Jays tonight.


THE SOMALIA MISSION: Pentagon; Clinton Defends Aspin on Action Regarding Request for U.S. Tanks
President Clinton defended Secretary of Defense Les Aspin today against criticism from Capitol Hill, but made clear that he had no role in Mr.
Aspin's decision not to send armored reinforcements to the American force in Somalia last month.
Mr.
Aspin acknowledged on Thursday that he had erred in rejecting a request from military commanders for four tanks and 14 Bradley Fighting Vehicles for American troops in Somalia.
Some political figures in Washington have asserted that the equipment would have prevented some or all of the American casualties in a clash in Mogadishu last weekend.


As New Season Dawns, Riley Sounds an Alarm
At 12:01 this morning, while others slept, the Knicks hit the practice floor and opened training camp.
Then, after a few hours of rest, Pat Riley directed a verbal wake-up call toward any player who is worried about his role.
Both Tony Campbell and Charles Oakley vented concerns about playing time on Thursday.
Riley responded today.
The coach was calm and cool, but his message was direct.


COMPANY BRIEFS
BRITISH SYPHON INDUSTRIES, England, an auto parts and engineering company, said it had accepted a $50 million bid in cash and shares from Graystone P.L.C., an electrical and mechanical engineering conern.
DUN &amp; BRADSTREET CORP., plans to move A. C. Nielsen/Monitor-Plus and Dunsnet, two of its subsidiaries, from Wilton to Shelton, Conn., along with 237 jobs.


News Communications Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Deciding on a New Mortgage: 15 or 30 Years?
Randy Mazur, 35, owns a construction company, and his wife, Marlene, 33, a financial planning firm.
They live on a Christmas Tree farm inColts Neck, N.J., with their three children, aged 8, 9 and 11.
Until August, they were carryiking a 30-year mortgage taken out in 1986 at an interest rate of a whopping 11 3/8 percent.
With today's low rates, it was time to refinance.
The Mazurs decideed to consider a 15-year loan, keeping in mind that they must plan for their children's future college costs.


Oilers Have Finished Look In Rout of Aimless Islanders
The Islanders are going to Disneyland on Sunday, but the trip isn't the traditional promotional reward for victors after a championship.
It's for a game against the expansion Mighty Ducks of Anaheim, the third of four stops on a long, bumpy road trip that has begun with two dreary defeats at the start of the season.
The second came tonight, a 5-1 embarrassment against the Edmonton Oilers at Northlands Coliseum.


Concern About Toll Robberies Leads to Heightened Security
Responding to a record increase in tollbooth robberies, the agencies that run New York City's major bridges and tunnels have quietly deployed more armed police officers at 15 crossings and are using more video monitors and an array of tactics to deter, detect and snare drive-by bandits.
Besides facing more officers and guns and having his face and license number captured on tape, the would-be robber nowadays also may find less money available at the booths, an improved radio system for police chases, a $10,000 price on his head and an "800" number for informers to turn him in, officials said.


Workfare's Limitations
To the Editor:
Everything in "Westchester's Workfare Works, So Why Not New York City's?" (letter, Sept. 28) by Andrew O'Rourke is right on, except what he states I said in my Sept. 4 Op-Ed article.
I believe firmly that able-bodied welfare recipients should work for the public good, and I'm a big supporter of workfare.
My point was that without serious efforts to train workers on the job, workfare becomes a treadmill that does not give participants the skills to escape the welfare system and find full-time jobs.
I also made the point that without sufficient training, workfare participants are of limited use in public service jobs.
BETSY GOTBAUM  Commissioner of Parks &amp; Recreation New York, Sept. 29, 1993


Sports of The Times; Seeking Doctor Jock In Pittsburgh
BLACK night is falling on Pittsburgh.
It is 7:30.
The University of Pittsburgh football team finished practice two hours ago.
Johnny Majors, the head coach, has just completed an hour workout, mandatory therapy since he had heart bypass surgery a little more than a year ago.
Playing at Notre Dame Saturday afternoon isn't part of the rehabilitation program.


Religion Notes
Ecumenically Environmental
When you talk about grass roots, you can't get much more local than the houses of worship that dot every city in America.
And the grass and roots that these congregations often care about are the environmental problems in their own communities, starting with their own front lawns.


Reeves Seeking Meggett Magic
Has Giants running back Dave Meggett lost some of his effectiveness?
Some observers around the National Football League say defenses have caught up with him, but the Washington Redskins, the Giants' opponent Sunday, don't buy it.
For most of his five-year career, Meggett has been used mainly as a kickoff and punt returner, as well as a back who would come in on third down and passing situations.


Observer; Make It Bill and Lyndon
Although President Clinton has always invited us to think of him as the Jack Kennedy of the 1990's generation, the more I watch him the more he reminds me of Lyndon Johnson.
Physically he is a big man, like Johnson, with bad eating habits, like Johnson, and is a prodigious energy burner, like Johnson.
Johnson, like Clinton, was minutely informed on the tiniest point of the smallest piece of legislation and could talk about it until you screamed for mercy.
Like Johnson, Clinton is a product of segregation-cursed Southern politics where a man with the slightest liberal temperament, especially on the race issue, had to be as cunning and often as unscrupulous as a Borgia to survive.


American President Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 17


Celtics Land Their Man
The Boston Celtics signed center ACIE EARL, the 19th pick in this year's National Basketball Association draft, to a five-year, $5.5 million contract yesterday.


Winn-Dixie Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 22


N.B.A. Clears Jordan
David Stern, the National Basketball Association commissioner, said yesterday that the league had ended its investigation into Michael Jordan's gambling activities and there was "absolutely no evidence Jordan violated league rules."
Stern earlier had said there was "absolutely no connection" between the investigation, conducted by the former Federal judge Frederick Lacey, and Jordan's sudden retirement on Wednesday.


Pessimism in Haiti: Violence Could Swamp Diplomacy
Just three weeks before Haiti's exiled President is to be restored to power, many Haitians are expressing doubts about whether a peaceful return to democracy is possible in the climate of growing violence here.
One reason for the fear is a lack of faith in the foreign force that is envisioned as the glue to hold together this country's negotiated political settlement.
The 1,300-member contingent of troops and policemen coming in will carry nothing more powerful than handguns and will not be authorized to stop violence.
A warship carrying about 250 American soldiers left a naval base in Puerto Rico today and another ship with 300 more troops was preparing to depart, the Pentagon said.


Facing an Elizabeth Police Officer, Extraterrestrial Evil Falters
The role model for America's newest superhero is a police lieutenant here with the protruding stomach of a Bulgarian super-heavyweight powerlifter who imitates Western gunfighters by carrying his pistol low on his right hip.
The eclectic lieutenant, Edward Stanislaus Szpond, acknowledges that, at first glance, he seems like the paradigm of what 1960's radicals called a "pig," an overweight, militaristic officer with a tendency to authoritarianism.


Shoeless Joe's Pen Is Even Mightier Than His Bat
In the 1920's, after Shoeless Joe Jackson and seven of his Chicago White Sox teammates were barred from the major leagues for their involvement in a bribery plot to throw the 1919 World Series, Jackson settled in this piedmont city in northwestern South Carolina, just a regular guy running a liquor store.
"You saw him every day," remembered Leo Hill, 66, a Greenville lawyer who grew up in the neighborhood where Jackson's store was situated.
"We all knew he was basically illiterate, and we didn't want to embarrass him by asking for his autograph."


Art as Captivating as the City's Skyline


Zubov, Norstrom Sent Down
With the Rangers' minor league club in Binghamton scheduled to open its season this weekend, Coach Mike Keenan has decided to send down two of the 10 defensemen he was been carrying on the roster -- Mattias Norstrom and Sergei Zubov.
Norstrom, a rookie, was impressive in preseason, but it has been assumed by Rangers' management since the start of camp that he needs more time in the minors.
Zubov has gone from being a defenseman with the most ice time at the end of last season to almost a non-entity in Keenan's system.


New York Hospitals Foresee Loss Of Billions Under Clinton's Plan
Already facing chronic money problems, New York City's hospitals said yesterday that they would lose about $4 billion in Government revenue, or about 4 percent of the hospitals' total budgets, in the first five years of President Clinton's proposed national health plan.
In perhaps the first detailed look at how the Clinton proposal could affect local health care providers, the Greater New York Hospital Association said that cuts in Medicare and Medicaid would far outweigh increases in aid for people who now lack health insurance.
Cuomo Meets With Moynihan
The hospital association's report is a first step in what promises to be intense jockeying among interest groups in the health care industry that hope to reshape the Administration's plan to guarantee health care to all Americans.
In New York City, for example, although hospitals stand to lose revenue, some clinics, doctors and other health care providers may receive more money.


Florio and Whitman Hit Trail After Debate
One day after their first debate, Gov.
Jim Florio and his Republican opponent, Christine Todd Whitman, resumed life on the campaign trail.
She visited a high school and a financial firm.
He got a visit from the top Democrat in the United States, President Clinton.
The President officially came to New Jersey to lobby in support of his health care package.
But in one short speech before an enthusiastic crowd at the Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital, Mr.
Clinton managed, through the issue of violence in America, to link his health care proposals to one of the most popular planks in Mr.
Florio's campaign: gun control.


Yeltsin Suspends the Communist Party and Other Foes
Russia's main Communist Party, among the largest political parties in the country, was suspended today by the Justice Ministry under the state-of-emergency decrees of President Boris N. Yeltsin.
The ministry also suspended the People's Party of Free Russia, which had been led by the jailed Vice President, Aleksandr V. Rutskoi, but which has disavowed him.
That brings to 10 the number of political parties and organizations suspended, as well as some 13 newspapers.
The state of emergency is scheduled to end on Sunday, but it could be extended.


WD-40 Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Warriors No More?
Responding to concerns from American Indians, Marquette University will drop "Warriors" as the nickname for its athletic teams, The Capital Times, of Madison, Wis., reported yesterday.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about Christine Todd Whitman's tax-cutting proposals in the New Jersey campaign for governor referred incompletely to two Princeton scholars, Harvey Rosen and David Bradford, who spoke favorably of her plan.
Both Mr.
Rosen and Mr.
Bradford belonged to Mrs.
Whitman's Economic Recovery Council, but they attended no meetings and did not help draft the plan.


THE SOMALIA MISSION: Analysis; The U.N.'s Glow Is Gone
After embracing the United Nations as the global peacemaker of the future, President Clinton has broken sharply with it over Somalia, signaling the Administration's intense displeasure with Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali and complicating United States participation in peacekeeping operations elsewhere.
In his television address on Thursday, Mr.
Clinton said in effect that after scores of Americans were killed or wounded in a United Nations-led raid in Mogadishu on Sunday, the United States would have no choice but to go it alone.
Although he did not say it out loud, another message came through loud and clear: the United Nations is not up to the job.


Salinas Asks Trade Pact Effort
President Carlos Salinas de Gortari appealed to a group of visiting American Congressmen today to approve the North American Free Trade Agreement without modification or delay, suggesting that Mexico might not support the pact if it is not put into effect by Jan. 1.
In a meeting with the Congressional delegation at the presidential residence, Los Pinos, Mr.
Salinas reaffirmed a written statement he made to The Washington Post on Thursday that neither renegotiating nor rescheduling the agreement "are real options at this stage."


Tyrex Oil Co. (NSC) reports earnings for Year to June 30


Robbins &amp; Myers Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


United Stationers Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Nations of New York, An 11-Day Arts Festival
Twenty-six music, dance and theater events are to be featured in the Nations of New York Arts Festival, presented from Thursday through Oct. 24 at the Henry Street Settlement, 466 Grand Street, Lower East Side.
The festival is to open with a gala centennial tribute to the settlement by Nikolais and Murray Louis Dance.
Other performers are to include Women of the Calabash, the Klezmatics, the New Federal Theater and the Alien Comic.
The programs are also to include commissioned works by the Louis Johnson Dance Theater Ensemble with the Henry Street Music School Ensemble and by the Alice Farly Dance Theater.


Surety Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Survival Technology Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Ruling on Inmate's Return to New York Creates Death-Penalty Quandary for Cuomo
A Federal judge created a moral and political quandary for Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo today by ordering that an Oklahoma death-row inmate be returned to New York to finish a sentence of 20 years to life for murder rather than fulfilling the inmate's wish to be executed immediately.
The dilemma was created by the second part of the ruling, which allows Mr.
Cuomo, an ardent opponent of the death penalty, to waive Thomas Grasso's return to New York.


RESULTS PLUS
TROTTING  American Winner Last  American Winner's bid to become trotting's first triple crown champion in 21 years ended in embarrassment yesterday.
The 3-year-old colt, driven by Ron Pierce, broke stride repeatedly in the second heat of the 101st Kentucky Futurity at Lexington, Ky., and finished last.
His chief nemesis, Pine Chip, stormed to a record-setting victory by six and a half lengths.
After finishing second to Pine Chip in the first heat by a stunning eight lengths, American Winner, who captured the Yonkers Trot and Hambletonian earlier in the year, figured to come back with a fury in the second heat.
Instead, he finished eighth in the 8-horse field, 24 lengths behind Pine Chip, who was driven by John Campbell.
Pine Chip set a track record by speeding around the Red Mile track in 1:523/5 .
Oaklea Jay finished second and High Noon Star third.
TENNIS  Yzaga Upsets Courier  Jaime Yzaga, the 54th-ranked player from Peru, ripped forehands past top-seeded Jim Courier last night for a 6-4, 2-6, 6-4 quarterfinal upset at the Australian Indoor championships in Sydney.
Yzaga will meet Goran Ivanisevic, the defending champion, in today's semifinals.
Ivanisevic slammed 11 aces in scoring a 6-3, 6-2 victory over Mikael Pernfors.
In the other semifinal, Petr Korda will face Wayne Ferreira. (AP) SOCCER  Nigeria Reaches Finals  Nigeria gained its first berth in the World Cup finals with a 1-1 tie against Algeria last night in Algiers.
Samuel Kinedi scored the goal for Nigeria in the 19th minute, and Algeria tied it in the 67th minute when Abdelhamid Tasfaout scored.
Nigeria and the Ivory Coast ended the African Group A schedule with 5 points in four games in the three-team division.
Nigeria advances to the 1994 finals in the United States because it had a higher goal differential than the Ivory Coast.
On Sunday, Cameroon and Zimbabwe meet for the Africa's Group C berth, while Morocco and Zambia play for the Group B berth. (AP) GOLF  Maggert in Position
Jeff Maggert, regarded as one of the best players who has yet to win a PGA Tour event, is after a breakthrough this weekend in the Walt Disney World-Oldsmobile Golf Classic in Lake Buena Vista, Fla.
He shot a seven-under-par 65 on Disney's Magnolia course to share the lead with Skip Kendall before yesterday's second round was suspended because of rain.
Half the field of 132 still must complete the round in the tournament being played on three courses.
Maggert and Kendall, who shot 66, were atop the leader board with two-day totals of 13-under-par 131.
Ted Tryba and Mark McCumber were one stroke back at 132 after rounds of 68 and 67, respectively, on the easier Lake Buena Vista course. (AP) Birdie-Birdie Close: Gibby Gilbert birdied the final two holes and took a one-stroke lead in the first round of the Transamerica Senior Golf Championship in Napa, Calif.
Gilbert shot a five-under-par 67 at Silverado Country Club.
Among four at 68 was Lee Trevino, shooting for his third straight victory on the Senior PGA Tour.
Trevino was tied with Tom Shaw, Bob Wynn and Dave Stockton.
Chi Chi Rodriguez, Al Geiberger and Gary Player were at 69. (AP)


Self-Discipline on Wall Street
Leading Wall Street underwriters of state and local bond issues have put a moratorium on contributions to political officeholders and candidates at the state and local levels.
Their compact is a welcome sign that major providers of campaign cash finally see it's wrong.
They are way ahead of most politicians.
So far, so good, but the ban should be permanent, and adopted more broadly, by lawyers, accountants and small investment firms whose business is largely local.


Electro Rent Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Sluggish Jobs Data Last Month
The labor market improved only modestly in September as payroll jobs expanded by 156,000 and the unemployment rate remained at 6.7 percent, its two-year low, the Labor Department reported today.
Although the basic figures closely matched consensus expectations, some of the secondary numbers reflected more weakness than had been expected.
Among the weaker of these was an 18-minute cut in the length of the private-sector workweek, a seventh straight decline in the number of jobs in factories and a sharp increase in the length of jobless spells.


Q. &amp;. A.
Retirement Money Abroad
Q.
Can I receive distributions from my 401(k) plan if I am living in a foreign country? -- FRANCESCO F. BARTOLOMEO, Brooklyn
A.
Yes.
In fact, you may be able to begin distributions from your 401(k) account earlier than if you were a resident of the United States.


A Paramount Bidder Reinforces Hand
QVC Network Inc. was negotiating yesterday with the BellSouth Corporation and at least two other companies to strike a deal that would give it more options to raise the cash portion of its $9.5 billion bid for Paramount Communications Inc.
Taking in an outside partner would give QVC more flexibility than having to turn for help to John C. Malone, one of its partners in the deal.


Vietnam Does Some Networking
A few feet from trays of crab cakes and fried shrimp and white wine, dozens of senior executives from the anchors of American industry were obediently lined up in a Plaza Hotel ballroom.
They were from companies like Pfizer, Mobil and Avon, and they were waiting to shake the hand of -- and, they hoped, to have a few words with -- the First Deputy Prime Minister of Vietnam.
It was not a royal dinner, but sometimes it seemed on Thursday night as if the American executives were treating the Vietnamese official, Phan Van Khai, like a prince.
They flattered him.
They toasted him.
They gave him several standing ovations.
They left little doubt that they were eager -- maybe too eager in the minds of demonstrators nearby -- to do business with a former enemy.


Bandag Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Weighing a Teacher's Rights
It's easy to understand why parents would be upset to have Peter Melzer teaching their children.
Mr.
Melzer, a physics teacher at the Bronx High School of Science, is also a leader of the North American Man-Boy Love Association.
Issues of the group's newsletter, with Mr.
Melzer's name on the masthead as officer or editor, have included how-to articles on seducing young boys.
It sounds like any parent's nightmare: a teacher with easy access to youths who openly espouses sex with youths.
But there is a big problem with current efforts to remove Mr.
Melzer.
There is no evidence whatever that he poses any danger, sexual or otherwise, to his students.
The case against him rests entirely on views expressed in writing, mostly by others, and on what he may or may not have done years ago in a foreign country.
Thus moves by the New York City Board of Education to dismiss him for these articles raise troubling issues of free speech and civil rights.


Hytek Microsystems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Corrections
An article yesterday about Robert B. Oakley, President Clinton's new envoy to Somalia, referred incorrectly to his terms as Ambassador to Zaire and Somalia.
He left those posts after being reassigned by the State Department; he was not forced out by the host governments.


Holiday on Monday
The Columbus Day holiday will be observed on Monday.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  PARADE: Tomorrow, the Hispanic Columbus Day Parade begins at 12:30 P.M. at Fifth Avenue and 44th Street, going north to 72d Street and east to Third Avenue.
Monday, the Columbus Day Parade begins at 10:15 A.M. at Fifth Avenue and 44th Street, going north to 86th Street and east to Third Avenue.


THE SOMALIA MISSION: Voices; A Common Cry Across the U.S.: It's Time to Exit
President Clinton's decision to send more troops to Somalia, even while setting a deadline for a final United States pullout, did not satisfy Tony Bright.
"It just won't work," he said.


At Spain VW Plant, Decision Time
Near Barcelona, in a union office with cracked tile floors and used metallic office furniture, a dozen middle-aged auto workers from Spain's SEAT assembly plant milled about, arguing over who will be to blame if their jobs are lost.
Volkswagen A.G., SEAT's parent, clearly wants some drastic steps taken.
It says that SEAT is rolling up a staggering $769 million loss this year.
Volkswagen had to hurriedly inject $911 million into the subsidiary last month.
And SEAT's chairman left last week as VW signaled that it might close the plant, which has churned out cars for 40 years.


Top Rhode Island Justice Quits Amid Accusations
Chief Justice Thomas F. Fay of the Rhode Island Supreme Court, who faced impeachment proceedings and a criminal trial on ethics accusations, resigned today, saying he had committed "no intentional wrongdoing" but wanted to relieve the state and his family "much pain and anguish."
The 52-year-old Chief Justice, who temporarily stepped down from the bench in late August, told Gov.
Bruce Sundlun in a letter that his resignation would take effect immediately.


RPM Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Dell Recalls Thousands Of Notebook Computers
The Dell Computer Corporation said today that it was recalling about 17,000 discontinued notebooks because the machines might overheat and pose a fire hazard.
Repairing the computers at no charge to customers will cost the personal computer maker $1.5 million to $2 million, Dell said.
The company, which is based in Austin, said it expected to account for the expense in its current third quarter, but did not expect the repair costs to change its financial projections.


Atmel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


United Stationers Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Tyrex Oil Co. (NSC) reports earnings for Year to June 30


Syntellect Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nets Face ?? and $$ As Camp Starts
While General Manager Willis Reed wrestled with the problem of whether the Nets can leap-frog past the latest National Basketball Association salary benchmarks with an offer to Derrick Coleman, Coach Chuck Daly had different problems today as the team opened training camp.
For a start: Who are these guys, and where are they going to play?
And how will the Nets fill the holes left by the losses of Drazen Petrovic, Sam Bowie and Chris Dudley?


Zelepukin and Modry Pace Devils' 2d Victory
Valery Zelepukin of Russia and Jaroslav Modry of the Czech Republic looked tonight as if they could be cornerstones for the Devils this season and beyond.
Zelepukin, 25, had two goals and an assist and Modry, 22, had two assists in leading the Devils to a 6-3 triumph over the Capitals tonight at USAir Arena, formerly the Capital Centre.


TRANSACTIONS
Basketball  National Basketball Association
CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Signed Greg Wiltjer, center.


Stolt-Nielsen S.A. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Student Loan Marketing Assn.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Luby's Cafeterias Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Endorsement By Teachers Is Unlikely
In a repudiation of Mayor David N. Dinkins, the United Federation of Teachers, one of the largest and most powerful unions in the city, is unlikely to make any endorsement for mayor, union officials said yesterday.
Sandra Feldman, the union president, said that the union's membership was divided and that its leadership had doubts about both Mr.
Dinkins and his Republican-Liberal opponent, Rudolph W. Giuliani.
The union's 3,000-member delegate assembly is to take up the issue on Wednesday.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
2.95
2.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.97
2.96
2.81
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.06
3.06
2.95
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.81
4.88
6.08
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.92
6.01
7.52
TELEPHONE BONDS
6.87
7.02
8.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.41
5.43
6.42
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


New Yorkers Can Take Back Their Waterfront
To the Editor:
"Students Turn Cleanup of River Into Adventure" (Sept. 21) describes the daylong experience of 1,500 volunteers on the shores of the Housatonic River in Connecticut.
You make two splendid points:


Keane Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Topro Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Classical Music in Review
Chie Sato Roden  Pianist Weill Recital Hall


Chock Full O' Nuts Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
Already facing chronic money problems, New York City's hospitals said yesterday that they would lose about $4 billion in Government revenue in the first five years of President Clinton's proposed national health plan.
In perhaps the first detailed look at how the Clinton proposal could affect local health care providers, the Greater New York Hospital Association said that cuts in Medicare and Medicaid would far outweigh increases in aid for people who now lack health insurance.
Page 1.
NEUTRALITY FOR TEACHERS?
In a repudiation of Mayor Dinkins, the United Federation of Teachers, one of the largest and most powerful unions in the city, is unlikely to make any endorsement for mayor, union officials said in a day of campaign developments.
Also spicing the political stew was an article in New York Newsday that caused politics to clash with the parks commission, with a result that was part Kabuki theater, part Fellini movie and pure psychological warfare Campaign Trail.
Page 26.


Bridge
Nine years ago Bob and Jill Blanchard of Manhattan began a legal action that eventually induced the American Contract Bridge League to abandon the scheduling of Men's Pairs and Men's Teams.
These traditional events made it impossible for a married couple, or any mixed partnership, to compete, since the parallel events were for Women's Pairs and Teams.
The Blanchard marriage has since dissolved, but their efforts have had a permanent effect: There are no longer any men's events on the calendar at national, regional or sectional level.
The regional team event played Thursday in Kiamesha Lake, N.Y., would once have been restricted to men.
As it was open, it was possible for Sande Boas of Manhattan to win her first regional title, backed by Glenn Milgrim and Jared Lilienstein, both of Manhattan, and Lapt Chan of Woodside, Queens.


Morehouse Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Corrections
A brief notice in Weekend yesterday headed "Where and When," about the New York Public Library exhibition on the Dead Sea Scrolls, misstated the library's telephone number.
It is (212) 661-7220.


CHRONICLE
SERENA STANHOPE may have given the British royal family a bit of a scare on Thursday when she failed to appear for the rehearsal of her wedding to VISCOUNT LINLEY, Princess Margaret's son and the Queen's nephew.
But for the main event -- the wedding yesterday afternoon at St.
Margaret's Church, in Westminster Abbey -- the bride, 23, was right on time, The Press Association, the British news agency, reported.
Attended by four bridesmaids, three pages and 14 ushers, the couple were married in a 40-minute ceremony conducted by the Very Rev.
Michael Mayne, the Dean of Westminster, and Canon Donald Grey, the rector of St.
Margaret's.
As they emerged from the church following what Mr.
Mayne described as "a lovely family service," bells pealed and a crowd of 5,000 cheered the viscont and his bride, the daughter of Viscount Petersham.
A 1911 Rolls-Royce took the couple to the reception at St.
James's Palace.


Chock Full O' Nuts Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Egypt Is Said to Jail a Critic of the President
A leading opposition politician was being held by the Egyptian police on charges of humiliating President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt in a newspaper article, human rights officials here said today.
It was the first time a prominent politician had been held overnight since opposition parties were allowed to operate in relative freedom over a decade ago.
Helmy Murad, vice president of the Socialist Labor Party and a former Minister of Education, was arrested on Thursday along with two journalists after publishing an article in the party newspaper, Al Shaab, on Tuesday urging Mr.
Mubarak to provide information on an unspecified arms deal, human rights official said.


Review/Television; NBC and ABC Take On CBS and Lansbury
How do you loosen Angela Lansbury's hammerlock on the Sundays-at-8 time slot she has long monopolized with "Murder, She Wrote" on CBS?
NBC, committed to 22 episodes of Steven Spielberg's "Seaquest DSV," is betting that a talking dolphin can do the trick.
ABC, giving Superman still another whirl in "Lois and Clark," is going with a hunk in a red cape.
Freighted with elaborate sets and special effects, the new productions are expensive and ambitious.
They obviously relish the possibility of toppling Ms.
Lansbury's sweet old Jessica Fletcher.
Seaquest DSV (it means deep submergence vehicle) is a futuristic submarine patrolling and exploring the world's waters in 2018.
A consultant to the series, Dr.
Robert Ballard, the oceanographer who found the sunken Titanic, insists that this is not science fiction, but that the show is predicting the future.
The pragmatic Mr.
Spielberg, still looking for a television hit after the disappointments of "Amazing Stories" and "Family Dog," is more flexible.
He says the project is part science, part fiction and "it's part complete and pure fantasy."


U.N. Economic Curbs On Pretoria Are Lifted
The General Assembly voted today to lift its call for economic sanctions against South Africa and urged all countries to end any remaining restrictions.
Although largely symbolic, the United Nations call for sanctions has discouraged banks and international financial institutions from dealing with South Africa.
The sanctions have also led many American states and cities, including New York, to penalize South Africa for its racial policy of apartheid.


Pinkerton's Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 3


Classical Music in Review
Ex Umbris  Christ and St. Stephen's Church


Alcoa reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Dance; Injecting Drama Into the Meditation
Molissa Fenley presented two vibrant premieres on Thursday night in a program that opened a two-week season at the Kitchen (512 West 19th Street, west of 10th Avenue, Chelsea).
"Tilliboyo-Escalay" and "Witches' Float" have a welcome new dramatic edge that tempers the extreme meditative tone of Ms.
Fenley's recent repertory.
The first work reverts to her earlier high dynamics, whereas "Witches' Float" has an intense ritualism as the choreographer, her face and bare chest in red body paint, engages in a silent dialogue with four inanimate figures, all female nudes by the sculptor Kiki Smith.
Typically, Ms.
Fenley's choice of music explores the international new-music scene from America to Africa.


Printronix Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Sloan's Supermarkets Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


U.N. Could Pay Its Way by Selling World Rights
To the Editor:
In "Clinton, at U.N., Lists Stiff Terms for Sending U.S. Force to Bosnia" (front page, Sept. 28), you report that the President called on the United Nations to be more selective where it sends troops in the future, saying the United States could not afford to go on subsidizing open-ended missions.


U.N. Could Pay Its Way by Selling World Rights; A Nuclear-Free Mideast
To the Editor:
The emerging reassessment of United Nations resolutions bearing on Israel in the wake of the accord signed by Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization should give prominent attention to a resolution for a nuclear-weapon-free zone adopted annually without opposition by the General Assembly since 1974.


Review/Jazz; Bravura, Quotes and Kitsch From a Young Saxophonist
Toward the end of his second set at the Village Vanguard on Thursday night, the young tenor saxophonist Joshua Redman started quoting Sonny Rollins.
Unaccompanied, he threw in bits of Mr.
Rollins's melody "St. Thomas" and some of his trademark improvisatory ideas.
Then he and his band went full tilt into the number, with Mr.
Redman using a repeated figure of Mr.
Rollins's as a motif.
It was part bravura showmanship, part homage and part esthetic exercise, all done simply because it could be done, the type of performance most young virtuosos can't seem to avoid.


Health Care in Minnesota: Model for U.S. or Novelty?
Welcome to Minnesota, where all the women are strong, all the men are good-looking and, if you believe the Clintons, all the health care providers are working happily and efficiently to hold down costs and deliver the very best care.
As President Clinton and his wife, Hillary, set about selling their health care plan, they have added a glowing new verse to Garrison Keillor's paean to Lake Wobegon, presenting this state as a model of the humane, organized and cost-effective medicine to which the nation should aspire.


Nixon Moves From Bit Part to Leading Man
For two games, the National League Championship Series has provided the expected, such as strong starting pitching by Atlanta, and the unexpected, such as the first loss at home this season by Philadelphia's Tommy Greene.
But it has produced only one major surprise, and it comes right at the top of the order.
The series, which moves to Atlanta for Game 3 this afternoon, was supposed to exhibit the National League version of the leadoff hitter's clinic.
It has done that, but contrary to expectations, the clinic is being taught by the Braves' Otis Nixon, not by Philadelphia's Lenny Dykstra, whose numbers this season had people calling him the most potent leadoff hitter since Rickey Henderson in the 1980's.


Pentagon Lifts Restrictions On Gay Troops Temporarily
The Pentagon has shelved for now its new "don't ask, don't tell" policy on homosexuals, saying it was compelled by a Federal district judge here to allow gay service members worldwide to serve openly without fear of punishment while the Government appeals the injunction.
Gay rights leaders are hailing the action.
But they are also urging gay service members to use caution in disclosing their homosexuality, advising that any action they take now might be used against them later if the injunction is lifted by a higher court.


Julius Levinson, 68, Corporate Tax Expert
Julius Levinson, an expert on corporate taxation who helped build Coltec Industries in New York into a leading manufacturer of aerospace and automotive parts, died on Tuesday at the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
He was 68 and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Levinson worked for the company from 1957 until his retirement last June, rising to vice president for taxes in 1971.
He was considered one of the nation's leading experts in Federal and international corporate taxation.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-8 A TWO-SIDED SOMALIA POLICY
The White House took two tracks on Somalia, leaving the door open for a negotiated solution that could include the clan leader Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid but also issuing tough military warnings.  1


THE SOMALIA MISSION: United Nations; Envoy, With Glass Half Full, Toasts Operation in Somalia Despite Critics
This June when the United Nations distributed wanted posters and a $10,000 reward for the capture of Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, a fugitive Somali clan leader, his loyalists promptly responded in kind.
Within days, rough photocopied handouts offered $1 million to anyone who handed over the United Nations special envoy in Somalia, Adm.
Jonathan Howe, referred to in posters and known throughout Mogadishu as Animal Howe.


Amdahl Expects to Report Another Losing Quarter
The Amdahl Corporation said today that it expected to report a third-quarter operating loss that would be considerably larger than the loss it reported in the second quarter.
Amdahl, a maker of mainframe computers, lost $23.7 million in the second quarter.
With the third-quarter loss, Amdahl will have lost money for three consecutive quarters, and analysts said it was unlikely to show near-term improvement.


What Does Giuliani Stand For? Cutting Services, Dinkins Says
ON THE SCREEN: Elongated, black and white photograph of a grimacing Rudolph W. Giuliani fills the left side of the screen over throbbing music and male narrator's sepulchral voice, while highlights of the script scroll up on the right, in front of a cork brown bulletin-board backgrouns.
When specific Giuliani proposals are cited, newspaper headlines appear on the screen, like: "Rudy Rx: Sell Off City Hosps" from the New York Post.
PRODUCER: Doak, Shrum, Harris, Carrier, Devine of Washington


Seles May Come Back In Evert Celebrity Meet
MONICA SELES could return to tennis three weeks from today at the CHRIS EVERT celebrity tournament in Boca Raton, Fla.
Evert said she has talked to Seles about competing and that the former No. 1 player, who was stabbed in the back during a tournament in Germany in April, has just started to hit some balls.


A.J. Day 1 for Bulls Arrives to Brave Words
Jerry Krause, the general manager of the Michael Jordan-less Chicago Bulls, kept saying that when he awoke Thursday morning, the sun was shining and the newspapers contained none of his friends' or relatives' obituaries.
He didn't say anything about today.
This was the day the reality of Jordan's retirement announcement on Wednesday finally hit home.
The Bulls opened their training camp this morning, and while basketball's Elvis happened to be in the building, he was not in uniform.
Everyone pretty much agreed with Coach Phil Jackson, who said: "I know the potential for him coming back next season is out there, but that's a whole year away. I'm sure he won't be playing this season, and that's what we're playing for."


INSIDE
Fears for Haiti's Fragility
As Haiti counts down the days to democracy, many are wondering if the violence exploding there will prevent a peaceful transition.
Page 4.
Motorman Faulted in Crash
Transit officials said Thursday's subway crash was caused by a train operator who ran a red light and then probably tried to cover it up.
Page 25.
Letting Gay Troops Be Open
Challenged by a Federal judge, the Pentagon has suspended its policy on homosexuals and will allow them to serve openly without reprisal.
Page 9.
White SOx Win, 6-1Z
Wilson Alvarez pitched Chicago over the Blue Jays, 6-1. in game 3 of the American League playoffs.
Page 31.


After Deluge, Farmers Go Shopping
Many fields along Midwestern rivers lie ruined from the summer's flooding, and most crops throughout the region were planted so late that there is more danger than usual that frost will interfere with the harvest.
But when more than 100,000 farmers gathered last week in Amana, Iowa, for the 41st annual Farm Progress Show, the mood was oddly buoyant.
"I've been surprised at what a good mood the farmers are in," said Kenny Wagahoff, surveying the crowds from the tent that his company, Top Air Manufacturing of Parkersburg, Iowa, had set up at Amana Farms Inc. to show off its spraying equipment.
"It's like they've figured they may as well look ahead to next year."


Topro Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Classical Music in Review
Yoshiko Okada  Pianist Carnegie Hall


Burlington Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stocks End Day Mixed As Dow Moves Up 1.11
Stocks were mixed yesterday despite a strong performance by the bond market, where prices gained and yields fell on employment figures that traders interpreted as showing the economy was still underperforming.
Analysts said the chief reason for the stock market's lackluster performance was investor concern over forthcoming third-quarter corporate earnings reports.


George Boehm, 71, Science Journalist And Bridge Expert
George A. W. Boehm, a journalist and author on scientific subjects and an expert in contract bridge, died on Thursday at Beth Israel Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 71.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


Mayoral Race Makes Park a Field for Politics
When politics clashed with the New York City Parks Commissioner yesterday the result was part Kabuki theater, part Fellini movie and pure psychological warfare.
A New York Newsday article yesterday challenged the Dinkins administration with running campaign advertisements that misrepresented its "Fields of Dreams" program as having turned 40 vacant lots into clean and safe ballfields.
Instead, the newspaper described 12 of the fields as unplayable and ran a photograph of one that is being used as a parking lot.


Small Stocks: More Than a Fleeting Fad
Stocks of small companies have posted impressive gains recently, but will they do better than stocks of large companies over the long haul?
A growing number of investment managers say yes, and several studies bear them out.
Over the last 30 years, small companies have produced a cumulative return more than twice that of large companies, albeit with some years of gut-wrenching losses, according to Dimensional Fund Advisers, a San Mateo, Calif., investment company.


A Pioneer Of Realism
Consuelo Kanaga (1894-1978) was one of America's most important photographers.
Yet largely because she disdained wealth, fame and self-promotion, her transcendent images have never received the acclaim they deserve.
The photographs on this page appear in the first major retrospective of her work, "Consuelo Kanaga: An American Photographer," which will open Friday at the Brooklyn Museum.
Born in Astoria, Ore., Kanaga was hired in 1915 as a reporter at The San Francisco Chronicle but quickly became more interested in the work of the paper's photographers.
She took a job in the darkroom and was eventually named a staff photographer.


Keane Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Term Insurance May Outlive Its Usefulness Well Before Retirement
Are you growing too old for term life insurance?
That's a question too rarely asked, financial advisers say.
"People just go on, year after year, paying the premiums because they have always been told they must have life insurance," said Richard Feld, a certified public accountant in Teaneck, N.J.


Atmel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stolt-Nielsen S.A. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


How the Danes Also Rescued the Torah Scrolls
To the Editor:
To "Danes Commemorate Rescue of Jews From Nazis" (news article, Sept. 28), your gripping account of how Denmark rescued its Jews from under the noses of its World War II occupiers, I would add a further remarkable Danish act of preservation.


Luby's Cafeterias Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Syntellect Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American President Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 17


Dollar Falls Against Mark But Rises in Yen Trading
The dollar fell sharply against the German mark and several other leading currencies yesterday after the September employment report failed to convince investors that the economy is growing fast enough to push up interest rates.
But it rose against the Japanese yen after a Treasury official said the dollar should not be allowed to fall too far in an effort to increase American exports.
A weak dollar makes American goods less expensive abroad.


Clinton Visits New Jersey Hospital to Press His Health Plan


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The unemployment rate remained at 6.7 percent in September, with the labor market improving only modestly by adding 156,000 payroll jobs.
Although the results matched expectations, some secondary numbers reflected more weakness than had been expected.
The report sent the dollar down against European currencies and ignited a powerful rally in the bond market.  [ Page 39. ]
Suspicion that some traders made big profits in Treasury bond futures using an unauthorized leak of the September employment data has prompted an investigation by the Chicago Board of Trade and the Labor Department.  [ 51. ]


Dollar Falls Against Mark But Rises in Yen Trading
The dollar fell sharply against the German mark and several other leading currencies yesterday after the September employment report failed to convince investors that the economy is growing fast enough to push up interest rates.
But it rose against the Japanese yen after a Treasury official said the dollar should not be allowed to fall too far in an effort to increase American exports.
A weak dollar makes American goods less expensive abroad.


Burlington Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New York's Lucrative Offer Persuades Unicef to Stay
Unicef, the United Nations relief organization that had considered moving to New Rochelle, said yesterday it would remain in its current headquarters across from the United Nations and expand into 14 floors of a nearby Manhattan office tower.
The agency, which had been negotiating with the two cities for three years and had even considered moving to Germany, said it would accept a lucrative package of financial incentives offered by the Dinkins administration.


RPM Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Corrections
Because of a production error, the continuation of a front-page article yesterday about a dispute within the Clinton Administration over policy toward Haiti was omitted from some copies.
Readers wishing copies of the complete article may write to Production Quality Control, The New York Times, 229 West 43d Street, New York, N.Y. 10036.


Richard Bertelsen, Fidelity Spokesman And Chronicler, 42
Richard A. Bertelsen, a top officer of Fidelity Investments, the Boston-based financial empire, was found dead in his Boston home on Monday.
He was 42.
A corporate statement said he appeared to have died of natural causes.


Hanoi Journal; Promise of Prosperity Threatens a City's Charm
Nguyen Lan stands between this 1,000-year-old capital and the wrecking ball that has destroyed so much of the architectural heritage of Southeast Asia.
And he would just as soon be standing somewhere else.
"I know that our Government leaders support preservation of the old city," said Mr.
Lan, the chief Government architect of Hanoi.
"They know its beauty."


Qmed Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Abbott Laboratories reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Headline
We've won before we even take the field.
Just to have our flag raised is better than any victory. -- SAEB ERAKAT, a Palestinian negotiator, on a soccer match in Jericho.  [ 8:3. ]


No Headline
The Rev.
Arie R. Brouwer, an internationally known church leader and a former General Secretary of the National Council of Churches, died on Thursday at his home in Teaneck, N.J.
He was 58.
The cause was colon cancer, family members said.


U.N. Says Iraq Takes First Steps to Comply on Arms Controls
In what appears to be steady movement toward meeting United Nations conditions for the lifting of economic sanctions, Iraq turned over documents today listing former arms suppliers in Baghdad and said Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz would travel to the United Nations in November for further talks.
"There was considerable progress in the technical areas," said Rolf Ekeus, the chairman of the United Nations special commission implementing the Gulf War cease-fire terms.
"Iraq provided us with a large amount of new data on past production of prohibited weapons or items."


Borough Tourist's Guide To the Border Crossing
IN a city whose parts are mostly separated by water, the Brooklyn-Queens line is singular as the only major land boundary dividing boroughs, stretching for 12 undefended miles from the East River to Jamaica Bay.
And as Staten Island, the most insular of the city's parts, contemplates secession -- thereby contesting the frosty notion that good moats make good neighbors -- it seemed both timely and intriguing to wander the Brooklyn-Queens frontier looking for signs of border tensions or interborough amity.


Qmed Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


THE SOMALIA MISSION: Voices; A Common Cry Across the U.S.: It's Time to Exit
President Clinton's decision to send more troops to Somalia, even while setting a deadline for a final United States pullout, did not satisfy Tony Bright.
"It just won't work," he said.


Emile Albert Berol, 81, A Pencil Manufacturer
Emile Albert Berol, former president and chairman of the Eagle Pencil Company, later called the Berol Corporation, died at his home in Bedford Hills, N.Y., on Wednesday.
He was 81.
He died after a fall, his family said.


Report on Assault on Waco Cult Contradicts Reno's Explanations
The Justice Department provided new information today that contradicted Attorney General Janet Reno's explanation of why she ordered the tear gas assault on the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex., in April.
The assault ended in a fire that killed at least 75 cult members, many of them children.
The new details on the assault were disclosed in a portion of a three-part report prepared by the Justice Department on its handling of the 51-day standoff between cult members and Federal agents.


THE SOMALIA MISSION: Overview; U.S. MIXES SIGNALS TO SOMALI GENERAL ON ITS NEXT STEPS
President Clinton and his senior advisers took two tracks on Somalia today, leaving the door open for a negotiated political solution that could include the factional leader Mohammed Farah Aidid, but also issuing tough military warnings intended to protect American forces until reinforcements arrive.
Clinton Administration officials said they were prepared to mount an armed rescue of an imprisoned American helicopter pilot and would not rule out attacking General Aidid.


Snapping Back Could Be a Problem
The snap was comfortable, placed just the way Boomer Esiason liked it.
Yes, that was Jim Sweeney who was making the exchange today at Jets practice.
On Tuesday the Jets said Sweeney could miss three to six weeks with the ankle injury he sustained in Sunday's loss to the Philadelphia Eagles.
He has been the starting center for the last 47 games and has not missed a start somewhere on the offensive line since 1984, when he was a rookie.


U.N. Could Pay Its Way by Selling World Rights; Membership for Taiwan
To the Editor:
Since 1971, the people on Taiwan have been denied representation in the United Nations and other international bodies.
Taiwan's isolation was reaffirmed this year when a proposal by seven Central American countries to study Taiwan membership in the United Nations was not placed on the agenda.
For a country like Taiwan with a population larger than two-thirds of the world's nations, vast economic resources, a rich cultural heritage and a long history of democratic struggle, such a denial is an abuse of human rights and contrary to the principle of universality embraced by the United Nations.


Review/Film Festival; Infiltrating the Land of Sugar Plums
Tim Burton is already well known as a master of macabre ingenuity, but "Tim Burton's the Nightmare Before Christmas" presents him in a new light.
This delectably ghoulish fairy tale, conceived by Mr.
Burton as a full-length film made in stop-motion animation (think of the California Raisins on a dark and stormy night), has a clever visual format that keeps it streamlined and sharp.
As directed painstakingly by Henry Selick, a stop-motion veteran who worked from Mr.
Burton's blueprint, this buoyant film blends the most likable aspects of "Edward Scissorhands," "Beetlejuice" and "Batman," and sends them off to Toyland.
It also stamps the unmistakable Burton sensibility onto every frame.
"Tim Burton's the Nightmare Before Christmas" is fun for the whole Addams family, as well as for anyone else inclined to appreciate the spectacle of Santa Claus being kidnapped and harassed.
It is Mr.
Burton's peculiar gift to find benign mischief in that kind of spectacle, just as Danny Elfman, who wrote the many serviceable songs that turn this into a full-fledged movie musical, is capable of writing gleefully in a minor key.


Review/Opera; A Little Devil Who Was Too Good
One of the surprises of the New York City Opera's World Premiere Festival this week was that a minor work, commissioned by NBC for television in 1955, turned out to be an unduly neglected and charming theater piece.
Lukas Foss meant "Griffelkin," an opera about a 10-year-old devil who can't quite succeed in hell, to appeal to both children and adults, and I think it will.
If the revised version of the score, which had its premiere on Thursday night, were pruned, particularly in the second act, it could become a minor classic.
"Griffelkin" avoids almost all the pitfalls of adult works about, and partly for, children: it swerves into sentimentality without becoming mawkish; it celebrates innocence without being banal, and it never condescends to its characters or its subject.
Mr.
Foss's score, which includes a fair number of academic niceties (including a canon and lighthearted allusions to Mozart), is instantly accessible, managing to recall Stravinsky, Copland and hints of the young Leonard Bernstein, while still sounding original.
It has its longueurs and times of forced gaiety and tumult, particularly in the last half of the second act (the first act could easily be combined with the second), but the third act is strikingly sure-footed.
Overall, Mr.
Foss's wry music is a fine foil for Alastair Reid's literate, often rhyming libretto.


Electro Rent Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Pinkerton's Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 3


Sloan's Supermarkets Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Student Loan Marketing Assn.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stieglitz Photograph Brings Record Price
A 1920 photograph by Alfred Stieglitz of the hands of his wife, the artist Georgia O'Keeffe, was sold at Christie's in New York yesterday for $398,500, making it the highest price ever paid at auction for a photograph.
The previous auction record for a photograph was $193,895 for Man Ray's "Glass Tears," which sold at Sotheby's in London in May.
"This print is as important as anything you could imagine in 20th-century art," said Rick Webster, head of Christie's photograph department, who added that the buyer wished to remain anonymous.


Agency Says Motorman's Error May Have Caused Accident
The Brooklyn subway crash on Thursday was caused by a train operator who intentionally ran a red light and who then probably tried to cover it up, Transit Authority officials said yesterday.
The crash, which officials said was the first involving two passenger trains since July 1981, pointed to a systemwide problem in insuring rider safety: the near total reliance on operators to follow the rules.
Forty-two passengers were sent to hospitals and three remained hospitalized, all in stable condition.


OEA Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Classical Music in Review
'Voila Viola'  Merkin Concert Hall


Morehouse Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Corrections
An obituary headline yesterday about Brother Augustine Philip Nelan, the president of Manhattan College from 1953 to 1962, who died on Tuesday, referred to him incorrectly.
He was a Christian brother in the Roman Catholic Church, not a monk.
Christian brothers devote themselves to education.


Bandag Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
"What a treat," said Justice SANDRA DAY O'CONNOR yesterday as she prepared to swear in JANE ALEXANDER as chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Arts.
In the vaulted splendor of the Great Hall of the Library of Congress, Justice O'Connor recalled seeing Ms.
Alexander back in the 1970's in the play "First Monday in October," about a fictional first woman to serve on the Supreme Court.
"A little prophetic, I guess," the Justice said with a smile.
Calling Justice O'Connor her "role model," Ms.
Alexander recalled that her character in "First Monday in October" was a "blond conservative from the West with a great game of tennis, and lo and behold, a few years later we had a blonde on the court who played a great game of tennis."


Squabbling Sox Find a Unifying Force in Alvarez
The Chicago White Sox, feudin' and fussin' like some of their American League playoff predecessors, stopped jabbering long enough tonight and gained their first victory over the Toronto Blue Jays.
In the process, they made league history.
With Wilson Alvarez dominating the Blue Jays, allowing only one hit and two base runners in the final five innings, the White Sox won, 6-1, and became the first A.L. team to lose the first two games of the four-of-seven-game pennant playoff at home, then win a game before the series ended.
Four previous times a visiting team won the first two games, and each time that team went on to sweep the series.


The Hunt for Good Value
Defining good value has a lot to do with figuring out where to find it.
And the answer to that is: You can find it anywhere - with a good pair of eyes.
To make the point, we asked two interior designers and an architect to shop the chain stores we all use - retailers with no "to the trade only" signs on their doors - then to furnish rooms typical of thos we inhabit.
Through the eyes of these designers, you'll see that it's not where you shop but what you pick that counts.
Ultimately, good value depends on well-considered choices and the confidence to make thos choices personal.


Shuler Drives Tennessee To Victory
Tennessee 28, Arkansas 14
Heath Shuler tied a 23-year-old school record with his 18th touchdown pass of the season and scored two touchdowns rushing to lead Tennessee past Arkansas, 28-14, at Little Rock, Ark.
The Volunteers are ranked No. 11 in the Associated Press poll and No. 22 in The New York Times computer ranking.


Webber Out of Hospital
CHRIS WEBBER, the top pick in the National Basketball Association draft, was released from Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit yesterday, three days after undergoing an appendectomy.
Webber missed the start of training camp for the Golden State Warriors.


Corrections
A picture caption on page 20 of the Travel section today, with a listing of fall and winter cruises, misstates the ownership of a ship in the Panama Canal and carries an incorrect credit line.
The ship is the Crown Odyssey, and the picture is by the Royal Cruise Line, not Cunard.


Stop the World, They Want to Get On
The marathon that started 18 months ago with 141 nations seeking to qualify for the 1994 World Cup reaches a crucial stage this week, starting with games today that will determine two of the 24 finalists in the quadrennial competition, to be played in the United States next summer.
Two of the three finalists from Africa will be decided this afternoon, when Zambia visits Morocco and Cameroon plays host to Zimbabwe.
Nigeria qualified Friday.
Its 1-1 tie with Algeria in Algiers enabled Nigeria to edge out the Ivory Coast on goal differential.


The Light Blue Is Turned Black and Blue by Lafayette
The day Coach Ray Tellier can get his team to play well on both sides of the ball is the day Columbia (1-3) may win another game.
It didn't happen yesterday, as Lafayette rolled over the Lions, 58-6, at Wien Stadium.
At first, this didn't look like the same Columbia defense that allowed Colgate's awesome three-touchdown comeback in the last five minutes last week.
This week, the Lion defense set up several opportunities for the offense to score against Lafayette early.
And this Lion defense actually held Lafayette (3-2, 1-0 Patriot League) a few times near the goal line, otherwise the Leopards would have had even more points.


Corrections
An answer in the Q and A column on Sept. 19 about the tax consequences of the gift of a home to a family member misstated the person responsible for paying the taxes.
Gift taxes on such a transfer would be paid by the donor.


Merchants Say a Change in Bus Routes Hurts
Merchants in downtown Jamaica are once again fighting to preserve what they regard as the key to their economic well-being, the very thing they say insures the return of their customers each day: bus routes.
The Transit Authority last month began rerouting six bus lines that ran along Jamaica Avenue, the neighborhood's main commercial strip.
The goal was to improve service to and from the Archer Avenue station, a stop on the E, F and J subway lines.


Leaping the Rhetorical Gap
AT A MEETING with the President in the Cabinet Room, with mouth-filling words like multilateral and multinational flying around, a Senator wondered if they weren't losing touch with the words that real people use in everyday life.
That off-the-record remark about our language was promptly leaked to this department.
At a subsequent interview with President Clinton, I used it to form the basis for a penetrating question. (Actually, my question was a not overly harsh "Can you give me a little more on that?" but even so, it penetrated.)


IN SHORT: FICTION
FICTIVE MYSTERY  THERE IS NO BORGES
By Gerhard Kopf.  Braziller, $18.50.


'SeaQuest': Time to Sink Or Swim
Check one. "Seaquest DSV," NBC's new hourlong program, is:
(a): A ratings success.
A blend of action, adventure and undersea wonder.
A perfect family entertainment franchise for the important 8 P.M.
Sunday time slot.
A showcase for top-notch special effects.
A credit to the creative vision and marketing savvy of NBC, Universal Television, and most of all, the series executive producer, Steven Spielberg.
(b): A mess.
An embarrassment.
Gee-whiz computer graphics shoehorned around cliched characters, lame dialogue and weak stories.
A show in backstage turmoil: so far, two departed co-executive producers, plus an unhappy star.
Popular at first, true, but already falling behind CBS's hoary hit "Murder, She Wrote." Further proof that Mr.
Spielberg can't do television.


Divorced


In the Region/Connecticut; Making Gold-Coast Affordable Housing a Reality
DECADE after decade, Fairfield County's wealthier towns have talked about affordable housing, but as a subject for action it has been as intractable as the weather.
Barely noting state guidelines suggesting that a minimum of 10 percent of housing be in the "affordable" category -- which means $100,000 for a family of four in Fairfield County earning $40,000 a year -- most communities remain at about 2 percent.
Only the larger cities of Bridgeport and Stamford exceed the minimum.
Nevertheless, 126 units of new or renovated affordable housing have been produced around the county by the Fairfield 2000 Homes Corporation, a group of volunteer movers and shakers founded in 1987.


A New F.D.R. Ramp for 48th Street
After several years of appeals from neighborhood residents, city officials have announced plans to build a new entrance ramp to the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive at East 48th Street, reversing an earlier decision.
The old ramp, 600 feet long, was closed in 1987 during construction on the drive and never reopened.
Reasons given were structural deterioration and safety concerns. (The ramp forced vehicles into the fast left lane on the F.D.R., an arrangement that would violate new Federal regulations.)


The Case for the Defense
To the Editor:
Reforms in the legal profession are constantly under way and many have already been in place for a decade or more.
For example, our medical malpractice laws in New York were changed in 1985.
As far as consumers are concerned, they were not changed for the better.
Now meritorious cases against incompetent physicians are rejected because lawyers and clients cannot afford the expenses involved in litigating these matters.
Naturally, doctors and their insurance companies are pleased because court filings have gone way down.
Insurance companies have not, however, reduced their rates or their profits.
Lawyers suffered substantial losses of income and consumers are left with injuries and no remedies.


Paul Clifford, 82, Mathematician Who Focused on Quality Control
Paul C. Clifford, a professor of mathematics and a pioneer in the use of statistical equations for industrial quality control, died Wednesday at Newark Beth Israel Medical Center.
He was 82 and lived in Montclair, N.J.
The cause was complications from Alzheimer's disease, his family said.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 26 about art exhibitions in Europe misstated the first name of an artist in a group show at the Grand Palais in Paris through Jan. 3.
He is Felix Vallotton, not Maurice.


Years of Champaign Misery Finally End for Ohio State
Ohio State 20, Illinois 12
It was a typical Ohio State-Illinois game, with fumbles, field goals and good defense.
But for the first time in six years, the Buckeyes won.


Plant Now for Best Results in Spring
THIS is an odd time of year for most gardeners.
The tree leaves are beginning to turn.
There are signals everywhere that the growing period is going fast.
Some may think about moving activities indoors.
Yet there is reluctance.
It is so delightful to be outside.
Lawns still need mowing.
There is an enormous amount of yardwork still to be done.
Don't put the tools away.
Savor the month.


A Checklist for a Sagging City
Last Sunday, more than 200 residents of the Upper West Side, armed with clipboards, walked up and down the neighborhood's streets and avenues, looking for cracked pavement, peeling paint, unsafe wires, dying trees and other detritus of a decaying city.
Jessica Mates, a volunteer leader, eyed a sagging grating by the side of a building.
"That's the kind of thing that gets worse and worse if you don't fix it," she said.


The House That Junk Built
IT all started with a snapshot of a roof with a bunch of potted plants lined up along a curious blue plastic wall.
"The enclosed picture shows one corner of our Brooklyn Heights roof terrace," wrote Richard P. Rosenthal, an architect who lives on Hicks Street.
"The roof has direct exposure to the harbor with its constant winds. To protect the plants, my wife sewed New York Times wrappers onto webbing strips and wove them through the rail." The pots, he added, were white plastic construction-material pails -- of the type found at any building site around town.


Corrections
Because of a producer's schedule change, a theater listing on page 42 of the Arts and Leisure section today for "Angels in America: Perestroika" is outdated.
Previews will begin on Oct. 19, not on Saturday.


The Yangtze's Gorges
IT is at dawn that the murky waters of the Yangtze River are most mysterious.
As little cargo boats emerge from the mist like apparitions, it seems entirely possible that the Three Gorges here in central China were formed not by geological forces but by the goddess Yao Ji and the 12 dragons.
The 12 dragons, as local folk can tell you, used to bully and oppress the peasants along the Yangtze.
Then Yao Ji showed up on the top of a nearby cloud and pointed her finger at the dragons, killing them.
Unfortunately, the goddess hadn't thought the problem through.
The bodies of the dragons left 12 huge mountains that blocked the river and turned the region into a huge sea.


Sally Cantey, Daniel Connolly
Sally Cantey, the deputy director of community relations for the Manhattan District Attorney's office, was married on Friday to Daniel Scott Connolly, an assistant district attorney in that office.
The Rev.
James Coleman performed the ceremony at St.
George Roman Catholic Church in Guilford, Conn.
Mrs.
Connolly, 31, graduated cum laude from Tufts University and received a master's degree in literature from New York University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph D. Cantey of Guilford.
Her father retired as the president of Pension Service Inc., a developer of pension plans for small businesses, in New Haven.


Phone 'Maps' In Orlando
A New York-based company called Wayfinder and Sprint/United Telephone-Florida have teamed up to offer electronic driving directions from 2,500 pay phones in the Orlando area.
The 24-hour service, called Telemap, began on Sept. 23.
Within the next year, a Sprint/United spokesman said, the service will be available at an additional 7,000 pay phones in Tallahassee, Fort Walton Beach, Ocala, Fort Myers and Naples.


7 Turnovers Later, Huskies Rally to Edge Cal, 24-23
Washington 24, California 23
This time, California was the victim of a comeback.


Plant Now for Best Results in Spring
THIS is an odd time of year for most gardeners.
The tree leaves are beginning to turn.
There are signals everywhere that the growing period is going fast.
Some may think about moving activities indoors.
Yet there is reluctance.
It is so delightful to be outside.
Lawns still need mowing.
There is an enormous amount of yardwork still to be done.
Don't put the tools away.
Savor the month.


Patrol the Pathway, Don't Reroute It
When Westchester County  [ "Safety vs. Esthetics on Bronx River," Aug. 8 ]  states that it plans to elevate and reroute more than a mile of the paved Bronx River Pathway because of two sexual assaults that occurred in the park in the last two years, they've got to be kidding.
Do county officials believe the problem will be solved by making the entire length of the path from Harney Road southward visible to drivers on the Bronx River Parkway?
Are they suggesting that the safety of women will be determined by these drivers?
How ridiculous!
A driver is supposed to be watching the road, not the path for possible rapes. (Does the county want to be responsible for more car accidents?)


A Touch of Crass
Finally, let us not forget the value of vulgarity and those dearly beloved objects that glow only in the eyes of their owners.
They are the modern equivalents of the household gods the ancients enshrined in their homes to bring luck and ward off evil.
To these personal icons, standard notions of taste and decorum do not apply.
Ask a random group, as we have here, and you'll be surprised to discover the trash that is treasured.
One dollar, pour-it-yourself wax model of Grauman's Chinese Theater.
Miniature plaster-of Paris Venus de Milo wearing a shower cap.
Maori "Paut" clubs from New Zealand made of whalebone, to fend off enemies.
One-cup coffee maker.
Giants screw embedded in a wooden peg.
Pet tombstone with the word "hen" scratched on it.
Photo of the Dartmouth class of 1912, featuring a housemother in a starched collar.
Cast of a 20-inch waist, made when it owner was 23 years old.
Plastic keychain in the shape of a pat of butter concealing a tape measure.
A piece of roofing slate etched with a drawing of a cat in a trash can.
Heart-shaped gold locket displayed with a leaf of parsley inside.
Lobster-claw mobile.
Rubber bullet.
Cast-iron newspaper weight.
John Lennon's 1976 Musicians' Union card, signed with a happy face.
Wooden snakes. 1950's clay doll bought on the Atlantic City boardwalk.
A spiral-shaped earring tree.
World War I poster, hung in the bathroom, that says "Duty calls".
"Lamb Chop," a stuffed animal in a tuxedo.
Pink china miniature icebox perched on the back of a pink pig.
Eighteen land-snail shells.
Mirror with duck feet.
Six-inch olive-jar cork.
Cast-iron softball.
Headdress feathers of a dance-hall girl.
Sidewalk portrait of Ruggles, a dog.
Pea-green felt lamp shade, shaped like a cowboy hat.
Two-inch green rubber Statue of Liberty.
Three-dollar Kachina doll with a punk haircut.
Eighteen-inch purple "G" from a Gulf Oil sign.
Red, yellow and blue neon crown.
Birdhouse shaped like a corner deli.
Stuffed cockroach puppet.
Fake palm trees.
Fluorescent rubber skull.
Stuffed armadillo.
Crushed dinosaur eggshells.
Stack of colorful dryer lint.


On View: Books, Prints, Famous People
In the last couple of years, Jane Stubbs's book parties have become an established stop on the Upper East Side social circuit.
Cheery and self-effacing, Mrs.
Stubbs, 35, who grew up in Natchez, Miss., is the co-owner, with her husband, John, of Stubbs Books and Prints, a two-story shop at 153 East 70 Street that is crammed with prints and books on subjects like architecture, gardening and travel.


Calling it a Career


Blood Gave AIDS Virus to Over 300 Germans
Germany's Minister of Health has rejected calls for his resignation over a scandal stemming from the distribution of blood infected with the virus that causes AIDS.
"My political responsibility is to protect people," the official, Horst Seehofer, told Parliament on Friday.
"I cannot do that by stepping back from difficult problems."


The Better to Sell You With . . .
Joni Evans, the former publisher who is now an agent at William Morris, has signed an author she used to edit at her Random House imprint, Turtle Bay Books.
Ms.
Evans recently lured Dalma Heyn, the author of "The Erotic Silence of the American Wife," away from the Virginia Barber agency.


NAVY'S SECRETARY HAS HIS OWN FIGHT
Overruled in his first major decision as the Navy's new top civilian, John H. Dalton is fighting to save his credibility as well as a working relationship with his top military officer at a time when the Navy remains dogged by a two-year-old sexual harassment scandal.
Defense Secretary Les Aspin's reversal this week of Mr.
Dalton's call to remove the Navy's top officer, Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, for failing to show leadership at the 1991 Tailhook Association convention, was more than simply an embarrassment.
It raised serious questions about whether the Navy Secretary can still work effectively with Admiral Kelso, the chief of naval operations.


Beyond Foley Square: Acting Like a Tourist Close to Home; Queens
The courthouses in Queens are scattered in three areas, and jurors are assigned wherever they are needed.
If you are assigned to Kew Gardens, an hour or so in free time can easily be spent in the boutiques, jewelers and other stores on Austin Street in Forest Hills.


F.Y.I.
Marble Hill's Exile Q.  Why is there a small piece of Manhattan in the Bronx?
Did it defect?
What area code does it take?
And which Borough President do residents vote for?


Glass Distinctions
Tra Vigne, the popular restaurant in the Napa Valley, caused a minor tremor in the vineyards by serving wine in a stubby tumbler rather than a traditional stemmed glass.
The growers were not amused.
Local wines should be shown to their best advantage, they argued.
Industry leaders warned of an erosion of standards.
The wine press covered the crisis in depth.


IF PRODUCTIVITY'S RISING, WHY ARE JOBS PAYING LESS?
Steven Rattner is excessively cavalier about the people who lose their jobs during what he describes as productivity upturns; more important, he offers no evidence that new jobs will actually result from the current upturn ("If Productivity's Rising, Why Are Jobs Paying Less?" Sept. 19).
To top it off, his nostrums include the same ones that are always offered by the business community: tax incentives (for industry, naturally, not the job seekers), deficit reduction and less Government interference in private enterprise.
And as might be expected, Rattner vetoes Government policy that would actually create jobs, whether through public works or "industrial policy."


Elyssa Silverman, S. D. Rosenbaum
Elyssa Ayn Silverman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey Silverman of New York, was married last evening to Scott Daniel Rosenbaum, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Kenneth Rosenbaum of Syosset, L.I.
Rabbi Joseph Potasnik performed the ceremony at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Rosenbaum, 23, is a public relations and marketing assistant at Tommy Hilfiger U.S.A., a clothing maker in New York.
She graduated from American University.
Her father is a senior managing director at Spear, Leeds &amp; Kellogg, a securities brokerage in New York.


New Yorkers &amp; Co.
Textile Company Taps Brooklyn Artists for Designs When Homemaker Industries, a manufacturer and importer of textiles based in Manhattan, decided to add ethnic patterns to its rugs and table linens, the company called the Mayor's Office of African-American and Caribbean Affairs in search of artists.
It was quickly referred to the Bedford-Stuyvesant Restoration Corporation, a community center with an arts and culture unit.


Nicholas Kisburg, 78, a Lobbyist For Teamsters and a Social Critic
Nicholas M. Kisburg, a longtime lobbyist for the International Brotherhood of Teamsters in New York and a sharp critic of the city's welfare system in the late 1960's and the 1970's, died on Monday at a nursing home in Penobscot, Maine.
He was 78 and had lived in Blue Hill, Me., since retiring in 1979.
He died in his sleep due to complications from emphysema, said his wife, Anne.


In 'Flyin' West,' Women of Fortitude
WHEN Sophie Washington goes gunning after Frank Charles in mid-Act II of "Flyin' West," the audience at the Crossroads Theater is openly rooting for her.
But wait.
Miss Leah has a more benignly militant plan for doing away with a wife abuser and a swindler, and once that is let out, there is no containing the cheers at Crossroads.
Everyone is ready for the kill.


E.T., Don't Call Us, We'll Call You. Someday.
LAST year, on the 500th anniversary of Columbus's arrival, NASA announced a 10-year project to scan the skies for radio waves emitted by alien civilizations.
As Columbus Day 1993 comes around, the program is being canceled, the $1 million a month needed to sustain it eliminated from the budget by a House-Senate conference committee.
It was as though the Great Navigator, having barely sailed beyond the Canary Islands, was yanked home by Queen Isabella, who decided that, on second thought, she'd rather keep her jewels.
The astronomers in charge of the project, the High Resolution Microwave Survey, were naturally disappointed and began looking for a reasonable facsimile of Edward P. Bass, the Texas billionaire who bankrolled Biosphere 2 in Arizona.
Such persistence is testimony to the peculiar hubris that convinces us there are others out there, enough like ourselves that we can hope to understand them, and vice versa.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 10, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
2
THE AGE OF INNOCENCE, by Edith Wharton. (Collier/Macmillan, $5.95.) The 1920 novel about New York society life in the 1870's.
2
5
DRAGON TEARS, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) Two police detectives try to cope with a demonic serial killer in southern California.
3
4
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
4
34
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
5
89
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
6
78
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
7
18
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
8*
1
FORBIDDEN, by Elizabeth Lowell. (Avon, $5.99.) A woman in flight from a love that has been prophesied to be fatal.
9*
7
THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) A businesswoman's fortunes are imperiled by past and present secrets.
10
2
MITIGATING CIRCUMSTANCES, by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg. (Signet, $5.99.) A woman's revenge after she and a daughter are attacked.
11
25
SPHERE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) Four scientists explore an alien spaceship found on the ocean floor.
12
41
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The investigation of a woman's death involves the American-Japanese rivalry.
13
3
THE SECRET HISTORY, by Donna Tartt. (Ivy, $6.99.) Close friends at a small college must deal with the consequences of a crime.
14
3
HIDDEN TALENTS, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.99.) The romance of a creative woman and a hard-boiled businessman.
15
41
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their mothers.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
4
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
518
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
3*
4
SAVE YOUR JOB, SAVE OUR COUNTRY, by Ross Perot with Pat Choate. (Hyperion, $6.95.) Arguments against the ratification of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
4
34
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
5*
2
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Bantam, $6.99.) The autobiography of the general.
6*
8
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces.
7
24
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
8
6
PRINCESS, by Jean P. Sasson. (Avon, $5.50.) Life as lived by a member of the royal family and other women in Saudi Arabia.
9
104
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
10
7
I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim Jerome. (Pocket, $5.99.) The autobiography of the television talk show host.
11*
1
THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH SECURITY PLAN. (Times Books/Random House, $8.) The draft report of the Clinton Administration's proposals for health care reform.
12
13
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
13
125
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
14*
21
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President.
15
21
THE GOVERNMENT RACKET, by Martin L. Gross. (Bantam, $7.99.) Examples of waste.
16*
11
A ROSE FOR HER GRAVE, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) Six true-crime stories.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
2
THE DAYS ARE JUST PACKED, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A new collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
138
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $9.95.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
3
154
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
16
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 25, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Move Over, Blazer
Fall fashion's first big winner is the chenille sweater, as soft as a horse's nose, in jewel-tone colors.
Many women are wearing them for day, evening and weekends.
The popularity of the sweater is due not only to its tactile quality but also to its availability in a wide range of prices.
Chenille sweaters are loose, oversize and worn outside trousers, skirts and leggings.
For many women, they are replacing the fall blazer.


Annette Mathieu and William Bialosky
FRIENDS describe Annette Mathieu, 31, and William Bialosky, 34, as opposites with one thing in common -- a great sense of humor.
He is an architect who plays the bassoon and spends several weeks each year canoeing in remote areas of the Adirondacks, Maine and Canada.


Oct. 3-9: Victims Don't Forget; A Vietnam-Era Fugitive Goes to Prison
A generation ago, as a young radical, Katherine Ann Power took part in a bank robbery that led to the murder of a Boston police officer, Walter Schroeder.
Last week, having emerged from an adulthood in hiding, she was sentenced -- to 8 to 12 years in prison for armed robbery and manslaughter, with a chance for release in a little over five years.
Ms. Power apologized to the court for playing a part in taking a human life.


On Sunday; As Pizza Maker Knows, Sinatra Still Delivers
THERE is a generation whose Elvis never died.
"Shooby-dooby-doo," some of its odder members still mumble lyrically at times, a tribute to the closing wisp of Frank Sinatra's "Strangers in the Night." The more imaginative rent the video of "The Pope of Greenwich Village" solely to watch the opening credits and hear "Summer Wind" sung so cleanly by Sinatra as the actor Mickey Rourke dolls himself up in quintessential New York double-breasted sharpness, French cuffs and all, a perfect visual for Sinatra's articulation.
Of such is the life of Patsy Grimaldi and all the other Sinatra fanatics tucked about New York's less-pretentious corners.
"When Frank checks into the Waldorf he orders two large sausage pies to go, and for him I deliver," Patsy says, breaking his no-delivery policy at Patsy's Coal-Oven Pizzeria under the Brooklyn Bridge's eastern arch.
"He sent a jet from the West Coast to pick up 50 pies."


Lived Fast, Died Young
BOMBSHELL The Life and Death of Jean Harlow.
By David Stenn.
Illustrated. 370 pp.
New York:  Doubleday. $22.50.


What is Good Value?
The quest for value is on - in politics, in family life, in design.
But what does it mean?
When it come to furnishing a home, "getting good value" often has a bargain-basement ring.
However, there's a deeper meaning that calls for a new way of making choices.
The best designers know that good value can turn up in unlikely places.
They exercise selectivity, whether they are shopping at auction houses or chain stores.
Then, there is the long-term satisfaction of solid workmanship.
Good value, in short, doesn't hamg on a price tag.
It is a way of looking at your wold and putting together a home with a sense of purpose.
Increasingly, it is based on an attitude toward preservation that looks as much to the future as to the past.
Finally, good value celebrates personal taste and the confidence to live by your own standards.
Where to begin?
At home, naturally


To Prevent Violence In Domestic Disputes
"Domestic Violence Victims Find Understanding"  [ Aug. 29 ]  was an accurate and thorough overview of arrest policies in Suffolk County.
Strong arrest policies, especially policies that mandate arrest for violations of orders of protection, are effective deterrents for spousal violence.
The Suffolk County Police Department and dozens of town and village police departments throughout the county are to be commended for the seriousness with which they respond to violence in the home.


No Headline
We face the risk of becoming another elderly drinking and chowder society. - W. D. KNUTSON, president of the Tailhook Association.  [ 20:4. ]


Commercial Property:/Upper Broadway; The Glitter of the Other Broadway
FOR years they've flocked to Zabar's for their lox, to H &amp; H for their bagels, to Fairway for their fruits and vegetables.
They are a motley lot, with well-coiffed women in minks jostling ponytailed men in cutoffs for counter space; some have their bags of goodies loaded into limousines, others tie them to bicycle racks, still others hail cabs -- and many, many more just walk home.
These are the Broadway shoppers, people from all careers, all classes, all races, who hate to waste money but are willing to spend whatever it takes for quality.
They have been around for decades.
And now a new wave of retailers, including some national chains, are recognizing them as one of the most potentially lucrative customer groups around.


Corrections
Because of a computer entry error, a letter to the editor on Sept. 12 about a James Mason film retrospective misattributed the television film "Homage to Chagall -- The Colors of Love." It was produced by the CBC (the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation), not by CBS.


In America; The Right Thing
President Clinton is swimming in treacherous political waters with his latest Somalia policy.
Another combat disaster in Mogadishu -- the loss of a large number of Americans, the taking of additional hostages -- would present an enormous threat to his Presidency.
The conciliatory moves yesterday by the factional leader Mohammed Farah Aidid give the President some space in which to breathe, but not much.
In Somalia, there are no guarantees.


Kmart's Stock Surge Masks a Weakness at the Core; Still Searching for Ways to Stop A Painful Slide in Market Share
AS a way of sidestepping head-on competition with Wal-Mart, Kmart has worked hard to increase apparel sales.
In recent years, the retailer began emphasizing the fashion side of the clothing it sells, which clearly differentiates it from Wal-Mart.
Still, Kmart's apparel sales have at best equaled last year's, according to Walter F. Loeb, president of Loeb Associates Inc., a retail consulting firm in New York, although they began to perk up last month.


Dana Heller, Donald Whamond 3d
Dana Florence Heller, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter E. Heller of Purchase, N.Y., was married yesterday to Donald Sinclair Whamond 3d, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Whamond Jr. of Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
James Walsh, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Church of the Resurrection in Rye.
Mrs.
Whamond, 25, is a freelance photographer in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is the president of Accuscan Inc., a licensing company for scanning and facsimile technology in Purchase.


Is It the Year of the Woman, or of Making Amends?
IN A NEW YORKER CARTOON SOME years ago, a woman in bearskins painting bison on a cave wall wondered idly to another bearskinned woman why there hadn't been any important male artists.
The joke works for artists but not photographers, for everyone acknowledges that women photographers have been important all along.
Well.
When Beaumont Newhall revised his classic "History of Photography" in 1982, he increased the number of women mentioned to 13; the first page of his eight-page index lists 38 men.
It must be hastily admitted that photography was invented by men and dominated by them well beyond the time that the medium required chemistry and the female sex required smelling salts.
Institutions have not done all that much better than Newhall.
Susan Kismaric, curator of photography at the Museum of Modern Art, told a panel last year that at the end of 1990 the Modern owned work by 1,226 photographers, of whom 172 (14 percent) were women.
The exhibition record was slightly more respectable: of 70 one-person shows organized by the museum, 20 (or 29 percent) were of women's work.
Yet consider that at this moment women are perhaps more prominent in the field of photography than men -- few men with cameras can claim the audience, press attention, even, at times, the prices of Cindy Sherman, Annie Leibovitz or Sally Mann.


Joan Campo, Christopher Carter
Joan Whalen Campo and Christopher V. R. Carter, advertising sales representatives at Time magazine in New York, were married yesterday in Hyannis Port, Mass.
The Rev.
David Carter, an Episcopal minister and a brother of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at St.
Andrew's-by-the-Sea Church.
Mrs.
Carter, 33, graduated from Trinity College in Hartford.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
William Campo of Greenwich, Conn.
Her father is the managing director, in Greenwich, for the Hobbs Group, an international insurance company.


Showtime for Seniors
Pat Sheinwold went to see "Lost in Yonkers" at one of New York City's larger movie houses one afternoon last spring.
Age 59, she paid full freight, but she noticed that several over-65's in line ahead of her were turned away because it was 10 minutes past the 5 P.M. cutoff for the senior citizen discount.
Inside, she found the theater almost empty.
Ridiculous, she thought, and fired off a letter to the Cineplex Odeon people in Toronto.
Ms.
Sheinwold discovered that there was no cutoff at their theaters in Los Angeles and Chicago, so why limit New Yorkers to early shows and only on weekdays?


Ethan Allen
"I always thought of Ethan Allen as the place to go for stately Colonial furniture," says the interior designer Victoria Hagan.
"I was surprised to find so many contemporary peices and accessories, too." The chain's wide selection allowed the designer to indulge in her favorite kind of shoping spree.
"Ethan Allen displays their merchandise in complete collections and room vignettes," she says.
"The fun is in taking some pieces from one set and some from another. Mixing helps create a more timeless interior." The room she decorated - a sunny bedroom in a prewar town house - is light and airy.
White walls and furniture, she figured, would allow for a variety of accessories.
Pieces with sculptural shilhouettes, such as the metal-framed bed, and interesting details, such as the nail heads on the sofa arms, were high on her list.
And for a twist, there's a pie rack usually sold as a Colonial memento that Hagan found ideal for books and magazines.
"One-stop shopping can be terrific," she concludes, "as long as you remember that it's the personalized details that make a room come alive." The following items are available at Ethan Allen Home Interiors stores nationwide.
For location information call (800) 228-9229. 1.
Ceramic bust, 14 inches high, $165. 2.
Chesterfield sofa, 88 inches long, with "Windsurf" cotton upholstery, $1,599. 3.
"Bohkara" bark cotton pillow, $45. 4.
"Wild Strawberries in Cream" jumbo ceramic teacup and saucer, $24. 5.
Ottoman with "Windsurf" cotton upholstery, $349. 6.
English-horn floor lamp with Roman bronze finish with flax-colored pleated shade (not shown), $399.
Shown here with the designer's own lamp shade. 7.
Armless chair with "Odyssey" cotton and polyester upholstery, $589. 8.
Brushed steel sconce with brass wrappings, $129. 9.
Bed from the "Medallion Collection" in parchment-finished wood with antiqued pewter-finished iron posts and canopy, brass trim and finials, $1,899 for queen size. 10.
Creamware urn lamp with black lamp shade (not shown), $215.
Shown here with the designer's own lamp shade. 11.
Porcelain box with eagle crest, $85. 12.
Sunburst frame made of resin compound with beveled mirror, 7 3/4 inches in diameter, $59. 13.
Side chair upholstered in "Windsurf" cotton, $547. 14.
Herringbone sisal area rug, 9 by 12 feet, $799.
Or to order at $39 per square yard.
Binding, approximately $5 per linear yard. 15.
Club chair upholstered in "Windsurf" cotton, $949. 16.
Pine chandelier with antiqued brass arms, $520.
Other items: Gold-framed prints from Finestra, 1755 York Avenue.
Bed linens from Anichini Linens.
For stores, call (800) 553-5309. 1.
Ceramic bust, 14 inches high, $165. 2.
Hand-forged iron stand with pewter finish, $199. 3.
Miniature frosted glass vase, $35. 4.
Chiseled glass and antiqued brass floor lamp, five feet high, with sand-colored parchment shade (not shown), $229.
Shown here with the designer's own lamp shade. 5.
Mirror with gold leaf and black resin compound frame and beveled glass, 30 1/4 inches in diameter, $449. 6.
Iron Mission-style candleholders, 14 inches, $59; 17 1/2 inches, $69. 7.
Brass fire tools, $280 set of five (broom and poker shown). 8.
Club chair with "Windsurf" cotton upholstery, $949.
On the mantel: Photograph by Aaron Siskind from the Light Gallery, (212) 249-5653.
Welded steel sculpture by Steven Singer, Steven Singer Studio, Brooklyn, N.Y.


Name That Colt
PICKING A WINNING horse, as every bettor knows, is not easy.
But picking a winning horse name may be even harder.
When Sky Beauty emerged as the queen of the 3-year-olds this year, it was a victory not only for her owners, but also for the genteel tradition of names like Man o' War, Count Fleet, Whirlaway and Native Dancer that, like most genteel traditions, is struggling a bit.
The horses circling the track these days have names like No Fat Chicks, Liver Stand, Janitress or Far Out Beast.
When the great Genuine Risk, one of only three fillies to win the Kentucky Derby, gave birth to a foal in May, after 11 straight years of miscarriages and other problems, racing fans around the world cheered.
It was a boy.
Suggestions on what to name the new arrival came pouring into Three Chimneys Farm in Midway, Ky., where the colt was born.
Predictable names, like Worth the Risk, Genuine Miracle or Risky Business.
Well-intentioned but strange names, like Genuine Impact, inspired by the operation that the foal underwent to remove an impaction of the colon.
Inscrutable names, like Calculator and Brown Bread.
More than 300 names, all told -- and most of them unusable under the strict rules that govern the naming of thoroughbreds.


Broadway Flops Go to CD Heaven
IT SEEMS ALMOST EMBARRASSING NOW THAT ON A crisp early winter night in 1964 I had nothing better to do in my young life than walk up to the box office of the Shubert Theater and buy a ticket for "Bajour."
"Bajour": The title doesn't exactly roar down memory lane 30 years later, does it?
In truth, even at the time, it was the kind of carefree Broadway musical designed to be forgotten during intermission.
When Act II began, you counted on the characters to remind you of just what they were doing when the curtain fell 15 minutes earlier.
The show was so artificial, so hermetically sealed in the creakiest conventions of musical comedy, that its every line abhorred any cohesive connections to human experience as practiced beyond Shubert Alley.


Where to Get Free Shots for Children
New York City, with the help of the United States Committee for Unicef, will give free immunizations for measles, mumps and rubella, diphtheria, tetanus and whooping cough, polio, meningitis and hepatitis B to any child who needs them on Saturday.
Here are immunization sites, as listed by the Department of Health.
MANHATTAN
Baruch Houses Child Health Clinic
280 Delancey Street, (212) 673-5990
Bellevue Hospital Immunization Program
462 First Avenue, (212) 561-6104
Betances Health Unit
281 East Broadway, (212) 227-8843
Betances Health Unit
34 Gouverneur Avenue, (212) 227-8843
Betances Health Unit
280 Henry Street, (212) 227-8843
Chinatown Community Health Center
89 Baxter Street, (212) 233-5059
East Harlem Child Health Clinic
158 East 115th Street, (212) 360-5919-23
Harlem Hospital Center, Pediatric Clinic
506 Lenox Avenue, (212) 934-2350-63
Lenox Hill Hospital
100 East 77th Street, (212) 434-3150
Manhattanville Child Health Center
21 Old Broadway, (212) 678-6704-8
Metropolitan Hospital Center
1901 First Avenue, (212) 230-6228
Mount Sinai Medical Center
J.H.S. 117, 240 East 109th Street, (212) 241-0938
Nena Comprehensive Health Center
279 East Third Street, (212) 477-8864
New York Downtown
170 William Street, (212) 312-5052
New York Hospital, Cornell Medical Center
525 East 68th Street, (212) 821-0560
North General Hospital
1879 Madison Avenue, (212) 821-0560
Presbyterian Hospital
I.S. 143, 515 West 182d Street, (212) 305-8900
Polo Grounds Houses Child Health Clinic
2927 Eighth Avenue, (212) 283-0500
Renaissance, Drew Hamilton Clinic
2698 Eighth Avenue, (212) 932-6526-30
Renaissance, Grant Houses Clinic
3170 Broadway, (212) 932-6526-30
Renaissance, Polo Grounds Clinic
2967 Eighth Avenue, (212) 932-6526-30
Renaissance, Lenox Avenue Clinic
34 West 118th Street, (212) 932-6526-30
Renaissance, Sydenhom Neighborhood Family Care Center
215 West 125th Street, (212) 932-6526-30
Richard Allen Center for Life
1854 Amsterdam Avenue, (212) 316-1120
Riverside Child Health Clinic
160 West 100th Street, (212) 280-9240
Settlement Health and Medical Services
314 East 104th Street, (212) 860-0401
St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center
Amsterdam Avenue and 114th Street, (212) 523-5325
St. Vincent's Hospital, Chelsea Clinic
241 West 30th Street, (212) 594-2200
St. Vincent's Hospital, Chinatown Clinic
168 Canal Street, (212) 431-5505
Washington Heights Child Health Clinic
600 West 168th Street, (212) 304-5408-9
Williams F. Ryan Community Health Center
110 West 97th Street, (212) 316-7956
BRONX
Adams Houses
755 East 152d Street, (718) 402-8973
Banana Kelly, South Bronx Health Center
991 Union Avenue, (718) 328-9878
Beacon Center 148
169th Street and Third Avenue, (718) 538-0484
Bronx Lebanon Hospital
1650 Grand Concourse, (718) 960-1033
Bronx Municipal Hospital Center
Pelham Parkway and Eastchester Road, (718) 918-5430
Forest Houses Child Health Clinic
1005 Tinton Avenue, (718) 589-1242
Glebe Avenue Child Health Clinic
252 Glebe Avenue, (718) 792-0100
Gunhill Pediatric Primary Care Center
3450 White Plains Road, (718) 653-0700
Hunts Point Multiservice Center
1675 Westchester Avenue, (718) 402-8898
Hunts Point Multiservice Center
661 Cauldwell Avenue, (718) 402-8898
Lincoln Medical Health Center
234 East 149th Street, (718) 579-8640
Martin Luther King Jr. Health Center
3674 Third Avenue, (718) 681-3400
Mitchel Houses Child Health Clinic
185 Willis Avenue, (718) 292-4235
Monroe Houses Child Health Clinic
816 Soundview Avenue, (718) 328-4477
Montefiore Comprehensive Health Care Center
230 East 162d Street, (718) 992-9265
Montefiore Comprehensive Family Health Center
1175 Morris Park Avenue, (718) 597-8500
Montefiore Family Health Center
360 East 193d Street, (718) 933-2400
Montefiore Fordham Family Practice
1 Fordham Plaza, (718) 405-4010
Morris Heights Health Center
85 West Burnside Avenue, (718) 716-4400
Morrisania Health Center
1225 Gerard Avenue, (718) 960-2738
North Central Bronx Hospital
3424 Kossuth Avenue
Our Lady of Mercy Medical Center
600 East 233d Street, (718) 920-9000
Our Lady of Mercy Medical Center
1419 Shakespeare Avenue, (718) 538-6311
Segundo Ruiz Selvis Health Center
545 East 142d Street, (718) 579-4000
Soundview Health Center
731 White Plains Road, (718) 589-8775
Union Hospital, Primary Care Center
188th Street and Valentine Avenue, (718) 220-2020
Urban Health Plan
1070 Southern Boulevard, (718) 991-4833
Webster House Child Health Clinic
401 East 168th Street, (718) 538-1982
BROOKLYN
Bedford Stuyvesant Health Center
1413 Fulton Street, (718) 636-4500
Brevoort Houses Child Health Clinic
258 Ralph Avenue, (718) 756-1458
Brookdale Hospital Medical Center
Linden Boulevard at Brookdale Plaza, (718) 240-5924
Brooklyn Hospital Center
121 DeKalb Avenue, (718) 403-8168
Brooklyn Plaza Medical Center
650 Fulton Street, (718) 596-9800
Brownsville Multiservice Family Health Center
444 Thomas S. Boyland Street, (718) 345-5504
Coney Island Hospital
2601 Ocean Parkway, (718) 615-4009
Crown Heights Child Health Clinic
1218 Prospect Place, (718) 735-0561
Cumberland Health Center
100 North Portland Avenue, (718) 260-7531
East New York Health Center
2094 Pitkin Avenue, (718) 240-0500
Fort Greene Child Health Clinic
295 Flatbush Avenue, (718) 643-8589
Maimonides Medical Center
4802 Tenth Avenue, (718) 935-7089
Howard Houses Child Health Clinic
1620 East New York Avenue, (718) 385-3690
Homecrest Child Health Clinic
1601 Avenue S, (718) 692-9548
Interfaith Medical Center
555 Prospect Place, (718) 935-7089
Irving Avenue Child Health Clinic
203 Irving Avenue, (718) 456-2808
Jonathan Williams Child Health Clinic
333 Roebling Street, (718) 387-6407
Kings County Hospital Center
451 Clarkson Avenue, (718) 245-3660
Long Island College Hospital
349 Henry Street, (718) 780-1355
Luna Park Houses Child Health Clinic
2817 West 12th Street, (718) 266-2720
Park Slope Family Health Center, Lutheran Medical Center
220 13th Street, (718) 832-5987
Lyndon Baines Johnson Health Complex
276 Nostrand Avenue, (718) 636-2220
Methodist Hospital
506 Sixth Street, (718) 780-3130
Methodist Hospital Family Health Center
210 Flatbush Avenue, (718) 783-0070
Sheepshead Bay Houses Child Health Clinic
3525 Nostrand Avenue, (718) 332-3522
South Brooklyn Health Center
120 Richards Street, (718) 834-8202
Sunset Park Child Health Clinic
514 49th Street, (718) 436-2802
Sutter Avenue Child Health Clinic
1091 Sutter Avenue, (718) 647-0800
University Hospital, Brooklyn SUNY-HSCB
450 Clarkson Avenue, (718) 270-2978
Victory Memorial Hospital
9036 Seventh Avenue, (718) 630-2134
Bushwick Woodhull Health Center
1420 Bushwick Avenue, (718) 919-1200
Wyckoff Gardens Child Health Clinic
266 Wyckoff Street, (718) 875-3975
Wyckoff Height Medical Center
374 Stockholm Street, (718) 963-7708-9 QUEENS
Astoria Child Health Clinic
12-26 31st Avenue, (718) 728-8764
Catholic Medical Center
152-11 89th Avenue, (718) 657-0713
CHP: The Medical Group, Jamaica Center
90-23 161st Street, (718) 657-0052
Corona Child Health Clinic
104th Street and Corona Avenue, (718) 699-7778
DOH Communicare, Ridgewood
769 Onderdonk Avenue, (718) 821-9020
Elmhurst Doctor Office Center
81-08 Queens Boulevard, (718) 478-6300
Elmhurst Hospital Center
79-01 Broadway, (718) 334-2503
Flushing Hospital Medical Center
45th Avenue and Parsons Boulevard, (718) 670-5358
Hollis Doctor Office Center
197-27 Hillside Avenue, (718) 217-8000
Jamaica Hospital, Queens Health Service
130-20 Farmers Boulevard, (718) 723-4141
Jamaica Hospital Center for Family Care
97-04 Sutphin Boulevard, (718) 523-5500
Junction Boulevard Child Health Clinic
34-33 Junction Boulevard, (718) 476-7655-61
Kew Garden Doctor Office Center
80-02 Kew Garden Road, (718) 793-0300
La Guardia Hospital
102-01 66th Road, (718) 830-4200
New York Hospital Medical Center of Queens
56-45 Main Street, (718) 670-1033
NYH, Women and Children's Health Center of Western Queens
36-11 21st Street, (718) 482-7772
Peninsula Hospital Center
51-15 Beach Channel Drive, (718) 945-7100, X715
Queens Drew Health Center
Archer Avenue and Merrick Boulevard
Queens Hospital Center
82-68 164th Street, (718) 883-4500
St. John Episcopal Hospital
327 Beach 19th St., (718) 868-7690
VNS, St. Rose of Lima School
154 Beach 84th Street, (718) 318-5200 STATEN ISLAND
Bayley Seton Hospital
75 Vanderbilt Avenue, (718) 390-5850
DOH, Communicare, S.I.
29-71 Hylan Boulevard, (718) 351-6413
Mariner's Harbor Houses Child Health Clinic
142 Brabant Street, (718) 761-2060
Staten Island University Hospital
242 Mason Avenue, (718) 226-6200
Staten Island University Hospital
57 Bay Street, (718) 226-6200
Staten Island University Hospital
235 Port Richmond Avenue, (718) 226-6200
Staten Island University Hospital
375 Seginne Avenue, (718) 226-6200
St. George Child Health Clinic
51 Stuyvesant Place, (718) 983-4516
Stapleton Child Health Clinic
111 Canal Street, (718) 447-0686


Corrections
The On the Street column last week misstated the relationship between a young girl and a woman shown wearing ankle-length dresses after services on Yom Kippur.
They are not related.


Mutual Funds; A Matter of Style: Value or Growth?
WHAT'S in a mutual fund's name?
Usually not enough to tell an investor how the manager is picking the portfolio's stocks.
Most investors can learn from a fund's name that it owns stocks of smaller companies, or invests globally, or combines stocks and bonds in one portfolio.
But, with some exceptions, fund names fail to convey which of two basic approaches to stock-picking its manager uses: value or growth.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
DOWNTOWN BROOKLYN  Caribbean Word-Pictures, In the Author's Voice
Kelvin Christopher James of Trinidad will read from his first novel, "Secrets," recently published by Villard Books, this week in a Barnes &amp; Noble bookstore.
Mr.
James's last work was a collection of short stories set in both the West Indies and Harlem.
His novel, which recounts the tale of a young girl in the Caribbean, is filled with allegory and West Indian dialect.
Barnes &amp; Noble, Albee Square Mall, downtown Brooklyn; Oct 13, 7 P.M.; free; (718) 253-5283.
FLUSHING MEADOWS  Theater in the Park Reopens
The Queens Theater in the Park, in what was the New York State Pavilion of the 1964 World's Fair, will open on Saturday night with a benefit party and a performance of "Forbidden Broadway."
The $4 million project, a two-year restoration of a long-vacant theater undertaken by New York City, features a 500-seat main auditorium and a 99-seat studio theater.
Several events are planned for this season, among them a variety show, "The Chinese-American Extravaganza," and a new musical, "Johnny Mercer: Too Marvelous for Words."
On Saturday, a cocktail party and reception from 6 to 7:30 P.M. will be followed by dinner and a performance of "Forbidden Broadway" by the Atlantic Theater Company as well as appearances by a Chinese folk-dance company and a gospel singer.
Queens Theater in the Park; Oct. 16, 6 P.M.; $100 and $250; (718) 760-0064.
UPPER WEST SIDE  An Open Pool Tournament, But Amateurs Beware
The Amsterdam Billiard Club will hold its second annual open pool tournament on Monday, and the competitors will include the likes of Grady (the Professor) Matthews and Ewa Mataya.
If those names don't ring a bell, chances are this tournament is not for you -- except, maybe, as an observer.
Last year, 200 spectators attended the contest, which has a prize pool of $10,000.
"If you don't make a living playing pool, you shouldn't be in this event," said Lane Campbell, an instructor at the club.
"This is not just a bunch of good New York players. These are world champs."
The Amsterdam Billiard Club, 344 Amsterdam Avenue; Oct. 11, noon to midnight; entrance fee, $100; spectators, $25 in advance, $35 at the door; (212) 496-8180.
TIMES SQUARE  For Proud Dog-Owners Who Carry Pictures
The owners of poodles and Weimaraners, not their pets, will face off Wednesday when the Dog Fanciers Club of New York holds its third annual "Photos of Fidos" contest at Sardi's Restaurant.
Contestants will enter 8-by-10's of their beloved pups; the shots will be judged by a panel of photography professionals.
The 30-year-old club, which meets monthly for luncheons and dog-related activities, will award two $100 prizes, one for black-and-white photos, one for color.
Linda Harman, the owner of Animals for Advertising, a dog talent agency, will advise owners on how to get their dogs into show business.
Do not expect a lot of covetous sniping between the owners of Loopsie and Muffin.
"That only happens at dog shows," said the club's president, Howard Atlee.
Sardi's Restaurant, 243 West 44th Street; Oct. 13, 11:30 A.M.; $50 for contestants, including lunch; $40, lunch and viewing; $10, viewing only, until 12:30 P.M.; (201) 837-1253.
JENNIFER STEINHAUER


A Fortune For a Nickel
ONE of America's dream coins is going to auction this week.
A 1913 Liberty Head nickel, one of only four known still to exist, will be sold Wednesday at Stack's.
The 1913 Liberty Head nickels should never have been minted.
Charles E. Barber's Liberty Head design had been used since 1883 and was replaced in 1913 by James Earle Fraser's design with the head of an American Indian on the obverse and a bison on the reverse, a design that lasted until 1938.
But beginning in early December 1912, the United States Mint had orders to wait until the new designs were approved before making more coins.
The Buffalo nickels started rolling off the presses on Feb. 17, 1913.
For almost seven years, collectors and Mint officials thought the transition had gone well.


The Cost Challenge for Child Care
FAMILIES who employ child care workers in their homes will be required to pay for the workers' health care under the Clinton Administration's proposal.
This will be true both for caretakers who have no coverage now and for those who are covered by a spouse's plan.


In a Moment of Harmony, Candidates Attend Dinner
Following a week of intensifying political rancor in the city's mayoral campaign, Mayor David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani, his Republican-Liberal challenger, put aside their partisan passions for just a brief, rare moment last night and spoke on their shared dreams for ethnic harmony as the they shared the head table at a dinner celebrating achievements of Italian-Americans.
The two candidates, who have made stinging accusations about each other while campaigning through a second election, greeted each other with a handshake and warm, if awkward, smiles in a reception room at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel.
Both then spoke to 600 people at the annual black-tie dinner of the Columbus Citizens Foundation, which sponsors the Columbus Day Parade tomorrow.


Hurdle to Peace: Parting the Mideast's Waters
Beyond all the hopeful talk of peace in the Middle East, a battle is shaping over an issue as powerful as land, as basic as oil: the region is running out of water, and no one, Israeli or Arab, is prepared to do with less so others can have more.
In a region where barren deserts and cloudless skies make water life's most precious commodity, the dispute may prove even more complicated than the brave new steps promised by Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.


Fete De Famille VIII
Kissinger and a Harley at fund-raising party to fight AIDS, Oct. 4.


To Read It Is to Destroy It
To the Editor:
Congratulations on the hilarious juxtaposition of Gerald Jonas's essay "The Disappearing $2,000 Book" with Robert Coover's ruminations in "Hyperfiction: Novels for the Computer" and in "And Hypertext Is Only the Beginning. Watch Out!" (Aug. 29).


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
NUREYEV TRIBUTE
The artistic director of the Connecticut Ballet Theater, Brett Raphael, will open the season in Stamford with "Men in Dance: A Gala Tribute to Rudolf Nureyev." The single performance honoring the star who died last January will take place on Saturday at 8:30 P.M. in the Rich Forum of the Stamford Center for the Arts.


Gregory Rush and Kathleen Purcell
Kathleen Bridget Purcell, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Patrick J. Purcell of Weston, Mass., and New York, was married yesterday to Gregory Rush, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Rush of Pembroke, N.H.
The Rev.
John Geoghan, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Julia's Church in Weston, Mass.
Mrs.
Rush, 22, and her husband, 23, graduated from Dartmouth College.
She is a classified advertising representative at The Boston Herald.
Her father is the publisher of The Herald and The New York Post and is the chief executive of News America Publishing Inc., the parent company of those newspapers, TV Guide, Mirabella magazine and News America Free Standing Inserts.


Joann Alperstein, Jonathan Ludwig
Joann Sharon Alperstein, a daughter of Rayna and Robert Alperstein of Rye Brook, N.Y., was married last evening to Jonathan Benjamin Ludwig, the son of Judith and Joseph Ludwig of Sharon, Mass.
Rabbi Phillip Berkowitz officiated at the Bretton Woods Inn in Morris Plains, N.J.


Strings And Piano Together
FANCIERS of stringed instruments and the piano should be happy with the choices offered this week.
One violin-piano partnership, consisting of the Westchester residents Peggy Klinger and Theora Cultice, will play Bach, Brahms, Messiaen and Kreisler on Wednesday at 12:35 P.M. at Grace Episcopal Church in White Plains.
For more details on this and later programs in the 1993-94 Downtown Music at Grace series, the number to call is 949-0384.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
How to Arrive in Roslyn
"WELCOME to Roslyn," the first English settlers were told.
"Watch where you step." To celebrate the 350th anniversary of the landing of English settlers on Gold Coast shores a small part of the coast of Roslyn Village was set aside for a landing re-enactment.
But a four-legged creature had obviously landed there first.
So "watch where you step" took on added meaning as the settlers took their first steps on Long Island.


Departures and Arrivals
In downtown Jamaica, as stores like Mod Fashion, Revels Men's Wear and the Everything Store closed over the summer, others, mainly clothes shops, discount stores and fast-food store arrived to fill the vaccant space, sometimes overnight.
These businesses have opened along Jamaica Avenue since July.
White Castle, 160-13 Jamaica Avenue Blimpie's, 89-02 165th Street Parade of Shoes, 163-15 Jamaica Avenue (under construction) Big &amp; Tall Casual Male, 162-24 Jamaica Avenue Paramount Linen, 164-11 Jamaica Avenue KLM Variety, a discount store, 89-13 164th Street Beauty Supply, a discount store, 162-12 Jamaica Avenue Her's Boutique, a clothes store, 161-11 Jamaica Avenue Source: Jamaica Chamber of Commerce


Fate-of-the-Earth Furniture
THESE DAYS, MORE AND MORE of us are thinking green.
We bring string bags to the supermarket and buy biodegradable detergents, organic vegetables, even recyclable teakettles.
Yet how many of us think of the fate of the earth when selecting a new sofa or table?
It's difficult to imagine them as a threat to the environment, much less to one's health.
But the truth is that furniture manufacturing is a fundamentally polluting business: Companies often use pesticide-treated wood and apply paints and finishes that contain volatile toxic solvents, as well as glues made with formaldehyde, a likely carcinogen.
Not to mention the millions of acres of rain forest that are destroyed in the demand for tropical woods such as mahogany and rosewood.
Troubled by this environmental toll, a growing number of designers, manufacturers and marketers have embarked on an ecological odyssey in search of cleaner and safer materials and renewable wood sources.


City Hall Rivals Stress Abortion In Battle for the Votes of Women
A television commercial for Mayor David N. Dinkins hammers away at Rudolph W. Giuliani's reservations about abortion in 1989.
A radio spot by the state Democratic Party reminds listeners that Mr.
Giuliani served in the Republican administrations that blocked doctors from providing abortion counseling in clinics that received Federal money.
In rebuttal, Mr.
Giuliani has put his wife, Donna Hanover Giuliani, on the air, with the former television news anchor promoting her husband's record on women's issues and wrapping up with, "And make no mistake about it, Rudy Giuliani is pro-choice."


Brassy 'City of Angels' In Village of Elmsford
"CITY OF ANGELS" at the Westchester Broadway Theater is a tricky musical about how a writer (Stine) labors to make a screenplay of his novel ("City of Angels"), which is about the misadventures of a 1940's-type hard-boiled private eye (Stone).
Stine transfers his real dilemmas into Stone's cinematic perils, which, in turn, affect Stine's life.
Alternately a sendup of film noir and a tirade against the corruption of creativity by Hollywood, the Cy Coleman (music), David Zippel (lyrics), Larry Gelbart (book) collaboration pits art against life in perpetual conflict.


Sports of The Times; The White Sox Putting Michael Behind Them
THE Chicago White Sox are not exactly dead.
At one point it seemed they might well have been going home early today -- 25 players in 25 chartered planes, to paraphrase the old Boston Red Sox, who were said to go out for dinner in 25 separate taxis.
On the brink of collapse, Wilson Alvarez shut down the Blue Jays, 6-1, Friday night, and then an improbable collection of players like Lance Johnson and Tim Belcher conspired to beat the Jays, 7-4, last night, showing that the White Sox would not be dragged down by whiners on their own team, by ancient jinxes, or even by the current bad karma from the retirement of a certain Chicagoland icon.


Star Gazers Fear San Diego Is Drawing the Blinds
The latest discovery by astronomers here: People and stars do not mix after all.
A recent decision by the San Diego City Council to switch from dull yellow astronomer-friendly street lights to dazzling white ones illustrates the increasing difficulty scientists are having in finding sites free of what they call light pollution.


Spicier Old Stops, Exotic New Ones
THE fall season is a pronounced one in the cruise industry.
The flotilla that cruises to Alaska in spring and summer has relocated to warm-weather ports, there are longer cruises to choose from, and South America and the South Pacific show up on more itineraries.
Many veteran travelers prefer fall and winter cruises because they provide a respite from the cold and from the summer throngs who have helped the industry achieve record bookings almost every year since the 1970's.
Since then growth in the number of passengers has averaged more than nine percent a year, and is expected to grow from 4.4 million passengers in 1993 to eight million in the year 2000.


he View From a Literary Dumpster
TRAVELS WITH LIZBETH By Lars Eighner. 271 pp. New York:  St. Martin's Press. $19.95.


Wall Street; In the First Wallet, He's a Distant Second
PRESIDENT CLINTON is rich in power, but a lot less so in assets.
Documents filed with the United States Office of Government Ethics show the details of his holdings as of July 4, when he and the rest of the First Family put their assets in a blind trust to sidestep conflicts.
At the time, he owned a few mutual funds and a lone municipal bond, together valued at less than $125,000.


Ms. Ackermann, Mr. Black
Marsha E. Ackermann, a doctoral student in American culture at the University of Michigan, was married on Friday to Thomas K. Black 3d, the production and operations manager for the Fame Software Corporation in Ann Arbor, Mich.
Mayor Ingrid Sheldon officiated at the Ann Arbor City Hall.
Ms.
Ackermann, 43, is keeping her name.
She was a legislative aide and speechwriter for former Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro and a communications specialist for the International Business Machines Corporation She graduated from Cornell University.
She is the daughter of the late Edward and Lee Ackermann.


THE KILLER FROM CULIACAN
In much of Latin America, it is pure European blood and background that is honored ("The Killer From Culiacan," by Charles Leerhsen, Aug. 29).
Mention of black and Indian blood is studiously avoided.
Not in Mexico, however.
There, it is refreshing to hear a man say proudly: "Yo soy indio. Yo soy Mexicano."


And Now, Star of Cozzene Falls to Earth
Racing's year of upsets produced one of its biggest yesterday when the French import Apple Tree won the $500,000 Turf Classic at Belmont Park while Star of Cozzene, the leading candidate for Horse of the Year, ran fourth in a field of five.
That wasn't all.
Thirty minutes later, Birdonthewire won the $200,000 Vosburgh by two and a half lengths over Take Me Out while the two favorites, Ibero and the Canadian star Alydeed, ran fourth and fifth in the field of six.
And the man in the winning saddle in both upsets was Mike Smith, who has been New York's leading jockey for the last three years.


The Very Rich Hours Of Florine Stettheimer
CONVENTIONAL WISDOM HAS IT that the American modernist Florine Stettheimer led a charmed life, which she transformed into an equally charmed art.
Rich, educated at the Art Students League and abroad, she lived, mostly with her adored mother and sisters, a life that was as cloistered as it was cutting-edge.
From their apartment in the Alwyn Court near Carnegie Hall, Stettheimer reigned over one of the most frequented salons of the small New York avant-garde in the 20's and 30's.
Its members included the artists Marcel Duchamp, Gaston Lachaise and Elie Nadelman, the composers Virgil Thomson and Edward Varese, the novelist Carl Van Vechten and the art critic Henry McBride.


Waffles Aren't Just for Breakfast Anymore
RECENTLY, my husband and I bought an old house in northwestern Connecticut, one of those buildings laughingly described as "needing work." Among the things left behind by the previous owners was a gleaming Art Deco waffle iron.
I had never made waffles before, so being the mother of a 5-year-old, it seemed a good time to learn.
In the back of a cupboard I discovered a mildewed cookbook missing its cover and first few pages.
It looked as though it dated back to the 1940's, and in it I found a recipe for waffles.
The previous afternoon my son and I had picked apples and raspberries in a local orchard, so I decided to add those to the recipe, and in the interests of health, I cut down the butter and used skim instead of whole milk.


Tarnished Knight On a Darker Stage
HAT saved Boris N. Yeltsin again was the face of his enemy.
Back in August 1991, the country and the soldiers rallied against the image of the Communist plotters, the bullying old bosses spouting their tired lies in the name of a discredited order.
There was no choice then.


'New York Days'
To the Editor:
This letter is prompted by Elizabeth Hardwick's review of "New York Days," by Willie Morris (Sept. 5).
I was the publisher of Harper's Magazine for most of the time described in that book.
Unfortunately, Miss Hardwick accepts certain statements at face value.


The Art of the Meal
Rising like soldiers from their furrows, corn is a beacon of summer.
While bundled and dried and stacked into shocks, it's the denouement of fall.
In "The Story of Corn," Betty Fussell writes of those cultures that set their seasonal clock by the life cycle of corn -- measuring their self-worth by its bounty, their future by how deftly preserved it is for the months of howling winds.


Sheila Dickinson, Kevin Gallagher
Sheila Dickinson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William Dickinson of Manhasset, L.I., was married there yesterday to Kevin Neal Gallagher, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James E. Gallagher of Garden City, L.I.
The Rev.
Anthony Refalo performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Gallagher is a vice president in the private banking division of the Chase Manhattan Bank in New York.
She graduated from Villanova University, as did her husband, and she received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.
Her father is the general manager and an owner of Rosie O'Grady's, a restaurant in New York.


Waffles Aren't Just for Breakfast Anymore
RECENTLY, my husband and I bought an old house in northwestern Connecticut, one of those buildings laughingly described as "needing work." Among the things left behind by the previous owners was a gleaming Art Deco waffle iron.
I had never made waffles before, so being the mother of a 5-year-old, it seemed a good time to learn.
In the back of a cupboard I discovered a mildewed cookbook missing its cover and first few pages.
It looked as though it dated back to the 1940's, and in it I found a recipe for waffles.
The previous afternoon my son and I had picked apples and raspberries in a local orchard, so I decided to add those to the recipe, and in the interests of health, I cut down the butter and used skim instead of whole milk.


Habitats/A Quirk on Bedford Street; Barrymore's Slim Stage
WALKING tours regularly clog the sidewalk outside the incredibly narrow brick house on the old Greenwich Village street.
"They keep taking snapshots of each other with their arms spread out across the whole width of the house," said Christopher Dubs, who has been trying to buy the house at 75 1/2 Bedford Street, between Morton and Commerce Streets, since last November and thinks he may soon succeed.


From Wide Right to Right On for F.S.U.
Of all the obstacles that have stood between Florida State University and that elusive national football championship, the Seminoles understood that the fourth quarter was the worst of all.
Hidden mistakes and kicks that sailed wide right had allowed the Miami Hurricanes to take a last-minute grasp of the big ones that got away.
The Seminoles could not allow that to happen today and continue to dream of a perfect season.
They used two early, dramatic scores to put Miami behind at the start, and this time, at last, the Seminoles never let go.
Florida State's imperfect but cathartic 28-10 victory ended Miami's 31-game regular-season winning streak and propelled the Seminoles beyond a point that has wrecked their hopes too many times.
Miami's defeat was the first in a regular-season game since a loss at Notre Dame on Oct. 20, 1990, and the most one-sided defeat other than a bowl game since a 38-3 loss to the Seminoles on Sept. 22, 1984.


Barbara Carton, Paul B. Hemp
Barbara Wells Carton, a reporter for the living and arts section at The Boston Globe, was married yesterday to Paul Bernard Hemp, an assistant business editor at the newspaper.
The Rev.
Gary Lemery officiated at St.
Matthew's Episcopal Church in Jamestown, R.I.
Ms.
Carton, who is keeping her name, graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received a master's degree in journalism from Boston University.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert W. Carton of Winnetka, Ill.
Her father is a professor emeritus at Rush Presbyterian St.
Luke's Medical Center in Chicago.


The New Four F's For Women
To the Editor:
The four F's of newspapers' "women's pages" ("Pages Of Their Own?" Oct. 3), are no longer food, fashions, family and furnishings.
Today's working woman is concerned with "femily" (a household headed by a single woman), F.O.H. (Friends of Hillary), financial planning and "fairy tales" (as R. W. Jackson, in "The Diabolical Dictionary of Modern English," calls "romance, job satisfaction, stress management, privacy, money in the bank, and other grims").
MARJORIE WOLFE Syosset, L.I.


Abuses Plague Programs to Help Exports of Agricultural Products
The Agriculture Department's $40 billion campaign to bolster crop exports, begun a decade ago to help beleaguered farmers, has instead enriched a small group of multinational corporations while doing little to expand the American share of the world's agricultural markets.
From 1986 through 1989, for example, one large Agriculture Department program to help the United States compete against the Europeans awarded $1.38 billion -- more than half its payouts -- to four multinational corporations, two of them based in Europe: Louis Dreyfus of France and Artfer Inc., which is owned by the Ferruzzi Group of Italy.
The others were Cargill Inc. of Minneapolis and Continental Grain of Chicago.


Getting Respect From City Hall
Michael Anglin stood amid weeds, broken glass and discarded needles in Morningside Park on a hill overlooking the paddleball courts at 122d Street, where he and his friends play after work.
Eight blocks down, across the critical divide between the Upper West Side and Harlem, are a well-kept baseball diamond, new playground equipment and a waterfall, all of which the city has installed over the last few years.
"There are two parks," Mr. Anglin said. "It's like this is two towns."


Small Merchants Sprucing Up Along Mermaid Avenue
Because of a recent influx of city, state and private funds, the dilapidated mom-and-pop businesses along Mermaid Avenue are sprucing up and expanding in hopes of attracting families drawn to the area by an urban renewal program.
More than 2,000 people have moved in since 1981, filling the 700 homes built under urban renewal, but they tend to shop at the larger, more modern stores in Bensonhurst, Mill Basin and Bay Ridge.


Albany Officials Gloomy Over Bank Company's Merger and Move
Business and political leaders here searched this week for a silver lining in the announcement that Albany's leading banking institution, Keycorp, will merge with an Ohio company and move its corporate headquarters to Cleveland.
Keycorp officials attempted to soften the blow, arguing that fewer than 100 executives are likely to move after the merger with the Society Corporation next March creates the nation's 10th-largest banking institution.


Joanne Shirlaw, Gregory Gersten
Joanne Shirlaw, the daughter of Joan A. Shirlaw of River Vale, N.J., was married last evening to Dr.
Gregory David Gersten, the son of Marvin Gersten and Stephanie Schmidt-Rank, both of New York.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman and the Rev.
Norman Brinkman, a Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony at the Harbor Club in New York.
Mrs.
Gersten, 30, is a social worker at Cedars-Sinai Hospital in Los Angeles.
She graduated from Fairleigh Dickinson University and received a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.


Ms. Jones, Mr. Ahl
Stephanie Elizabeth Jones, a daughter of Andrew F. Jones and Karen Berlin Jones, both of Salisbury, Md., was married yesterday to Peter Williams Ahl, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
George W. Ahl Jr. of Rowayton, Conn.
The Rev.
Simon Mein performed the Episcopal ceremony at the chapel of the St.
Andrew's School in Middletown, Del.
Mrs.
Ahl is a development officer at the New England Medical Center in Boston.
She and her husband graduated from Middlebury College.
Her father is a partner in the Chesapeake Insurance Agency in Salisbury.
Her mother is a history teacher at Wicomico High School there.


Oct. 3-9: Tailhook '93; An Admiral Is Salvaged As the Fraternity Sobers Up
Adm.
Frank B. Kelso's job as Chief of Naval Operations was spared last week by Defense Secretary Les Aspin, who overruled the Secretary of the Navy and retained the ranking officer to have attended the Tailhook Association convention of 1991 -- that infamous bacchanal that ruined military careers and added a new word to the language, synonymous with sexual abuse of women by drunken naval aviators.
But a small and subdued band of Tailhook Association members, virtually all of them retired and too old for serious hell-raising, were not mollified when they gathered in San Diego this weekend for the first convention since the scandal.


Harmonious Machine
To the Editor:
Contrary to "Mercedes Selects Alabama Site" (Business Day, Sept. 30), which states that Mercedes-Benz "will build its first automobile assembly plant in America in Tuscaloosa County, Ala.," Mercedes actually opened its first United States plant about 1906 on Long Island for the American Mercedes.
Production ceased in 1913 after a fire.
Since that plant was a joint venture with Steinway Piano, the product could be (and no doubt was) called a "well-tuned automobile." LOUIS T. WELLS JR.
Professor of Intl.
Management Graduate School of Business Administration, Harvard University Boston, Oct. 1, 1993


Dinners in the kitchen
Throughout history, dinner parties have been a counterpoint to daily life: starch for the rough-and-tumble early years of the country, excess in its lean times, haute cuisine for an era better known for jello molds and tuna casserole.
At the height of the recent craze for formality, friends confided their culinary misgivings in tones formerly reserved for suspicions of marital infidelity.
Today, the rise of simple, soul-warming cuisine suggests a move away from forced elegance.
"Dinner at 8" now signals an oasis in the modern, nanosecond-driven world.
And the best way for a host to engender that calm is to embody it.


Words Galore


Lawyers Do Their Bit, Too
To the Editor:
Dr.
Ribnik's article only goes to prove that some people are a little behind in their reading.
What the article calls "Lexicare" has been in operation for 30 years under the name "Judicare."


Does Coverage Polarize Elections?
To the Editor:
"Clinton Hits a Nerve on Race," (editorial, Sept. 30) highlights the tendency of voters to follow racial lines in biracial contests, often in response to campaign rhetoric.
But you ignore how the mass media's poll-driven, horse-race coverage of elections may exacerbate this tendency.


Still Mired in Last Season, Rangers to Keep Practicing
The Rangers' coach, Mike Keenan, already had scheduled practice for the next day at the team's workout complex at Rye Playland, despite the fact it was Sunday and, in the past, Sundays have often been optional days for the Rangers, days when they could rest.
Had a practice not been planned, though, tonight's game at Pittsburgh's Civic Arena probably would have precipitated one.
Three games into this young season, the Rangers continue to show signs of the problems that plagued them last season -- namely, a failure to hold a lead, a failure to capitalize on opportunities and a penchant for defensive mistakes.


Easier Said Than Done; Fragmented New Jersey Struggles to Cut Taxes
To understand the campaign arguments of Gov.
Jim Florio and Christine Todd Whitman over state spending, the three adjacent Bergen County school districts of Allendale, Ho-Ho-Kus and Saddle River offer a telling lesson.
Their combined enrollments are only 1,400, about the size of a high school in some places.
But their combined budgets add up to $15 million, as much as what a medium-sized city often spends for two or three times the number of students.


You Are What You Wear
"IT'S AGAINST THE LAW TO DRESS IMPROPER TO your sex," says a surly, suspicious shopkeeper as she watches a young woman look over the men's clothes.
The setting happens to be the American frontier in the 19th century, but the shopkeeper in "The Ballad of Little Jo" is expressing an idea that a half-dozen film makers have decided to challenge in places as far-flung as Beijing and Middle America.
Even before "The Crying Game" made transvestites the trendiest of heroes, three current films with cross-dressing characters were in the works.
Maggie Greenwald's richly textured and eloquent "Little Jo" and David Cronenberg's shrewd "M. Butterfly" are now playing.
Chen Kaige's "Farewell My Concubine," an extraordinary tale that sweeps through 50 years of Chinese theater and politics, opens on Friday after having played at the New York Film Festival.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
P.S.A.L.
SEEING DOUBLE: Duane Williams (18 carries for 124 yards, 2 touchdowns) and Duane Pickney (20 carries for 131 yards, 3 touchdowns) combined for all of TRUMAN'S (3-1) points as the Blue Devils hammered BRYANT (1-3), 36-6.


Harvest Festival Helps Pupils Study Plants
BASKETS of summer-grown produce overflowing with ripe tomatoes, eggplants, cucumbers, green peppers and corn nestled next to pots of marigolds and dried flower arrangements.
A cornucopia spilled forth gourds, squash and pumpkins near a wreath decorated with Indian corn, berries and dried cornstalks.
Perched under trees and along fences sat an assortment of life-size scarecrows, dressed to resemble farmers, cowgirls and fashion models.


Little Big People
ONE DAY LAST MAY, MY SON'S thirdgrade classroom was left in the care of a substitute teacher.
For reasons still undetermined, a small riot broke out, with children fighting, shrieking and shoving chairs.
Nine-year-olds going berserk in springtime is not unprecedented, but consider what happened next: The new principal lectured them with a sternness they were unaccustomed to.
Then she made them write letters of apology and then they fell apart all over again.
Those who claimed they had not participated in the brawl came down at dismissal time tearful and incensed at the burden of collective guilt imposed upon them.
"Isn't it illegal for her to punish those of us who did nothing?" one boy asked his mother.
"Should we sue her?" asked another.
When told they should show more respect for authority, one girl said, "Why should we respect her when she showed no respect for us?"
In the office of a child therapist recently, a 10-year-old girl leaned back and gazed at her mother with half-lidded contempt.
The child was there because her divorced parents couldn't do anything with her.
Her father was bitter because he had brought her along to buy his girlfriend an engagement gift and she had sulked the whole time.
Her mother complained that she refused to make friends with the mother's boyfriend.
"How do you expect me to have a relationship with him," the girl said with the ennui of a 40-year-old, "when he's always in your bedroom?"


Two-Line
To the Editor:
In his article about Wolfgang Sawallisch, the new conductor of the Philadelphia Orchestra  [ "Old Sound, New Resonance," Sept. 19 ] , Stephen Johnson speaks of a German influence in American musical life.
To fortify his contention, he also mentions Kurt Masur and Christoph von Dohnanyi.


What Do Lawyers Do As Families Crumble?
While one might argue against the credentials, tactics and philosophy of Milton Louvaris's group  [ "Group Attacked Over Legal Advice," Sept. 26 ] , it cannot be argued that the matrimonial bar and Family Court system are in dire need of reform.


Alexandra Piper, Jonathan Seed
Alexandra Piper, the daughter of Sarah J. Piper and Alexander R. Piper 3d, both of New York, was married on Sept. 12 to Jonathan Halleck Seed, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter H. Seed of Stillwater, Minn.
The Rev.
Mary Moore Gaines performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Old Dunfillan Winery in Kenwood, Calif.
The bride, 26, is an account executive at Gaper's Caterers in Chicago.
She and her husband graduated from Hamilton College, he magna cum laude.
Her father is a senior consultant at D. E. Shaw &amp; Company, a stockbrokerage in New York.
Her mother is the vice president of client services at the Research Board, a research and consulting concern in New York.
The bride is the granddaughter of the late Charles R. Jackson, whose novels included "The Lost Weekend."


Peter F. Clifton, Kristy M. Armstrong
Kristy Michelle Armstrong, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
C.
Michael Armstrong of Manhattan Beach, Calif., was married yesterday to Peter Folsom Clifton, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter Clifton of Bridgehampton, L.I.
The Rev.
Lidabell L. Pollard officiated at the Congregational Church in New Canaan, Conn.
The bride is a publicity manager at Dorling Kindersley Inc., a publishing company, in New York.
She graduated from Dickinson College.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the GM Hughes Electronics Corporation in Los Angeles.


The States' Stakes In Clinton's Health Plan
ANY social program as vast and complex as President Clinton's health-care plan has to have disparate effects on a country as vast and complex as the United States.
For all of its specificity, the plan has left the states trying to figure whether they would be winners or losers.
Take Texas, the state with the highest percentage of workers (25.3 percent) who have no health insurance.
By requiring all employers to pay for health insurance, the plan would hit Texas businesses especially hard.
But this mandate should mean better health care for 3.8 million uninsured Texans.


Beyond Foley Square: Acting Like a Tourist Close to Home; Brooklyn
One of the best tonics for courthouse cabin fever in New York City is available to the Brooklyn juror.
Just a 10-minute walk from the downtown courthouses, the Brooklyn Heights Promenade offers a spectacular, and restorative, view of lower Manhattan and the harbor.
Or stroll through Brooklyn Heights itself, immediately west of downtown Brooklyn and renowned for its 19th-century architecture -- stately brownstones on streets like Pierrepont and Remsen, country-flavored frame homes on Hicks and Middagh and richly designed churches.


Taylor Sees Future for Linebackers After He Calls It Quits With Giants
Lawrence Taylor, bum leg and all, sits atop the mountain like Zeus and looks down at all of the football mortals.
Every now and then Taylor will step away from his throne, visit with the other players and dispatch a piece of wisdom that can hit you like a lightning bolt.
In his own Zeus-like way, Taylor did just that this week by basically anointing another to the throne he will soon be departing.
If anything, this season Taylor has been the good Giants citizen.
His friends have left, both voluntarily and otherwise.
For the first time in his career, he was yanked from a game, because an ailing hamstring forced him to be less than average.
He knows the end is near, and there was no better indication of that when he basically named fellow linebacker Corey Miller as the Man to Replace L.T.


Jennifer Barbiero and Stephen Droesch
Jennifer Anne Barbiero, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony V. Barbiero of Islip, L.I., was married on Friday to Stephen Richard Droesch, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward R. Droesch of Syosset, L.I.
Msgr.
Charles Ribaudo performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Church in East Islip, L.I.
Mrs.
Droesch, 26, is an associate at Rivkin, Radler &amp; Kremer, a law firm in Uniondale, L.I.
She graduated magna cum laude from Lehigh University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from Cornell University.
Her father is a lawyer in Elmont, L.I.
Her grandfather the late Anthony Barbiero was a New York State Assemblyman and a judge of Nassau County District Court.


A Show That Spans 30 Years and 2 Networks
IN ITS TWO SEASONS, IT DREW plenty of awards and critical valentines, but "I'll Fly Away" never commanded a big enough audience to persuade NBC to keep it on the air.
While its true subject was the epic racial struggles of the 1950's and 60's, the show disguised itself as a gentle, often troubling family drama about a white lawyer in rural Georgia (played by Sam Waterston) and the black housekeeper (Regina Taylor) who cares for his three children.
When NBC canceled the show in May, PBS stepped forward and granted a rare reprieve: not only would public television broadcast repeats of all 38 episodes, but it would also commission a final chapter resolving the fates of all major characters.
That two-hour wrap-up, titled "Then and Now," will be seen tomorrow night on many PBS stations; the reruns will commence next week.


Paris in New York
This week, all eyes are on Paris, as the spring '94 ready-to-wear shows kick into high gear.
But there's still plenty of autumn ooh-la-la to be found on this side of the Atlantic in the myriad French boutiques sprinkled around Manhattan.


Tales of Police Corruption Not Surprising, 46th Precinct Residents Say
Every night, Winston Williams and his friends on Ryer Avenue made it a point to switch on the evening news to learn the latest from a mayoral panel's hearings on police corruption.
What they cannot forget is the face of that one officer, they said, close up on the screen, eyes unblinking and unremorseful, talking about the beatings he said he dispensed to drug dealers and residents on his beat a few years back and the drugs he stole in the 46th Precinct in the Bronx.


Duets By Wire
It was just too marvelous, too marvelous for words -- familiar words, that is, like duet.
For Frank Sinatra's next album, his first in nine years, the latest in fiber-optic telecommunications allowed a modern singer's dream: tele-crooning, or literally phoning in your performance.
The Sinatra album, due Nov. 2, involved duets with 13 far-flung artists.
Rather than face a nightmare of scheduling, Mr.
Sinatra's producer, Phil Ramone, turned to a system of high-capacity phone lines operated by the San Francisco-based Entertainment Digital Network.
With Mr.
Sinatra laying down tracks in Hollywood, Mr.
Ramone later mixed in live transmissions from the other performers -- Aretha Franklin from Detroit, Tony Bennett in New York, Charles Aznavour in London and Liza Minelli in Brazil.


Haiti: Mission Impossible?
On Thursday 600 American soldiers were supposed to leave for Haiti to help arrange the transition from military rule to the installation of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Their departure was delayed because a nervous Pentagon wanted "clarification" of their mission.
The objections, according to a state Department spokesman, have either been answered or overruled, and troops are now on their way, due to arrive in Port-au-Prince tomorrow.
That's a pity, because their mission, in its present form, will not work.


Waldheim and His Protectors
BETRAYAL The Untold Story of the Kurt Waldheim Investigation and Cover-Up.
By Eli M. Rosenbaum with William Hoffer.
Illustrated. 538 pp.
New York:  St.
Martin's Press. $25.95.


Portable Seinfeld
WHAT: "SeinLanguage," a book of "the stuff I have that you can read" by the comedian and sitcom star Jerry Seinfeld.
No. 1 on the New York Times best-seller list for hardcover nonfiction since Sept. 19; 750,000 copies sold since its debut on Aug. 25.
WHY THE GOLD RUSH?
Because his fans cannot get enough.
Mr.
Seinfeld has spawned much more than a hit television show; the passions of his admirers carry something of the collective force of a minor social movement.
For them, conversation is at its sweetest when the topic turns to Seinfeld moments.


Anthony Confronts Unfinished Business
As he talked about the upcoming Knicks season today, Greg Anthony was smiling.
It has not always been easy for Anthony to smile.
The March 23 brawl in Phoenix that led to a $20,000 fine and a five-game suspension for Anthony is the strongest memory most people have about his past season.
That incident, coupled with a severely sprained right ankle that he suffered March 16, turned a promising second season with the Knicks into frustration and disappointment.


IF PRODUCTIVITY'S RISING, WHY ARE JOBS PAYING LESS?
The fly in Rattner's pro-growth ointment is that "efficient" corporations may be firing the consumers who once bought their products.
If enough high-wage jobs are replaced by low-wage jobs, who will be left to buy the stream of goods turned out by "productive" industries?
It's a legitimate question one need not be a Luddite to ask.


Ms. Debra Gersh, Mr. Hernandez
Debra Ellen Gersh, the daughter of Richard and Arlene Gersh of Glen Ridge, N.J., was married yesterday to Gregory Hernandez, a son of Gregorio and Carmen Hernandez of Brooklyn.
Gerald E. Williams, a civil marriage officiant, performed the ceremony at the Radisson Plaza Hotel in Alexandria, Va.
Mrs.
Gersh Hernandez, 30, is the Washington editor of Editor &amp; Publisher magazine.
She and her husband graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is the president of Richard Gersh Associates Inc., and her mother is the creative director of Bit-by-Bit Creative Services, both public relations companies in New York.


Field for Omega Cup Is a Bermuda Triangle: Strong, Deep and Gold
Russell Coutts of New Zealand has cut a swath through the world of match-race sailing.
But his No. 1 ranking, solid as it seems, may not be enough to ward off the unusual number of America's Cup skippers that will gather at the Omega Gold Cup in Bermuda next week.
In its 54th year, the Gold Cup is expected to draw 24 match-racing teams for an eight-day competition that starts next Sunday off Hamilton, Bermuda.
Thirteen of the skippers are linked to 1995 America's Cup campaigns.


Assault-Rifle Sales Ban Prompts Legal Confusion
A significant chapter in Connecticut's long debate about gun control and crime may have seemed closed in June when Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. gleefully signed into law the nation's third statewide ban on assault-rifle sales.
Wrong.


Ms. Kelley, Mr. Southworth 3d
Mary Kathryn Kelley, the daughter of Rosemary and Kevin Kelley of West Point, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Hamilton Southworth 3d, the son of Eleanor and Hamilton Southworth Jr. of New York.
The Rev.
Richard Funk, a Baptist minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony in the Old Cadet Chapel at the United States Military Academy.
Ms.
Kelley is keeping her name.
She graduated from Mills College, and she and her husband, both 27, are to graduate from the University of Virginia School of Law in December.
They plan to practice law next spring in San Diego, where she is to become an associate at Brobeck, Phleger &amp; Harrison and he an associate at Klinedinst, Fliehman, McKillop &amp; Jones.


Correction
A picture caption last Sunday about warrants granted by the British royal family described an illustration incorrectly.
What was shown was not itself a warrant, but the Queen's coat of arms, which the warrant grants a merchant the right to display.


BEST SELLERS: October 10, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
61
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
2
LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching Hour."
3
5
2
SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $23.) Two Navajo tribal policemen undertake to unravel a web of politics and murder.
4
3
7
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
5
4
5
THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Concluding the "Griffin &amp; Sabine" trilogy.
6
6
26
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
7
7
30
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
8
8
9
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and woman and for the woman's first lover.
9
9
5
STRIP TEASE, by Carl Hiaasen. (Knopf, $21.) The problems, political and sexual, of a Florida Congressman.
10
10
10
STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a train robber and killer.
11
15
38
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through illustrated cards and letters.
12
12
16
PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $22.) The stresses and strains that befall a mother and her adopted Cherokee daughter.
13
13
2
POT OF GOLD, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon, $23.) A single mother and her teen-age daughter go on a spree after winning $60 million in a lottery.
14
14
13
THE NIGHT MANAGER, by John le Carre. (Knopf, $24.) A Zurich hotelman's life in the world of arms dealers, dope smugglers and international terrorists.
15*
11
5
THE DEATH AND LIFE OF SUPERMAN, by Roger Stern. (Spectra/Bantam, $19.95.) A novel about the comic-book hero, including his rebirth in the near future.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
5
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
2
2
22
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
3
3
7
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
4
6
61
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
5
4
8
MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Inspirational essays.
6
5
13
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A discussion of mood-changing medications.
7
1
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
8
7
18
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
9
9
43
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Spirituality and everyday life.
10
10
2
MORE MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Putnam, $21.95.) Stories about country music stars.
11
12
2
THE FOUNTAIN OF AGE, by Betty Friedan. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A call for men and women to regard life after age 60 as an exciting adventure.
12
1
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
13
8
4
CASE CLOSED, by Gerald Posner. (Random House, $25.) A reassessment of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.
14
1
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Reflections on 43 years of marriage.
15
1
BLACK HOLES AND BABY UNIVERSES, by Stephen Hawking. (Bantam, $21.95.) The Cambridge physicist ruminates on his life and the cosmos.
16*
13
16
DAYS OF GRACE, by Arthur Ashe and Arnold Rampersad. (Knopf, $24.) The memoirs of the late tennis star.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
11
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
2
2
21
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
3
3
3
THE WINNER WITHIN, by Pat Riley. (Putnam, $22.95.) The basketball coach's advice for achieving successful teamwork in sports and other endeavors.
4
4
15
EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Counsel about diet.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Sept. 25, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
ACROSS THE BRIDGE: Stories, by Mavis Gallant. (Random House, $19.) In these 11 lucid urban stories, most of which are set in Paris or Montreal, Mrs.
Gallant's wit and exactitude subvert the antiquity of her material.
BODY &amp; SOUL, by Frank Conroy. (Seymour Lawrence/Houghton Mifflin, $24.95.) An old-fashioned (deliberately) novel about a poor boy who grows up to be a famous pianist and composer, and a totally sincere love song to the 1950's, when such things were possible.
CRIME AND PUNISHMENT IN AMERICAN HISTORY, by Lawrence M. Friedman. (Basic Books, $30.) A law professor's impressive panoramic history of the criminal justice system, which, he argues, hasn't controlled crime since Plymouth Rock and will not control it now.
THE CULTURE OF DISBELIEF: How American Law and Politics Trivialize Religious Devotion, by Stephen L. Carter. (Basic Books, $25.) A professor of law at Yale examines what he calls a 20-year-old tendency to ban religion from public discourse, and argues that a just balance of mutually respectful forces is required, not a victory for church or secularism.
THE GRISLY WIFE, by Rodney Hall. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.) This volume of Rodney Hall's Australian trilogy is narrated by a female missionary who has seen 32 years of dark and bloody doings since coming to New South Wales.
LIFE WORK, by Donald Hall. (Beacon, $15.) Donald Hall, a poet and writer who has done many things well and who now, at 65, faces a mortal illness, tells us what he thinks matters about himself in this sort-of-autobiography.
LITTLE KINGDOMS: Three Novellas, by Steven Millhauser. (Poseidon, $21.) Three tales from the lush otherwhere that is Mr.
Millhauser's imagination, where human complexity and folly are embodied in dwarfs and dungeons and artists willing to sacrifice other satisfactions for art.
SO FAR FROM GOD, by Ana Castillo. (Norton, $19.95.) Magic realism in New Mexico: a girl who levitates at the age of 3 performs other miracles as required to save her three sisters from fates as grave as death or worse.
THE WARBURGS: The Twentieth-Century Odyssey of a Remarkable Jewish Family, by Ron Chernow. (Random House, $30.) Mr.
Chernow's vast Warburg saga follows the fates of a rich, thoroughly secularized German Jewish family betrayed by the nation and culture they loved.
WHILE ENGLAND SLEEPS, by David Leavitt. (Viking, $22.) England and Spain in the 1930's are the settings for a novel that indicts exploitation by sex, by class and by using other people's wars to work out personal frustrations.
WORKERS: An Archaeology of the Industrial Age, by Sebastiao Salgado. (Aperture, $100.) Pictures by a Brazilian photojournalist of the labors of humanity around the world, especially where hands and backs still do the work; many are beautiful, many appalling, many both.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 26 about Art Garfunkel misstated a song title.
It is "All I Know," not "All I Need."


Sandy Hook: A New Lab, A New Era
THE State of New Jersey which helped to make it all happen -- will become a partner and a major player in a new $19 million marine sciences laboratory to be dedicated here on Oct. 18.
Scientists, researchers, academics, environmentalists and governmental leaders say the laboratory will put New Jersey in the vanguard in the study of the ocean, bays, rivers and wetlands at a time when concerns are heightened over pollution and the marine dumping of dioxin-contaminated dredge spoils that continue to take a toll on waterways.


Virtuoso Fare





Lost in India
My Grandfather, William Dorsey Beal, died too young to figure in my childhood.
His is the missing chair in the quartet of parents' parents who posed in front of the fireplace with my father, mother, sisters and baby me.
To my mother, barely a year old when he died, he was the tall ghost whom she wished to say she remembered; to her children, he was some sun-bleached portraits.
Although I had inherited his last name as my middle, it was seldom spoken in our house, even by my grandmother.
What little I know about him now I've learned from a thick file of documents she prepared during her last years.
He seems to have been a virtuous but luckless man.
A Methodist Episcopal missionary who went to India in 1904 because my grandmother convinced him that her father the bishop could aid the young couple, he served with her for 11 years in Muzaffarpur, Calcutta and Belgaum.
During their last posting in the city of Meerut, he contracted a throat infection that went unrecognized as diphtheria.
The serum that could have saved him arrived a day late from the hill station.
My grandmother, left with debts and four young children, was too stunned to grieve at the funeral.
A smattering of mourners kept their distance from the ceremony for fear of contagion.
He was buried 8,000 miles from his birthplace in Ohio, at the age of 36.


Dina Arjoumandi, James McHeffey
Dina Helene Arjoumandi, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Abbass Arjoumandi of Colts Neck, N.J., was married yesterday to James Eugene McHeffey, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Murray McHeffey of Little Silver, N.J.
The Rev.
Michael Lankford officiated at St.
James Roman Catholic Church in Red Bank, N.J.
Mrs.
McHeffey, 29, is a fourth-year medical student at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey.
She graduated from Rutgers University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Rhode Island.
Her father is the president of Difaya International, a cosmetic and fragrance distribution and marketing company in Red Bank.


Reva Gold and Eric B. Fischman
Reva Gold, a daughter of Dr.
Ely Gold of River Vale, N.J., and Susan H. Gold of Tenafly, N.J., was married last evening to Eric B. Fischman, the son of Drs.
Donald A. Fischman and Marian W. Fischman, both of New York.
Rabbi Andre Unger performed the ceremony at the New York Marriott Eastside.
The bride, 28, is a policy analyst at Abt Associates, a social policy research firm in Bethesda, Md.
She graduated from Cornell University, as did her husband, and she received a master's degree in public policy from Harvard University.


JAPAN'S NEW TRAIN IS LOSING ITS STEAM
Sleek, speedy and almost always on time, the bullet train has stood for three decades as a symbol of Japan's reputation for advanced technology and efficiency.
But the newest and fastest bullet is shooting holes in that reputation.
The new Nozomi train, whose name means hope, has been plagued by breakdowns and defects since it went into service a year and a half ago.
Bolts have fallen out, welds and windows have cracked, doors have failed to close and a control stick broke off in a driver's hand.


PARTY SUPPORTING BRITAIN'S LEADER
Prime Minister John Major's greatest achievement at the Conservative Party conference this week can be summed up in a single word: survival.
From the opening speeches Tuesday morning to the rousing ovation given to Mr.
Major's closing address on Friday afternoon, it was clear that party leaders had been able to stave off any immediate challenge to his leadership and snuff out signs of rebellion.
Mr.
Major's hourlong speech was a call for a return to "the old core values" -- discipline, decency, self-reliance and respect for the law and family.
"It's back to basics," he declared.


Discovering Lower East Side
A colorful map and fold-out brochure that serves as a guide to more than 25 cultural and historic attractions on the Lower East Side of Manhattan has been published by the Lower East Side Consortium, an economic development group.
Titled "Discover Five Treasures on the Lower East Side," it gives detailed information about Little Italy, Chinatown, the area around Orchard and Delancey Streets, the East Village and the East Village area east of Avenue B called Loisaida by its largely Hispanic population from the Spanish pronunciation of Lower East Side.
Each neighborhood is represented with sections labeled "Discover the History," "Discover the Cultures" and "Discover the Sights."


POSTINGS: 55 Water Street; New Start for a Troubled Building
Finally, the end of a painful odyssey for a troubled building: Last week the ownership of the 52-story, 3.6 million-square-foot 55 Water Street was formally transferred from Olympia &amp; York to the New Water Street Corporation, the majority of which is owned by the Retirement Systems of Alabama.
And now the more pleasant journey begins: taking the once-debt-laden building from run-down property to modern corporate center.
It won't be a quick trip or a cheap one.
It will cost well over $20 million to remove asbestos.
The new owners plan to install a back-up electrical system to end, once and for all, the electricity outages that have plagued the building.
And they've just hired the architects Kohn Pedersen Fox to come up with an extensive cosmetic remodeling plan as well.


Corrections
A picture caption on Sept. 26 about the construction of a cardboard model of the area around Lincoln Center misidentified one model maker.
He was Joseph Keating, not Nicole Comp.


He Was a Good Samaritan Of the Subway, or Was He?
To the Editor:
On a recent subway ride in Manhattan, I witnessed a most strange phenomenon.
A well-dressed young man stood in the center of the car and offered to give something away.
"Are there any homeless people in this car?" he inquired.
"Any hungry people? Just signal me, and I'll give you a cup of coffee and a bag of doughnuts."


Tracy L. Hudson, Derek van Eck
Tracy Lynn Hudson, a daughter of Martha Alexander of Fort Worth and Carl B. Hudson of Hot Springs, Ark., was married yesterday to Derek Steven van Eck, a son of John and Sigrid van Eck of Scarborough, N.Y.
The ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Tim Boeglin at First United Methodist Church in Fort Worth.
Mrs. van Eck, 30, is a vice president in the fixed-income research department of C S First Boston, an investment firm in New York.
She graduated from the University of Texas at Austin.
Her mother is a technical analyst at the Lockheed Corporation in Fort Worth.
The bride's stepfather, Dr.
John Alexander, is a pathologist at Harris Hospital there.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 19 about the Richmond district in San Francisco located the Alhambra Theater incorrectly.
It is on Polk Street, near Union, not on Geary Boulevard.
The article also misidentified the western boundary of the district.
It is a few blocks west of 48th Avenue, not 40th.


Elias Performs His Own Galloping Ghost Routine
Princeton 34, Brown 16
Keith Elias ran for 206 yards and a pair of touchdowns and set three school records yesterday as unbeaten Princeton thumped Brown, 34-16, in Providence, R.I.


Plant Now for Best Results in Spring
THIS is an odd time of year for most gardeners.
The tree leaves are beginning to turn.
There are signals everywhere that the growing period is going fast.
Some may think about moving activities indoors.
Yet there is reluctance.
It is so delightful to be outside.
Lawns still need mowing.
There is an enormous amount of yardwork still to be done.
Don't put the tools away.
Savor the month.


Economics 401
To the Sports Editor:
Baseball owners seem unable to reach agreement on sharing local media revenue.
According to Murray Chass ("Owners Circle Bases But Don't Score," The Times, Sept. 7), lawsuits have been threatened by the high-revenue clubs, and the owners' chief labor executive says, "Everyone is acting pretty much in their own self-interest."
One of the reasons that revenue sharing in major league baseball is controversial is the lack of agreement on the financial success of the teams.
Owners continually cry poverty, but the amounts that teams sell for suggest financial success.
In my view, all major league baseball teams are financially successful and revenue sharing is superfluous to this nonexistent problem.


At Last, Work to Begin on a Civil Courthouse
After waiting for more than 20 years for a Civil Courthouse, Queens is finally ready to break ground.
"This is something that should have been done a long time ago," Joseph J. Risi, supervising judge of the court, said.
"I expect that the litigants will jump with joy."


Editors' Note
The Travel section on Aug. 29 carried an article by Michael Modzelewski headed "At the Top of Europe," about Norwegian Lapland.
The newspaper has since learned that the article was based on a trip arranged by travel businesses, which paid for the writer's airline tickets, hotels and other amenities.


Evaluating Threats to the Water Supply
A RECENTLY released study from the Natural Resources Defense Council, a nonprofit environmental organization based in Manhattan, suggests that New York City's reservoir systems, which supply many Westchester residents with drinking water, are at risk from population and development pressures that threaten the water quality.
The report identifies poorly planned development, sewage and urban runoff as long-term threats to such Westchester reservoirs as Kensico, Cross River, Muscoot and New Croton.
The study also proposes that new Federal and state regulatory standards be established to protect those watersheds.


Judith Fishlow And Mark Minter
Judith Charna Fishlow and Mark Howells Minter, vice presidents at Citibank in New York, were married yesterday in Cloudcroft, N.M.
Judge Henry Prelo, a magistrate of Otero County, N.M., officiated at the Lodge at Cloudcroft, a hotel.
Mrs.
Minter graduated from Wesleyan University and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is a daughter of Albert and Harriet Fishlow of Berkeley, Calif.
Her father is a professor of economics at the University of California at Berkeley, and her mother is an enrollment planner there in the office of the university's president.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
HUMOR SEINLANGUAGE By Jerry Seinfeld. Bantam, $19.95.


DOME Garden Won't Go to School
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines may save a popular community garden on West 84th Street.
On Wednesday, Mr.
Cortines told the Board of Education that he would not approve moving the garden to Louis D. Brandeis High School's schoolyard.
The Housing Authority has been trying to move the DOME garden -- named for Development of Opportunities through Meaningful Education, the group that oversees it -- to build a housing project on the site, between Amsterdam and Columbus Avenues.


Selectivity
Most people think a total transformation means tearing down walls.
But when the building is old and the apartment a rental, resourcefulness serves better than a wrecking crew.
Donald Kaufman and Taffy Dahl, well-known color consultants, relied on paint, artwork and a way with castoff furniture to give their rented Soho walk-up personality.
Occupying the top floors of an 1823 town house, the duplex offered a few challenges: eight small rooms with odd geometries (the building lost a corner when the street in front was widened).
But that, plus the pine plank floors, Victorian tilework and generations of paint on the stairs, gave the apartment an errant charm suited to the mood they were after.
"We couldn't afford a country house, but we needed a refuge," Kaufman says.
"We wanted something that felt as if you could walk out into the woods."
Permanent alterations were out of the question, so they made only one minor structural adjustment: built-in bookcases in the living room.
Then they started mixing paints.
"Paint is cheap, compared to other things," Kaufman says.
It was the obvious choice for this husband-and-wife team: They create paints in one-of-a-kind nuanced shades for architects and designers like Philip Johnson, Thad Hayes and Thierry Despont, not to mention artists like Ross Bleckner and even the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
"Our clients tend to be the color-obsessed," says Kaufman.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L. 27,227 Watch Lightning  A National Hockey League-record crowd of 27,227 watched Florida goaltender John Vanbiesbrouck stop all 36 Tampa Bay shots last night in a 2-0 Panthers victory that spoiled the Lightning's opener at the Thunderdome in St.
Petersburg, Fla.
The victory was the first for the expansion Panthers (1-1-1), who opened the season with a 4-4 tie Wednesday at Chicago.
Tampa Bay fell to 0-3.
The shutout was the 19th in an 11-year career for Vanbiesbrouck (1-0-1), who was acquired from the Vancouver Canucks in the 1993 expansion draft.(AP) Bruins 7, Nordiques 3: Adam Oates scored two of his three goals on power plays during a five-goal first period, and the Bruins went on to a 7-3 victory over the Quebec Nordiques last night at Boston.
Oates has four goals and nine points in three games this season.(AP) Flyers 5, Whalers 2: Josef Beranek and Kevin Dineen scored twice each in Philadelphia's five-goal first period, and the Flyers won at Hartford, making the Whalers 0-5-2 in home openers in the last seven years.
Despite that record, there was a full house of 15,635 at the Civic Center.
Many of those in attendance took advantage of a free ticket offer.(AP) TENNIS Another Yzaga Upset  Jaime Yzaga of Peru continued his giant-killing run at the Australian Indoor championships last night in Sydney, beating the defending champion, Goran Ivanisevic, 6-3, 6-4.
Ivanisevic is ranked ninth in the world and had won 10 matches in a row.
The unseeded Yzaga, ranked 54th, will face sixth-seeded Petr Korda in today's final.
Korda defeated Wayne Ferreira, 6-3, 6-2. (AP) Navratilova Advances: Top-seeded Martina Navratilova went a step closer to another title yesterday when she moved into the European Indoors final in Zurich.
Navratilova scored a 6-3, 6-4 semifinal victory over third-seeded Magdalena Maleeva of Bulgaria.
Maleeva's oldest sister, fourth-seeded Manuela Maleeva-Fragniere, won the other semifinal, beating Stephanie Rottier by 6-2, 7-5. (AP) GOLF Stadler Shares Lead  Craig Stadler was one of the lucky players at the rain-delayed Walt Disney World-Oldsmobile Classic yesterday in Lake Buena Vista, Fla.
He got in the last six holes of the second round of the $1 million PGA Tour event in the morning, then shot a four-under-par 68 for 203 to grab a share of the lead with Ed Humenik among the third-round finishers before an afternoon thunderstorm stopped play for the second straight day.
Not only was much of the field still scattered over three courses being used for the tournament, but Jeff Maggert and Skip Kendall -- two-thirds of the threesome who led after 36 holes -- hadn't even begun the third round.
That means some players will have to play 36 holes today if tournament officials meet a goal of getting in 72 holes without delaying the finish until tomorrow. (AP)
Shaw Comes Up 68 Again: Tom Shaw shot a 4-under-par 68 yesterday and took a one-stroke lead over Simon Hobday in the $600,000 Transamerica Senior Golf Championship at Napa, Calif.
Shaw's second straight 68 left him with an 8-under 136 total after 36 holes on the south course at Silverado Country Club.
Hobday carded the tournament's lowest round, a 66.
Weber knocked down 7,367 pins and collected a total of 8,132 points.
Yasutomo Bannai of Japan was the second-highest qualifier. (AP) SOCCER Tranmere Moves Closer  Tranmere improved its chances for its first berth in England's top soccer league with 2-1 victory over Bolton yesterday to move into first place in Division One.
Foward Pat Nevin scored the winning goal with nine minutes to play.
The Premier League had the day off in advance of England's World Cup qualifier Wednesday at the Netherlands.
Tranmere, in the Football League since 1921, has never played among England's elite, but a finish in the top two would grant the Rovers an automatic place in the Premier League next season. (AP)


Perfect Dive In
To the Sports Editor:
Robert Lipsyte found just the right balance in dealing with Greg Louganis's sexual orientation and its effect on his sports and after-sports careers ("Louganis Approaches the Edge of the Stage, and Leaps," The Times, Sept. 19).
It was especially satisfying to see the sports department handle this matter with openness, compassion and eloquence.
RANDOLPH LACY STEPHEN STEIN Houston


Sex Industry Defends Itself
Behind the yellow blinking lights of Manhattan Video, an adult store on 39th Street off Fifth Avenue, leaders of a new association met on Thursday to discuss strategy.
The group, yet to be named, has a clear goal: to defend the sex industry against neighborhood protests and moves by the city toward increased regulation.
A loose coalition of some 50 sex businesses, the association was formed in reaction to the Manhattan Borough President's Task Force on the Regulation of Sex-Related Businesses, which was established last spring to address complaints about the spread of sex businesses in residential areas.


Marni Jo Lerner, Charles Edelman
Marni Jo Lerner, an associate of the law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett, was married last evening to Charles Saul Edelman, an associate of the law firm Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Myron Fenster officiated at the Shelter Rock Jewish Center in Roslyn, L.I.


Streetscapes/The Northern Dispensary; Plan to House Homeless With AIDS Stirs a Protest
FOR more than a century and a half the Northern Dispensary, at Waverly Place and Christopher Street, did "a great deal of good without making much noise," as The Evening Post described the public clinic (then in rented quarters elsewhere) in 1828.
But now a small battle has erupted as a neighborhood group protests a plan to reopen the tiny triangular building as a residence for 15 homeless people with AIDS.
So far the only concrete hope of the protesters is a 162-year-old deed restriction.


Coach Sets Record
Summerville (S.C.) High School Coach JOHN McKISSICK stepped off the sideline and into history Friday night, becoming the coach with the most victories in football.
The Green Wave gave its coach of 42 seasons his 406th victory, the most ever in high school, college or the pros, with a 42-0 victory over Wando.


Leashing the Pit Bulls
To the Editor:
"The Pit Bull of Silicon Valley" (Sept. 19) states class-action lawyer William Lerach, like his adversaries, the managers of Silicon Valley's high-tech companies, is an entrepreneur because "he risks his own firm's capital on lengthy projects of uncertain outcome."


The Executive Computer; Free Technical Support: An Endangered Species of Service
THERE is no such thing as a free lunch, and there may soon be no such thing as a free technical support call.
As prices and profit margins fall in the personal computer software industry, some software makers are charging their customers for what was once "free" technical advice.
The Microsoft Corporation, for example, has revamped its technical support programs, and part of the plan includes new "priority" and "premium" fees for customers who call outside business hours seeking solutions to their problems.


Sports of The Times; The Braves Don't Want To Be Bills
AS a high school pitcher and hockey center in the Boston area, Tom Glavine was drafted in 1984 by both the Braves and hockey's Los Angeles Kings.
He chose baseball, developing into a three-time 20-game winner.
But if he had signed with the Kings, he once was asked, what would have happened to Wayne Gretzky?
Going along with the gag, the Braves' ace left-hander said, "I guess Wayne would've had to move to wing."


Science Symposium Deserves Recognition
Now that schools have started up again, I want to credit an article in the Westchester Weekly on May 2  [ "A Different Equation at SUNY Purchase" ]  with giving the Natural Sciences Student Symposium at the State University of New York at Purchase the publicity it deserves.


Lawyers Do Their Bit, Too
To the Editor:
In response to "Health Reform? How About Lawyers" (Sept. 26), which suggested that lawyers are turning a blind eye to the needs of persons who cannot afford legal services.


On Not Misreading Murder Statistics
To the Editor:
"High Murder Rate for Women on Job" (news article, Oct. 3) states that 40 percent of women killed at work are murdered, while the figure for men is only 15 percent.
Officials suggested that this "difference" is due to the large number of women exposed to crime while working late at night.
The clear message is that women are at greater risk of being murdered in the workplace than men.
A critical reading of other statistics in the article discloses an entirely different picture.
Men account for 93 percent of all job-related deaths, although only 55 percent of the work force is male.
What this means is that less than 3 percent (40 percent of 7 percent) of workplace deaths are female murders, while almost 14 percent (15 percent of 93 percent) are male murders.
If we then take account of the differential representation of the sexes in the work force, we can see that a man is almost four times as likely to be murdered in the workplace as a woman and that a man is more than 11 times as likely as a woman to be killed on the job by all causes combined.
Thus, the reason that a greater proportion of female deaths in the workplace are murders is not that women are murdered at a higher rate than men, because they are not.
It is rather that men are killed at a higher rate by other causes.
The slant of this report is symptomatic of the treatment of virtually any statistics that show differences between men and women.
It is almost as if a conscious decision had been made along the line to report the information in a way to reinforce the notion that women are being victimized.
KINGSLEY R. BROWNE  Associate Professor of Law Wayne State University Detroit, Oct. 3, 1993


Windows on a World of Storybook Charm and Precision
THAT "Animal Antics," at the Scarsdale Historical Society, is aimed at children should not deter adults from investigating it -- and they don't have to be adults who are still children at heart, either.
Robert Heitmann, a star in other productions of the society, has returned with more of his dioramas based on nursery tales.
Most illustrate episodes from "The Tale of Peter Rabbit," "Alice in Wonderland" and "The Wind in the Willows"; a few represent tales that have yet to be told.
It is likely that more people are familiar with Mr.
Heitmann's work than know his name, for he has been doing Christmas windows for Tiffany for about 15 years.
As recounted by the artist in a recent telephone conversation, his career has proceeded effortlessly, beginning with the traveling scholarship that he won while a student of painting at the Cincinnati Art Academy in 1950 and that took him to Florence for a year.
After that he came back to the United States, worked for the Kudner Advertising Agency in Manhattan, visited Europe again (mostly on a bicycle) and returned to New York to work for Benton &amp; Bowles.


Yeltsin Orders Regional Legislatures Replaced
President Boris N. Yeltsin kept up pressure on his opponents in Russia's regions and territories today by ordering regional councils to submit to new elections and face a drastic reduction in their size.
In his latest decree, Mr.
Yeltsin gave a special commission six days to come up with a reorganization of regional government and set election procedures for new regional councils.


The Continuing Attack On Lincoln Center Park
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 19 article, "Destroying Trees to Save Them," primarily focused on the recently destroyed London plane trees at Lincoln Center.
However, this action is only the latest in a continuing barrage against the park there.


Clash Of the Titans
Colossal statues have provoked colossal reactions since at least 280 B.C., when Chares of Lindos built the Colossus of Rhodes.
But none have undergone a saga like that of "Hammering Man," the 48-foot, 13-ton mechanized steel silhouette, thick-legged and small-torsoed like a Gumby toy and ragged-edged like a Rorschach-test blot, that pounds away outside the flashy new Seattle Art Museum.
In just two years, "he," as Seattleites tend to call the sculpture, has been saluted by the art establishment and a porn palace, savaged in newspaper columns and a book, accidentally smashed on the pavement and lampooned in a beer commercial and on "Saturday Night Live."


The Executive Life; Waking to the Power Of Our Dream Worlds
BY day, Shelby Yastrow oversees multimillion-dollar legal matters and other problems that can affect the bottom line of the McDonald's Corporation.
But at night, the company's general counsel enters a very different boardroom, one in which he consistently humiliates himself by being totally unprepared for a meeting.
This is Mr.
Yastrow's recurring dream, and he is not alone.
Versions of this nighttime drama keep many executive-level colleagues working overtime in their sleep.
Nearly all of the 18 executives contacted for this article reported some variation of Mr.
Yastrow's dream: being one credit short of the number required to graduate, missing a critical court date or having to take an exam in a course for which they never went to class.


Trying to Save a Home For Snakes and 6 Cats
An article on Sept. 12 reported a proposal by the city's Housing Authority to move a 15-year-old community garden on West 84th Street in Manhattan to make way for a housing project for the homeless.
Under the plan, the garden would be relocated in a schoolyard across the street.
Last week, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines said he opposed that move.
The garden is operated by a neighborhood group called DOME, for Development of Opportunities through Meaningful Education.
To the Editor:
I'm writing to you about DOME.
Please don't tear it down!
There are lots of unused car lots in New York.
DOME garden is home to snakes, six cats, plants and other animals.
I know it's for a good cause, but when you look the other way, we need the garden!
GABRIELLE LUBART Grade 4, Public School 87 Manhattan


Tenants Slowing A Sale
A COLONIAL house in Scarsdale, N.Y, was offered for sale last May for $525,000.
It was a desirable home in a fashionable neighborhood and should have sold rapidly.
It did not.
The house had been rented pending a turnaround in the market.
And once the tenant discovered she might soon have to leave she refused to let brokers show the house.


A Collision in Court on Exxon's Oil Spill
THE cleanup of the 1989 Exxon Valdez oil spill in Alaska has moved from the shores of Prince William Sound to the courts of New York and Houston.
Now the Exxon Corporation and more than 100 insurers led by Lloyd's of London are suing each other over who should pay part of the multibillion-dollar tab for cleaning up the mess.
The dispute promises to be a closely watched battle royal for its sheer size, the corporate titans and legal personalities involved and its implications for pollution insurance and maritime law.
Although the legal battle is just getting under way, the rhetoric is already rumbling.


Farrakhan Plans Yankee Stadium Rally 3 Days Before Vote
The Rev.
Louis Farrakhan, the Nation of Islam leader admired by many black New Yorkers and despised by many Jews, is organizing a big rally to be held at Yankee Stadium just three days before the mayoral election -- a politically awkward prospect for Mayor David N. Dinkins, who needs both a huge black turnout and substantial Jewish support to win.
Many times over the years, and as recently as last week, Mr.
Dinkins has condemned Mr.
Farrakhan for his reference to Judaism as "a gutter religion" and other remarks seen by many as anti-Semitic.
But the minister's presence in New York City so close to the election could put Mr.
Dinkins in the position of being asked to repeat his denunciations of Mr.
Farrakhan again and again, possibly undermining support for Mr.
Dinkins among Mr.
Farrakhan's followers.


Corrections
An article on July 25 about Deborah Laake, who wrote a memoir about her Mormon childhood and marriages and subsequent stay in a psychiatric hospital, misstated the length of the hospital stay.
It was two months, not two years.
A letter from Ms.
Laake's publisher advising The Times of the error was received in late August; this correction was delayed by misrouting and editing oversights at The Times.


Somalis Can Well Govern Themselves; Bring Them to Account
To the Editor:
In "Somalia: Learn from Cambodia" (editorial, Sept. 30), you praise the United Nations peacekeeping and election-supervising mission in Cambodia because it used "diplomatic pressure to curb human rights abuses." You suggest this approach would be effective in Somalia, specifically as an alternative to prosecuting those responsible for attacking United Nations peacekeepers.


'The Big City Newcomer Blues'
To the Editor:
I feel compelled to write in defense of Webster Apartments, the 34th Street women's residence mentioned as being dorm-like and "really unfriendly" by Cheryl Braje in the article on Sept. 26 headed "The Big City Newcomer Housing Blues." Ten years ago I made my way to the top of a very long waiting list and happily paid $400 a month for a furnished room, heat, hot water, electricity, breakfast, dinner and daily maid service.
I fail to understand how Ms.
Braje (who came to Webster after having experienced a number of dreadful lodging misfortunes) could find much fault in this delightful dwelling.


Catching That Fading Sound of Razzmatazz
These somewhat whimsical, far from definitive lists refer to the original-cast recordings of Broadway musicals, not the musicals themselves.
Recordings that transcend their station, however fitfully in some cases, are marked with an asterisk.
Only recent CD and cassette reissues of Broadway material in print from the 1950s and 1960s are listed, with an emphasis on recordings of forgotten flops and semi-remembered successes that have reappeared after long being unavailable.
Therefore, cult failures like "Candide," "Anyone Can Whistle," "House of Flowers" and "She Loves Me" are excluded along with the period's familiar, frequently revived hits.


Waffles Aren't Just for Breakfast Anymore
RECENTLY, my husband and I bought an old house in northwestern Connecticut, one of those buildings laughingly described as "needing work." Among the things left behind by the previous owners was a gleaming Art Deco waffle iron.
I had never made waffles before, so being the mother of a 5-year-old, it seemed a good time to learn.
In the back of a cupboard I discovered a mildewed cookbook missing its cover and first few pages.
It looked as though it dated back to the 1940's, and in it I found a recipe for waffles.
The previous afternoon my son and I had picked apples and raspberries in a local orchard, so I decided to add those to the recipe, and in the interests of health, I cut down the butter and used skim instead of whole milk.


To Read It Is to Destroy It
To the Editor:
Gerald Jonas writes that collectors who purchase for $2,000 the (very) limited deluxe edition of William Gibson's "Agrippa (A Book of the Dead)" wind up with a Hobson's choice of preserving the edition or reading it, because to read this "story-on-a-disk" is to destroy it.
But there is an obvious solution.


Pressing Too Hard Costs Karpov a Point
PRESSING too hard led to Anatoly Karpov's defeat in Game 2 of the International Chess Federation world championship match on Sept. 6 in Zwolle, the Netherlands.
It allowed Jan Timman to catch up at 1-1.
Karpov, a former world champion, tried to prevent the Dutch grandmaster from carrying out a routine procedure that would have brought about an even game, but Timman ingeniously exposed the plan as too ambitious.
This occurred unexpectedly in a Queen's Indian Defense, Karpov's favorite opening.


OLD RIVALS BATTLE IN GREEK ELECTION
The banners are furled.
The campaigning is done.
The bullhorns have blessedly fallen silent.
All that remains for Greek voters to do in elections on Sunday is to deliver what the pollsters insist will be one of Europe's most remarkable political resurrections: the revival and reinstatement of Andreas Papandreou.


Davelight Time Works 2 Ways
To the Editor:
I perceive a fatal flaw in the reasoning of the Sept. 26 article "Davelight Savings or Letterman Loss." The analysis depends on the decreased productivity of the seven million "new viewers" CBS claims are now watching television from 11:30 P.M. to 12:30 A.M. as a result of David Letterman's slot slide.


'Butterfly' Does Not Mince Notes
Puccini's "Madama Butterfly," which is appearing in productions at both the Metropolitan Opera and the New York City Opera this month, inverts the point of a novel that appeared in 1887: Pierre Loti's "Madame Chrysantheme." That tale is also about a naval officer who purchases and marries a Japanese girl named after a delicate organism.
But the infatuation hardly leads to a love duet; instead, the officer comes actively to dislike his wife along with all Japanese (whom he calls monkeys).
Unaffected by his scorn, she appears to love him deeply.
She weeps and wails as he prepares to depart.
But when he returns unexpectedly to his room, he finds that she has not been a helpless innocent trampled in the mud by a Westerner; she counts her money and coolly awaits her next marital contract.
I suspect that this cynical plot would have been less successful than the one Puccini adapted from David Belasco's play.
In "Butterfly," the victim is more innocent, and her triumph more subtle: it is in the tears of listeners who despise Pinkerton, his crudity and his cowardice.
Cio-Cio San's victory is posthumous; it is accomplished through helplessness.


Sacca Found in Arizona
Penn State quarterback JOHN SACCA JR. , relegated to second-string and then removed from the team, has turned up in Arizona after being reported missing by his family.
"He's in good health," JOHN SACCA SR. , Sacca's father, told The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette yesterday.
The younger Sacca went to Phoenix to visit his older brother, TONY, a former Penn State quarterback who now plays with the Phoenix Cardinals.


Kmart's Stock Surge Masks a Weakness at the Core
THE Kmart Corporation's stock has been on a roll lately.
Wall Street gave a big hurrah in August when the company announced that it was selling off Payless, its cut-price drugstore chain, which no longer meshes well with its other businesses.
There were even louder cheers when word hit the street soon after that Kmart had hired investment bankers to sell pieces to the public of some of its other specialty-store chains, a move designed to set a market value for the stores that could help buoy the parent's stock.
Kmart shares are up more than 20 percent since June, closing Friday at $24.25.


Charley's Lessons in Leverage: First You Run
"THIS big guy, six-one, 200 pounds, grabs you in a choke hold," says Charley Nelson, a little guy, five-eight, 130 pounds, wrapping his fingers around my neck.
"Whatcha gonna do?"
Depends on the neighborhood, I want to say.
I'll either call a cop or go up to the Bronx and buy a gun.
But Charley has no sense of humor about such things, so I say, "Grab his right sleeve with my left hand, swing my right arm . . ."


Democrats Try Offense as Best Defense
Signaling an unusually combative public posture for the Democrats, the party chairman, David Wilhelm, leveled a sweeping attack today on the gun lobby, the insurance lobby, the anti-tax lobby, the religious right and, of course, the Republican Party.
"The party of Bill Clinton is an aggressive and confident party, willing to confront its foes, ready to respond to attacks quickly and effectively," Mr.
Wilhelm said here at the fall meeting of the Democratic National Committee.
"And let's be very clear: our foes are not limited to members of the other political party; they are the people and institutions who will fight to maintain the status quo."


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
HOLOCAUST-INSPIRED ART
Harold Lewis, an 80-year-old American artist, visited Auschwitz and Warsaw 12 years ago and came away with a burden of dark inspiration.
The motto "Arbeit Macht Frei," meaning work makes you free, inscribed above the gate to the concentration camp, provided an irony that permeates the works he created as a result of that experience.


Seiji Ozawa: 20 Years in Boston, And Still Just Passing Through?
In 1960 Seiji Ozawa was a young fellowship conductor at the Tanglewood Music Center in Lenox, Mass., and a finalist for the prestigious Koussevitzky Prize.
Thanks to strong support from two persuasive jury members, the composers Aaron Copland and Leon Kirchner, he won.
"His gifts were enormous, his gestures so revealing of the music," Mr.
Kirchner said recently.
Everyone predicted a brilliant career for him, and by any objective measure, the predictions have come true.
Mr.
Ozawa just began his 20th season as music director of the Boston Symphony Orchestra.
At 58, he has enjoyed the longest tenure of any active music director of a major American orchestra.


Republican Faces Stiff Challenge
Andrew S. Eristoff is an incumbent City Councilman, but barely so.
The Republican squeaked by with a slender margin of 57 votes out of 15,000 in a special election in February.
Now, he is considered the most vulnerable of the six Republicans on the 51-member Council, as the runner-up last time around, Jane R. Crotty, a Democrat, challenges him again in the Nov. 2 election.


O.K. Jurors, Recess. On to the Main Event.
The City asked Eric Asimov, who writes the $25 and Under column for The Times, to visit restaurants near the city's courthouses.
Here are his recommendations.
BROOKLYN  GAGE &amp; TOLLNER  (718) 875-5181; 372 Fulton Street, near Smith Street, downtown Brooklyn; all major credit cards
The area around Borough Hall is a field of fast-food restaurants, with stores and offices seemingly just filling the spaces between hamburger stands, pizza places and fried-chicken joints.
Fortunately, Gage &amp; Tollner, the bastion of seafood and Southern cooking, lives on, its dignified face blinking a little awkwardly in the tackiness of Fulton Mall.
The gas lamps for which the dark mahogany dining room is renowned are not lighted at lunchtime, but even under electric lights the restaurant retains its turn-of-the-century patina, with arching mirrors, felt-covered walls and a ceiling that wears the residue of more than 100 years of tobacco smoke.
Office workers, courthouse regulars and politicians are in attendance at lunch, when there is an $18.95 fixed-price three-course meal and quick lunches ranging from $7.95 to $12.95.
Otherwise, lunch can rise into the $25 to $40 range.
This is a chance to sample the peppery she-crab soup, big meaty crab cakes, and a wide variety of fish and shellfish dishes, like pan-roasted clam bellies and fried oysters.
Bourbon pecan pie seems like a perfect (Southern) courthouse dessert, not too sweet, but still as excessive as a good prosecutor's oratory.
QUEEN
(718) 596-5954; 84 Court Street, near Livingston Street, downtown Brooklyn; cash only
For Italian meals of a less nostalgic nature, try Queen, a relative newcomer at 35 years of age.
There is a brightly dowdy, almost middle-American feel to the dining room, with its blond-wood chairs and pastel colors.
The food is a cut more inventive than old-style Italian.
Appetizers are so big that jurors hoping to stay awake for closing arguments can make a meal of a dish like sweet fava beans sauteed in butter and olive oil with earthy cremini mushrooms and tender baby artichokes for $8.
Those planning to nap the afternoon away can indulge in a main course of homemade ravioli stuffed with a savory puree of cannellini beans and tomato in a tart balsamic vinegar sauce for $13.
Service is friendly yet formal.
A waiter supplements the big basket of bread with piping-hot fingers of fried pizza dough tasting faintly of cheese.
THE BRONX Court Deli  (718) 993-1380; 96 East 161st Street, South Bronx; cash only
Bronx Borough Hall looms over 161st Street, as busy a block as any in midtown Manhattan.
But where are the restaurants?
The area has nothing more to offer than a few coffee shops and bars.
"We just had a tuna fish sandwich sent in from a local pizza joint," one courthouse regular said.
"We don't have too many five-star places near the courthouse."
When the courthouse regulars do eat out, many go to the Court Deli, a plain but thriving restaurant across the street with linoleum-tile floors, a crowded takeout counter, and gruff but personable waitresses.
Apart from a thick, lusty split pea soup and the sizzling hot dogs, the food is mediocre, probably no better than at Yankee Stadium down the street.
The overstuffed sandwiches are generous enough, but pastrami is strictly one-dimensional; it spends too much time on the steam table.
But the coffee is good and rich.
QUEENS  PASTRAMI KING  (718) 263-1717; 124-24 Queens Boulevard, at 82d Avenue, Kew Gardens; American Express
Jurors assigned to the Kew Gardens courthouse on Queens Boulevard are culinarily fortunate: mavens know that the boulevard is the home of Pastrami King, a classic New York deli that serves world-class pastrami.
Dim, disheveled and full of Formica, this is a place for raucous family gatherings, where babies squeal and adults complain.
It's also a clubhouse for the courtroom types and politicos.
And it's a place for solitary pleasures, for contemplative chewing of the rich, garlicky pastrami, suffused with an almost vinegary smokiness that comes from 10 to 16 days of soaking and curing over smoldering cedar.
A sandwich is $5.95, and a good-looking, juicy hot dog with sauerkraut is $1.50.
Matzoh ball soup ($2) is thin and pallid.
MAX'S EATERY  (718) 526-9819; 9504 Sutphin Boulevard, at 95th Avenue, Jamaica; cash only
Jurors at the Jamaica courthouse on Sutphin Boulevard are likely to be a rather hostile group, if the availability of food is any gauge.
Simply put, there's not much around.
The most worthy spot within walking distance is Max's, an old-time luncheonette several dilapidated blocks south of the courthouse.
Max's does not look much better than the neighborhood.
Signs are hand-scrawled, the linoleum-tile floors have seen cleaner days, and coffee is served in plastic foam cups rather than in china mugs.
But waitresses call you "Hon," and the polyglot clientele of residents, construction workers and courthouse personnel exudes an aura of good feelings.
The Maxi-Burger is big and juicy, served on a fresh poppy-seed roll and strewn with fried onions ($4.70 with bacon and cheese).
There are also thick sandwiches and egg creams, and Max Rogalski himself, an aged presence, oversees his bustling staff, lunching on two slices of tomato.
STATEN ISLAND  LIL'S EATERY  (718) 273-9555; 95 Stuyvesant Place, at Hamilton Avenue, St.
George; cash only
For Staten Islanders, who serve their jury duty within walking distance of the ferry to Manhattan, the temptation to hop aboard for a lunch trip must be great.
Rather than risk a tardy return, though, jurors tend to restrict themselves to several fast-food spots in the area, or to Lil's Eatery, a small luncheonette decorated with posters that pay charming homage to stars who met tragic ends, like Elvis Presley, James Dean, Marilyn Monroe and Judy Garland.
Lil's is a smoky place, with fluorescent lights, Formica tables and an ancient jukebox at each booth, with choices ranging from Bing Crosby to Prince.
The menu doesn't stray far from breakfast dishes, sandwiches and burgers.
An onion-and-pepper omelet ($5.25) was greasy, and pancakes ($4.95) were doughy, but service was friendly and agreeable.
Lil's offers more ambitious specials, like pasta with eggplant for $11.95 and shrimp creole for $12.95.
Given the limited choices in the area, I vote for experimentation.
MANHATTAN  NHA TRANG  (212) 233-5948; 87 Baxter Street, Chinatown; cash only
With Chinatown right next door to the various courthouses, the choices for the Manhattan juror can be paralyzing.
Nha Trang, a plain storefront restaurant with terrific Vietnamese food, stands out.
There's a huge menu of more than 100 dishes.
Some of the best include perfectly fried spring rolls ($3.50); steamed ravioli, rice-noodle crepes wrapped around minced pork and ground mushrooms, served with mild Vietnamese pork sausage ($3.50), and barbecued shrimp on sugar cane ($5.25).
A full meal should cost less than $15.


Financing the Arts On the Backs of Kids
Two Sept. 5 articles ("Federal Grant Goes to Arts Council" and "Open Rehearsals as Prelude to Discovery") speak to an idea that was already seriously questioned when the Ford Foundation began a $230 million-plus foray into the performing arts almost 40 years ago: that arguments based on nonartistic grounds can be used successfully to advance support of the arts.
The educational motive for philanthropic activity in the arts, as proclaimed in the articles, operates in two ways.


Bonn Tries to Calm East Europeans on NATO
The German Defense Minister has sought to reassure East European countries that Bonn still welcomes them in NATO, despite Boris N. Yeltsin's recent signal that he opposes such a move.
But the official, Volker Ruhe, said that the North Atlantic Treaty Organization had to be reshaped to become inclusive rather than exclusive, and in doing so, should consider the security needs of Russia.
The alliance must not be seen as anti-Russian, he said.


Heroes Didn't Need To Be 'Superheroes'
It is always a thrill to watch astonishing moves by athletes in both victory and defeat.
However after reading about "Niceties at the Hamlet" about the parks given to the tennis players I also know that any sport, like real life, is rooted most deeply in the endorsements for monetary gain.


What Is This Thing Called Baby Film?
THIS summer, my wife and I had a baby, and in doing so we entered the strange land of Baby Pictures.
Taking photographs of your baby is one of the prime duties of being a parent, so I loaded up my camera and got set to play my role in the ritual.
To say that babies are a bonanza for photo companies is something of an understatement.
Getting new parents to buy anything related to babies is about as demanding as dynamiting fish.
According to marketing surveys, new parents -- surprise! -- take twice as many pictures as other people do.
Some manufacturers have even started to name their products for this market.


Memories Of Yaddo
To the Editor:
Anent Jean Nathan's piece on Yaddo and its galaxy of guests ("Yaddo," Sept. 19), permit me to offer these remembrances as a former "townie."


Investigators Hunt for the Killer of a Housing Police Officer
A legion of detectives searched yesterday for clues and witnesses to the killing of a housing police officer in Washington Heights, as some residents expressed anger over a towing operation that led to a confrontation between officers and residents just before the slaying on Friday night.
The officer, John Williamson, 25 years old, died at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center after he was struck on the head by a bucket of spackling compound hurled from the roof of a six-story tenement on West 175th Street, the police said.


Museum of the Americas Opens in Dallas
A new museum that aims to survey the cultural heritage of the New World opened in Dallas on Sept 26.
Situated in a 140,000-square-foot addition to the Dallas Museum of Art, the new Museum of the Americas houses some 4,000 works from North, Central and South America covering the pre-Columbian era through the mid-20th century.
The visitor can view nine display areas, including the ancient Andes gallery, the ancient Mexico and Central American gallery and the native North American gallery.


Reaffirmation Of Faith
To the Editor:
WGBH is not only maintaining but increasing its commitment to creative and innovative classical programming by expanding live performances and interviews and continuing to present challenging music.


Kmart's Stock Surge Masks a Weakness at the Core; Working to Keep The Shelves Full
THE trick to making money by selling goods at low prices is pushing a lot of merchandise through the pipeline.
The faster a discounter sells its inventory, the more it pads its slim profit margins.
Wal-Mart, whose savvy management of the flow of goods from manufacturers to consumers woke the retail industry to the value of computerized inventory systems, turns over its inventory about four and a half times a year.
Target's turnover is a little more than four times a year, while Kmart's is about three times.
That helps to explain why Kmart is also in third place on sales per square foot, a key measure of performance.


Making a Mint, Two Pennies At a Time
SUNLIGHT, as Justice Brandeis said, is the best disinfectant.
But it matters just how focused that sunlight is.
The Securities and Exchange Commission took an important step last week when it proposed rules to require that brokerage firms disclose just how much they are raking in from a little-known practice politely called "payment for order flow."


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article on Oct. 3 about French drawings at the Pierpont Morgan Library referred incorrectly to the painter Charles Lebrun.
He was active during the reign of Louis XIV, not Louis XVI.


The Ad Campaign; Giuliani and Women's Issues
On the screen: Donna Hanover Giuliani, the wife of Rudolph W. Giuliani, sits in front of a painting in a room that could be an office or living room.
As she speaks, an image of Mr.
Giuliani, casually dressed and surrounded by parents and children, comes on the screen.
Then the image of Ms.
Giuliani, dressed in a white blouse and blue jacket, returns and the camera pans closer to her until at the end she is being filmed in closeup.
Producer; The Garth Group of New York The Script: Ms.
Giuliani: Let me tell you about my husband's record on women's rights.
In his law practice, Rudy fought for split schedules and extended maternity leave so female lawyers could take care of their families without sacrificing their careers.
As U.S.
Attorney, he prosecuted an abortion clinic bomber who went to jail for seven years.
Rudy helped establish New York City's first on-site childcare center for federal workers and he appointed the first woman in the country to head an Organized Crime Strike Force.
And make no mistake about it, Rudy Giuliani is pro-choice.
Accuracy: Lawyers who would know whether Mr.
Giuliani fought for split schedules as a lawyer in private practice at Patterson, Belknap, Webb &amp; Tyler from 1977 through 1981 could not be reached for comment over the past few days.
But in all other respects the commercial is accurate, though perhaps making Mr.
Giuliani more central to events than he was.
When he was United States Attorney, his office did prosecute the case of Dennis J. Malvasi, an abortion clinic bomber who turned himself in after John Cardinal O'Connor made a televised appeal for him to surrender.
He was sentenced in 1987 to seven years in prison.
His office was also one of about 10 Federal agencies that provided operating funds for Fedkids, a child care center run by a not-for-profit corporation, that opened in 1988 in 26 Federal Plaza.
And Mr.
Giuliani appointed Barbara S. Jones as the first woman in the country to head a federal Organized Crime Strike Force.
Ms.
Giuliani winds up her remarks affirming that her husband believes in abortion rights.
In 1989, he gave several accounts of his position, before saying that while he opposed aboriton personally as a Roman Catholic, he would support and uphold abortion rights as public policy.
Scorecard: The commercial is designed to rebut a commercial by Mayor David N. Dinkins that revives Mr.
Giuliani's 1989 hesitations about abortion.
It presents his wife, known to New Yorkers as an former anchorwoman for WPIX, to make the case that Mr.
Giuliani is a progressive on women's issues.
The subliminal message is that if she married him, he has to be someone to whom professional, independent women can relate.
The question is whether the same women will see Mr.
Giuliani's wife as the best woman to make the case.
ALISON MITCHELL


Embattled


Bureaucratic Walls Give Visa Couriers Business
Want to get a pet chihuahua into Saudi Arabia?
A business visa to Kazakhstan?
Have to get medical supplies into Gabon?
Oil roughnecks into Ecuador?
Increasingly that means turning to a subculture of travel document couriers here, an eclectic band of graduate students, immigrant entrepreneurs and retirees who hand-carry up to 50 travel documents a day to embassies and shepherd them through the vicissitudes of visa protocol.


For Balanchine, Her Dancing Was A Path to the Future
In the history of every art form, certain figures play a crucial role that goes virtually unsung.
Very little, for example, is known in the West about the Russian ballerina Yelizaveta Gerdt (1891-1975).
And yet as George Balanchine noted emphatically in an interview a few years before his death in 1983, she was the dancer who influenced him most.
Recently I had an illuminating conversation about Gerdt with Vitaly Voulf, a Russian critic who is teaching courses on Russian theater at New York University.
Mr.
Voulf knew Gerdt well from 1948 until her death and was present when Balanchine arrived for dinner at her Moscow apartment in 1962.
The New York City Ballet's co-founder, who left Russia in 1924, had returned for the first time with his company.


Diedre Lawrence, Mark Roberts
Diedre Thalia Lawrence, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Kurt Lawrence of Groton, Conn., was married yesterday in Marblehead, Mass., to Mark Arthur Roberts, a son of Arthur H. Roberts of Houston and the late Marie F. Roberts.
The Rev.
John Potter performed the ceremony at the Old North Congregational Church.
Ms.
Lawrence is keeping her name.
She is an associate at Rubin &amp; Rudman, a law firm in Boston.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College and received a law degree from Boston University.
Her father is a manager of engineering at the General Dynamics Corporation, the weapons manufacturer, in Groton.


Crimes, Lies and Prudential-Bache
THE champagne flowed freely aboard the Queen Elizabeth 2 as a group of Prudential-Bache brokers and their spouses steamed out of New York harbor for a weeklong cruise celebrating another year of big sales and fat commissions.
Their host, Clifton S. Harrison, a Dallas developer who made millions selling real estate partnerships through Prudential's retail network, told them money was no object on the all-expenses-paid trip to London.
They agreed, ordering sumptuous meals not even on the ship's lavish menus.


The Day Civility Died


Ward Gets Advice From an Expert
The connection was made in a place where connections are often missed.
Florida State's basketball team was changing planes in Atlanta last winter.
Doug Williams, who led the Washington Redskins to a Super Bowl championship six seasons ago, stood at a nearby phone booth.
"I heard one of them say, 'Doug Williams,' he remembered. "I said, 'Where are you from?' They said, 'Florida State.' I said, 'Where's Charlie?' "


Amy E. Gelinas, Joseph R. Burke
Amy Elizabeth Gelinas, a daughter of John and Barbara Gelinas of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married there yesterday to Joseph Robert Burke, a son of Robert and Louise Burke of Rockford, Ill.
The ceremony was performed by Msgr.
Edward M. Connors at Immaculate Heart of Mary Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Burke, 28, is a clinical nurse specialist in pediatric oncology at New York University Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from Georgetown University and received a master's degree in pediatric nursing from the University of Pennsylvania.


A New Battle Over Navy Yard
The city has won its long battle to operate a garbage incinerator at the Brooklyn Navy Yard, but many nearby residents are lining up to contest a new city proposal that would establish a federally financed job training program for youths and adults at the yard's old administrative building at Flushing and Washington Avenues.
Participants would live there during their training, said Albert Wiltshire, president and chief executive officer of the Navy Yard.
"We've been working for two years to come up with a plan for Navy Yard buildings," said Councilman Kenneth K. Fisher, whose district includes Williamburg.
"But without notice, the city decided to carve a piece out of the heart of the site and offer it up for this program. We haven't been briefed. My larger concern is that even if the project has some merits, I'm not sure it helps the communities around the facility, which are in desperate need of housing."


A Matter of Taste
To the Editor:
Since Cadbury Ltd. anticipates marketing A&amp; W brands in Europe ("Cadbury Will Buy A&amp; W," Business Diary, Sept. 12), they are fortunate, indeed, that A&amp; W has diversified since the days when it marketed solely root beer.


Cruise Lines Cater to Kids, From Toddlers to Teens
THE cruise companies see the shape of the future, and it is the baby-boom generation.
American Family Cruises, a new line with an $80 million investment, is directing its sales efforts entirely to families.
Premier Cruise Lines, the nine-year-old Disney-linked operator of the three short-cruise Big Red Boats, is putting an educational twist on its longtime entertainment programs.
Carnival Cruise Lines has augmented its children's programs with a new one for toddlers, and Regency has expanded its children's program aboard the Regent Rainbow into year-round operation.
These and other lines are adding counselor staffs and changing both the names and the content of their attractions.
A look at pamphlets showing kids roller-skating down the deck makes it hard to remember that not too long ago typical shipboard activities revolved around the ring-toss, deck chairs and 11 A.M. bouillon.


Canyon Rafting
To the Editor: On the day you published "Braving a Grand Canyon Hydro-Rodeo" by Aaron Latham, my wife and I left on a six-and-a-half-day raft trip down 186 miles of the Colorado River through the canyon, covering about twice the distance of the Lathams' trip.
Mr.
Latham's experience of hiking down from the south rim to Phantom Ranch in 100-degree heat, and his report of the near-serious injury to one of the party, reflects only one way people can approach a canyon trip.


Yes, It's Improvised. But Is It Really Jazz?
This year's meet the composer grants for jazz ensembles and orchestras have just been announced, and the nearly $80,000 being dispensed is a welcome addition to the generally underfinanced world of jazz.
In 1989, when the New York-based organization devoted to supporting composers and expanding the audience for new music began giving money to jazz composers, it was a fairly radical thing to do.
And the definition of jazz implicit in the grants, like that in much of the jazz community, has been resolutely open-minded; almost any form of improvisation, according to that interpretation, constitutes jazz.
It's a perspective good enough for a living-room discussion, but when it manifests itself in policy it can become problematic, as this year's grants demonstrate.
The Pacific Rim Players, an unrecorded big band from Oregon, received $30,000 and is commissioning Wayne Horvitz, Robin Holcomb and Bob Nell to write pieces for it.
The San Francisco-based Rova Saxophone Quartet will get $24,000 and has commissioned works from Muhal Richard Abrams, Steve Adams (a member of the quartet) and Fred Frith.
And two perennials on the downtown improvisational scene, James Emery and Gerry Hemingway, will share $25,000 to produce music for small ensembles.


Bonnie L. Greene, Jon F. Ackerman
Bonnie Lee Greene, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Burton H. Greene of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married there last evening to Dr.
Jon F. Ackerman, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Martin A. Ackerman of Pleasantville, N.Y.
Rabbi Lester Bronstein performed the ceremony at the Fountainhead, a reception hall.


Your Own Account/Mary Rowland; Tempests for the Self-Employed
A number of provisions in the new tax law and the proposed health care package could drastically affect the financial picture of the millions of self-employed Americans.
The tax changes are mostly bad news for the self-employed.
"When you size up the winners and losers in the tax package, entrepreneurs land on the losing side," said William G. Brennan, a partner in the Washington office of Ernst &amp; Young.


Science Fiction
In earlier novels like "Grass" and "The Gate to Women's Country," Sheri S. Tepper created imaginary worlds in which actions begat consequences according to rules that were kept hidden from the main characters -- and from the reader as well -- until the end of the story.
At best, this is a risky strategy.
When it succeeds, as in "Grass," it can turn resolution into revelation; when it fails, as in "The Gate to Women's Country," it comes across as a contrivance that reduces everything that preceded it to a long-winded riddle with an arbitrary answer.
In A PLAGUE OF ANGELS (Spectra/Bantam, $21.95) Ms.
Tepper plays the same dangerous game, with a crucial difference.
She strews her narrative with hints that the world she has taken such pains to create is not what it seems.
In some indeterminate future, AIDS-like diseases ravage cities just a few days' walk from "archetypal villages" where capitalized Heroes look after capitalized Orphans, and where capitalized Oracles foresee the future and tell of a legendary past when people traveled to the stars and did not return.


THE LOOK OF THE NINETIES
'The Look of the Nineties" -- I loved it. I once wrote to the Fashion Institute recommending the inclusion of some ordinary people in the "best dressed" list. I received word that "we only list personalities who influence fashion." Leave it to Omaha to add realism to the history that contemporary fashion reflects. BETTYE HAERTIG Short Hills, N.J.


In Archers' World, She's the Whizzz Kid
MARGARET ADLER strode past a duffel bag, an old mattress and some straw hats, keeping her eye on the circular target at the back of her family's attic here.
Calculating her score, she pulled six aluminum arrows out of the target and returned them to her quiver, a black leather pouch festooned with lucky charms.
Then, for the second of many times that day, Maggie, as she is known, shot another round of arrows from her practice spot near a bookcase.
This is how one of the highest-ranked young archers in the United States trains for competitions, when she isn't traveling to Connecticut for lessons or crossing the country to shoot in tournaments.
Maggie, a Scarsdale High School junior who competes with girls 15 through 18, is ranked first in the East in outdoor archery and second in indoor archery.


Whatever Happens, Happens
THE BROTHERS By Frederick Barthelme. 262 pp. New York: Viking. $21.


Special Housing Needs Of the Elderly
"Condos for Elderly Tied Up in Politics and Budgets"  [ July 11 ]  was informative but discouraging to seniors in Nassau County, where the older population has increased at an astonishing rate.
During the last 20 years, in the same period that the overall Nassau County population decreased by 9.9 percent, the population aged 60 plus increased by 54 percent.
The need for appropriate and affordable senior housing in Nassau County is critical.
Nassau Senior Forum, a 23-year-old independent nonpartisan organization, deplores the impasse between the Democrats and Republicans on the County Board, which has stalled the construction of the 438 units for the elderly referred to in the article.


Sublime Design
The Wheel.
The Teapot.
The Stradivarius violin.
Some designs are of such obvious beauty and worth that they are destined to last for centuries.
Others lack esthetic appeal but seem sublime because they fulfill so completely the needs of the moment -- how much harder was life before the bendable straw and the paper clip?
But for the individual, what is truly valuable is what inspires passion, and here there's plenty of room for difference.
So, although there's no accounting for taste, we asked 10 design-savvy people to account for theirs.
Their task was to name an everyday object that, in their view, is perfectly designed.
While opinions varied, a few trends emerged: Simplicity is revered more than ornament.
Function is just as important as beauty.
And the Shakers, while they didn't believe in procreation, still have enthusiastic heirs.


Manager's Profile; Robert Rodriguez
Fund: FPA Capital, $147 million in assets; 6.5% sales load.
Manager since 1984; (Sponsor: First Pacific Advisors, Los Angeles).
Born: Dec. 13, 1948, Los Angeles.


Deborah Warshawsky, Paul Farfel
Deborah S. Warshawsky, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stanford Warshawsky of Short Hills, N.J., was married last evening to Paul H. Farfel, the son of Jack Farfel of Wayne, N.J., and the late Carole Farfel.
Rabbi Norman Patz performed the ceremony at the Pegasus Suite at the Rainbow Room in New York.
Mrs.
Farfel, 27, is a manager in the new business development department at Avon Products Inc. in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father is the vice chairman of Arnhold &amp; S. Bleichroeder Inc., an investment banking firm in New York.


A Landmark Manages to Cheat The Wrecking Ball
IF THERE IS ANYTHING TO BE SAID of Los Angeles in the last decade, it is that it has become consistently and continuously more citylike, in both the good and bad senses of that word.
It is a more urban place than it once was, denser and tenser and busier than ever.
Its citizens are less inclined to fool themselves into believing that escape brings freedom from the woes that afflict other cities, less willing to pretend that Los Angeles is as different from other cities as they once thought.
It's against this background of growing urban consciousness that the city's decision to spend $214 million on a library in the middle of its downtown has to be viewed.
This library is not only a place of books but a statement about urbanism, a statement about Los Angeles's increasing willingness to let itself be like other, older cities.
Designed by Hardy Holzman Pfeiffer Associates, a New York and Los Angeles firm with what could be called a highly urban sensibility, the project almost didn't happen at all.
That it not only got built but turned out as well as it did is a triumphant moment for both the city's architecture and its history.


Countering a Surge in Vacancies
Faced with the highest vacancy rate in its history, Co-op City has cut its staff and set out to lure buyers, providing low-interest loans, shortening the review process and offering for the first time wall-to-wall carpeting over the parquet floors.
While Co-op City officials said the vacancy rate peaked in July, the number of empty apartments has nearly doubled in the last year, to 1,200.
As with other Mitchell-Lama apartments, owners sell their apartments back to the complex, for equity.
The vacancies have led to concerns over cash shortages at the sprawling, 15,372-unit complex in the northeast Bronx, a 300-acre community with shopping malls, schools, community centers and its own power plant.


The E320: A 'Simpler' New Mercedes
"Mercedes-Benz watchers may have been stymied by the company's array of model designations in recent years. That's about to change."
Mercedes-Benz press release
LIFE is hard.
I try to keep it all straight, but confusion reigns.
Is a J30 a Lexis or an Infiniti?
What is an MX-6?
Is there such a thing as a Cougar XR7, or am I mixing it up with Mazda's RX7?


West Virginia Defense Rises to the Moment
West Virginia 36, Louisville 34
Robert Walker rushed for 161 yards and three touchdowns and West Virginia's defense forced Louisville's offense into four late turnovers to defeat the Cardinals at Morgantown, W.Va.


Jamie Littrell, Arthur Levitt 3d
Jamie Lynn Littrell, a daughter of Rosemary Littrell of Cocoa Beach, Fla., and Romie Littrell of Casselberry, Fla., was married last evening to Arthur Levitt 3d, the son of Arthur Levitt Jr., the Securities and Exchange Commission chairman, and Dr.
Marylin Levitt of New York and Santa Fe, N.M.
Rabbi Leonard Hellman officiated at the Levitt home in Santa Fe.
Mrs.
Levitt, a graduate of the University of Central Florida, is a sales representative in Orlando, Fla., for Home Therapy Products, a medical equipment manufacturer.
Her father is a sales representative for Ross Equipment Inc., a computer retailer in Orlando.
Her mother is the owner of the Stress Management Center, a massage therapy clinic in Cocoa Beach.


You Have to See the Forest, the Trees and the Map to Win
An epic occasion in the Army's basic training program has always been the night map-reading exercise that produced dozens of alleged soldiers stumbling around in the woods utterly lost.
The sport of orienteering can be like that.
But not for those in the World Orienteering Championships in Harriman State Park in New York's Orange County, 50 miles north of Manhattan.
About 250 orienteers, men and women from 34 nations, have assembled there for four days of competition yesterday, today, Tuesday and Thursday.


Wall Street; A Watchdog From the Other Side
BARRY P. BARBASH, 39, took over as director of the Division of Investment Management of the Securities and Exchange Commission on Sept. 27.
Mr.
Barbash, who had spent the previous 12 years at the New York law firm Willkie Farr &amp; Gallagher, makes a big switch to industry cop from his previous role, in which he frequently was adviser to Shearson's huge mutual fund operations.
He spoke about his plans for the S.E.C. division that oversees mutual funds and investment advisers.
Question: What are your priorities?


Would Van Gogh Be Insulted?
To the Editor:
Between them, Paul Goldberger and Michael Kimmelman, in their articles about the new galleries at the Met  [ "The Met Moves Things Around . . ." and "And Everybody Gets His Own Room," Sept. 19 ] , assert that "sumptuous" rooms have had to be created for the paintings because they "seemed minor" in the old home.


Dish to Come Down (Someday)
The satellite antenna that has stood dormant for years atop 10 Columbus Circle is still waiting to be taken down, or brought back to life.
In 1989, when Federal Express vacated the building, the company discovered it would cost about $250,000 to take down its $30,000 rooftop dish, used for fax transmissions.


Reprieve for Two Historic Seaport Buildings
City officials halted the demolition of two landmark buildings in the South Street Seaport Historic District last week when a preservation group offered money to try to save the structures.
Wreckers were preparing to tear down the adjoining brick buildings at 227 and 229 Water Street, which city inspectors had declared safety hazards.
But the work was suspended after the New York Landmarks Conservancy offered to use its emergency fund to pay for repairs to stabilize the vacant, crumbling structures, which date to 1798 and 1801.
The private, nonprofit conservancy promotes the preservation of historic buildings.


Oates's 'Perfectionist'
TOBIAS HARTE may strike you as a nit-picker, an obsessive-compulsive perhaps, and more than a bit of a bore.
But to Joyce Carol Oates, he's a perfectionist, and it's her play.
Let's assume that Ms.
Oates, who is the Roger S. Berlind Distinguished Professor of the Humanities at Princeton University, knows well the sort of rigid academic that Tobias represents.
What is baffling is how in "The Perfectionist," which is having its world-premiere engagement at the McCarter Theater, this extravagantly prolific author chooses to perpetuate a predictable, insulated, suburban, scholarly administrative stereotype rather than locate the elusive human dimension that might make one care about him.


Braves Take B.P. And Go 1 Up
The Phillies may not know all the scientific reasons about how a tidal wave builds momentum and grows in its fury as it picks up speed.
But they have to imagine it's much like the way the Atlanta Braves score runs.
For a second straight game in the National League Championship Series, the Phillies were done in by an offense that has roared with such intensity and speed it left the N.L.
East team gasping for air and looking for a few good arms to stop the onslaught.


Hog Heaven
69 Mott Street (212) 233-5877; 69 Mott Street, at Bayard Street, Chinatown; cash only
69 Mott Street is both the name and the address of a fast-moving, inexpensive family-style place that specializes in pork.
Tender, bite-size chunks of roast pig (as the menu calls it), slightly salty and nutty and served on a bed of rice, makes a wonderful little meal for just $3.
There are also good soups like chicken broth with thin, transparent rice noodles and flowery pork dumplings ($2.50).


Going One Better
At the 1994 Winter Games in Lillehammer, Norway, ski jumper OLE GUNNAR FIKJESTOEL , the 1988 world champion, hopes to top the archer who opened the 1992 Summer Olympics with such flair in Barcelona.
At the opening ceremony on Feb. 12, 1994, Fikjestoel will fly off the Lillehammer ski jump holding the Olympic flame.


Albany Officials Fall Behind In Plan to Alter History Lessons
New York education officials are two years behind schedule in their controversial effort to rewrite the state's history curriculum to better reflect the contributions of minorities.
Those involved say they have been hampered by a lack of money and interminable academic arguments within a committee appointed to develop the new curriculum.


Conversations: Phoebe Eng; Publisher Sees Asian-American Identity as a Work in Progress
PHOEBE ENG, the publisher of A. Magazine and a Chinese-American, recalls an experience common in some way to almost every hyphenated American.
During high school, she considered it a great compliment to be told by her Jewish friends that she fit in so well they thought of her as Phoebe Engstein, not really Chinese at all.
Today, she considers that part of the invisibility blues plaguing people of color.
"There is a great dishonesty in pretending that race does not not matter," Ms.
Eng said.
"I really do believe that if you do not acknowledge color or background in social dynamics, be it individual or group-related, you're not acknowledging what's really going on."


THEORY ON MAKEUP OF UNIVERSE GAINS
In their efforts to understand the formation of galaxies and evolution of the universe as a whole, scientists have come to suspect that some unknown, invisible matter almost certainly makes up more than 90 percent of the mass in the universe.
They have a name for it, dark matter, but have yet to identify it.
For more than a decade, the leading theory envisaged a universe full of slow-moving exotic particles, as yet undiscovered, known as cold dark matter.
Some scientists favored hot dark matter, particles that traveled close to the speed of light.
But the universe that astronomers are seeing with greater detail does not seem to fit either model.


Margaret E. Behr and Duncan J. Laird
Margaret Emily Behr, a daughter of Walter Behr of Chevy Chase, Md., and the late Louise Behr, was married yesterday to Duncan James Laird, the son of Joan Laird of Hadley, Mass., and the late Clarence Laird.
The Rev.
Victoria Safford, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the Helen Hills Hills Chapel at Smith College in Northampton, Mass.
Mrs.
Laird, 29, graduated from Oberlin College.
She is a student counselor at Smith College, from which she and her husband received their master's degrees in social work.
Her father is the Mayor of Somerset, Md.
Her mother was a clinical social worker in Chevy Chase.


His 15 Minutes of Fame Took Only 17 Seconds
Rudy Ruettiger's visit to Santa Monica, Calif., in 1989 promised nothing but a lunch.
Still, he hoped for more as he flew in from South Bend, Ind.
He was certain that when he met the screenwriter Angelo Pizzo, Mr.
Pizzo would feel compelled to write about him, about how his implausible dream -- playing football for Notre Dame University -- came true, for a short yet exciting 17 seconds.
Mr.
Ruettiger waited at the agreed-upon restaurant near Mr.
Pizzo's home, he said, "and he stood me up." He drove around until he spotted a mailman.
"I told him my friend lived around here, but I lost the address," he said.
"He showed me where it was." Mr.
Pizzo answered the insistent knocking on his door only when Mr.
Ruettiger shouted: "It's Rudy! You're late for lunch!"


Susan Bacot, Andrew Herzberg
Susan Carter Bacot, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Carter Bacot of Montclair, N.J., was married yesterday to Andrew Jay Herzberg, a son of Melvin Herzberg of New York and the late Joan Herzberg.
The Rev.
Dr.
North Barry Dancy performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Sag Harbor, L.I.
Ms.
Bacot, 27, is keeping her name.
She is the founder of Susan Productions, a video production company in New York.
She graduated from Hamilton College in Clinton, N.Y.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Bank of New York Company. and the chairman of the board of trustees of Hamilton College.
Her mother, Shirley S. Bacot, is the chairwoman of the board of trustees at Wells College in Aurora, N.Y.


Brooklyn Got There First
To the Editor:
I would like to correct one historical error in your review of Beaumont New hall's "Focus: Memoirs of a Life in Photography" (Aug. 15).
The reviewer wrote that "in 1940, Newhall . . . became the first curator of MOMA's department of photography, the first such department in any American museum."


How Vintage Trimmings Turned Into Jewelry With Panache
"NO chains on me!" said the jewelry designer Valerie Peyton Horn, modeling a three-strand gold belt, who added devilishly, "These are cord." And punctuating each hip were large, vintage ormolu medallions -- pins actually -- of an intricate design.
Suddenly the belts became a necklace, with an ormolu earring clipped over the strands.
On her wrist Ms.
Horn wrapped a Velcro closure gold-woven ribbon cuff, about two inches wide, and added a brilliant gold Turk's-head bracelet (familiar to most as a Nantucket rope bracelet.) For most of the morning, she delighted in the limitless permutations of her pins, earrings, necklaces, chokers and belts.
Always chic, always high-impact and very rich looking.


Q and A
Turned Down For Refinancing Q. Recently I attempted to refinance the mortgage on our 613-square-foot house on 1.8 acres, which can be claimed as our primary home because of the amount of time we spend there.
I found, however, that it was impossible because most lenders said that there was too little house for the parcel of land.
We could not find any bank -- with one exception -- that would consider refinancing for a home under 850 square feet.
Unfortunately, that lender rejected our application because the home has no central-heating system.
The house is insulated and heated with propane.
Are there any banks that would refinance our mortgage?
There is no problem with credit or equity. . . .
Margaret Hannigan, Manhattan


Indian Festival Celebrates the Harvest With a Special Purpose


Young Adults Gain a New Independence in Communal Living
LIKE other young adults who share a house, Julia McDonnell, Annemarie Erickson and Judy Scarcello share the chores, watch television and sometimes go to the mall and the movies together.
But they and the two other women and two young men who also live in an eight-room Colonial on a pleasant street in Yorktown Heights are never completely on their own.
A house manager or staff member is with them 24 hours a day.
The young adults, who moved into the house on June 26, are developmentally disabled.
They were picked to live in the house by the State Developmental Disability Service Office or the county's Community Mental Health Board.


Something Extra
MARRIAGE TO A MAN WITH antecedents in the building trades isn't always easy.
I used to own a summer house I loved in the Catskill Mountains.
When my husband and I were first together, I took him there, full of delight and not a little pride: The house was sited in a beautiful spot, and the interior had a seductive yellow-gold glow that comes from lots of pine paneling.
We drove a thousand miles from Iowa to get there, me burbling the whole way about how much he would love it.
We arrived just at sunset.
The pine paneling was alight, the pond was a glassy platinum steel, the nearer hillsides were an impossibly rich green, which shaded in the distance to a color I think of as Catskill purple.
I was ecstatic.
We walked through the living room, me twirling, Steve contemplative.
Just as I turned to carol, "Isn't this great?" I heard him mutter, "Floor's not level." Inevitably, that house went out of our possession, to be succeeded by a house with level floors, built many sturdy years ago by a man who otherwise specialized in barns.
My husband grew up in a house his father built in 1950.
The walls were brick, the windowsills were marble, the door frames steel.
A family snapshot shows the grid of steel beams laid in to support the first floor, which was concrete.
The only wood in the house was in the kitchen cabinets.
The house was built to withstand fire, flood and tornadoes, as well as the more immediate depredations of seven children -- five boys, including my husband -- and all their friends.
From the outside, however, none of this is obvious.
A modest-looking ranch, it fits into the neighborhood, and when my mother-in-law comes to sell it someday, I don't expect it will bring in much more than her neighbors have gotten for their homes.
But the purchasers will have received something extra -- and not just weight, strength and structural integrity rare in a residence of any sort.


Blowing Smoke In the Air
Freedom Air, named for the freedom it gives smokers to light up on board, flew its inaugural charter trip Sept. 28 from Chicago to Los Angeles, the first flight in what Freedom's operators hope will be a steady business catering to passengers irked by the smoking ban on domestic flights of less than six hours.
Despite advertising and widespread media attention, its trip flight between O'Hare International Airport in Chicago and Los Angeles International Airport attracted fewer than 10 paying passengers.
Ted Hall, a recently retired United Airlines pilot who founded Freedom Air and has smoked since he was 14 years old, said he will try to market the service on busy routes like Chicago-Los Angeles because they offer the greatest pool of potential smokers.
The company would give no details on scheduled flights beyond another round-trip flight between Chicago and Los Angeles on Oct. 12.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


Reporters Stay a Long-Distance Call Away
WHEN the first Navy Seals slithered onto the Somali beachhead last December, faces streaked with camouflage paint, commando knives at the ready, they were startled to find themselves suddenly awash in television lights, their landing recorded by scores of paunchy journalists waiting on the sand in cut-off jeans and shower clogs.
But last weekend, when an Army Ranger company was decimated raiding a warlord's hideout, losing more than a dozen soldiers killed, scores wounded, two helicopters downed and a relief column ambushed, there were no American reporters in the country.


Too Ill to Learn; Health System Fails to Meet Students' Needs, Educators Say
In a second-grade classroom on the Lower East Side, plaster flakes cascade from an old ceiling when students slam the door.
But it is not the threat of airborne asbestos or the sealed, contaminated rooms that worry educators at Public School 15; it is the students who come to school sick every day.
Some bring along breathing pumps for their asthma.
Some have been exposed to H.I.V.
Some can hardly concentrate because of throbbing toothaches; others cannot see the chalkboard.


No Four-Letter Words
To the Editor:
In her review of "The Morning After," by Katie Roiphe (Sept. 19), Wendy Kaminer suggests that Cosmopolitan was "designed partly as a woman's answer to Playboy." This is not true.
I should know.
I designed the present-day Cosmopolitan.
My Cosmopolitan, from its first issue, has been and continues to be a magazine for young women who love men and children but don't want to be identified solely as wife, girlfriend or mother.


When Serious Moral Issues Are Raised
IT is seldom that audiences have a chance to see a directorial vision at work as clearly as in "Death and the Maiden," which is at the Arena Players Repertory Theater in East Farmingdale through Oct. 24.
For anyone familiar with the script or for anyone who saw the Broadway production last year, this is a very different version.
The play, by Ariel Dorfman, ponders serious questions about the role of the individual in society.
Mr.
Dorfman explores issues of law, justice, retribution, forgiveness, remorse and responsibility in a manner that leaves these problems unresolved.


Witch Hazel: An Indian Remedy That Became Big Business
EACH autumn, when frost starts to whiten the fields of Connecticut, what is known as the cooking season gets underway at the E. E. Dickinson Company in Essex.
Trucks piled high with wood twigs and chips arrive at the company and are quickly emptied.
Then their drivers head back to more rural sections of Connecticut, Rhode Island, Massachusetts and Vermont to pick up more twigs and chips, thousands of pounds of them, as many as they can cut and deliver to Essex.


Dance, Health And Diplomacy
A Martha Graham premiere, a hospital benefit, a global honor.


Last Chances to Caulk Before Winter's Onslaught
ALL houses eventually need fresh caulking.
The purpose of the compound, often called caulking or caulk, is to seal gaps and cracks that develop between materials.
Unless the openings are sealed drafts can develop.
Even worse, moisture can penetrate walls.
Any season except winter is a good time to renew caulking.
In the winter temperatures are generally too cold to apply caulking.
It flows poorly and will not harden when the thermometer dips below 50.


How'd You End Up Here? A Juror's Primer
Who's called for jury duty?
The County Clerk's office compiles a master list of prospective jurors from lists of registered voters, licensed drivers and the state's mailing list of taxpayers.
The minimum age is 18.
What's the process of selection?


In Dirty Laundryland
MONDAY was my day to live out an appalling daydream.
It was a daytime television daydream, to be precise.
Maybe you've had it, too: the awful, tempting thought born out of those teasers for infra-dig talk shows.
An announcer cries: "Worshiping the Lord with snakes -- next, Jerry Springer!" (That's a real example.) And you wind up asking your most secret self: "What if I stayed home and watched this stuff all day long?"
So I did.


Masked Ball, Unmasked Italiana
Focus was on Italy at 13th annual benefit for Old Westbury Gardens, Oct. 2.


Report Cites Way to Guard Water Assets
A study whose publication has been blocked by the last two Israeli Governments says that Israel could give up significant portions of the Golan Heights and the West Bank, both captured in 1967, and still protect its access to vital water sources.
But a summary of the research-institute study, printed here on Friday in the newspaper Haaretz, said that regardless of possible territorial concessions, "Israel must do everything to protect the water assets now in its hands."


At Work; Clashing Over AIDS Coverage
THE Allied Services Division Welfare Fund is not a name that trips familiarly off the tongue, but last week the name was on the minds of many people who were wondering what sort of bellwether the fund will turn out to be.
Allied, a health plan insurer for about 20 companies, principally the Southern Pacific Transportation Company, agreed in late September to settle a discrimination complaint by rescinding a decision it had made to limit coverage for AIDS-related diseases.
The Equal Opportunity Employment Commission's Los Angeles regional office, which pursued the complaint under the Americans With Disabilities Act on behalf of two men with AIDS whose coverage dropped to $5,000 from $300,000, declared a victory, not least because the complaint, filed in April, was settled in almost record time.


Conran's-Habitat
The Prince of Chintz has never been known for understated design.
Sending him to Conran's-Habitat - the Valhalla of the pared-down and contemporary look - to shop for living room furnishing might seem like a dare.
He insists not.
"I hate to disillusion you," says Mario Buatta, "but it's a fallacy that I have to have chintz in a room." Nor was the space he worked in steeped in wood-paneled tradition: a new condominium apartment with wide-open views of the Manhattan skyline and Central Park.
In making the room his own, Buatta shopped for the big-ticket items at Conran's, then applied his signature touch: pattern on pattern.
"I try to work the way Mother Nature does, putting together different shapes and textures," he says.
"Think of a forest where there are all theses different colors, lights, textures and even smells, but it's still calm and restful. That's my aim," At Conran's, Buatta made a beeline for sinkably soft furniture to cushion the condo's boxy proportions and for patterned upholstery to give warmth.
To these he added layers of colored fabric and an intriguing miscellany of books, dog prints, objects and plants.
The result is vintage Buatta - but without a stitch of chintz in sight.
The following items are available at Conran's-Habitat stores nationwide.
For the nearest location or to order, call (800) 326-6726. 1.
"Southampton" sofa, 86 inches long, in natural linen-blend fabric, $799; matching armchair (not shown), $499, and ottoman, $279. 2.
"Manchester" cocktail table in black steel, $199. 3.
"Red Mesa" armchair upholstered in woven kilim-design cotton-blend fabric, $599; matching ottoman, $399; sofa (not shown), 89 inches long, $999.
Available by special order in other fabrics and leathers at an additional charge. 4.
"Textillery" rayon chenille throw, available in selected colors and patterns, $199 to $399. 5.
Thai Ming-style chair, $595. 6.
"Bessarabia" wool Arabian rug, available in selected sizes and patterns, $899 to $1,999.
Mario Buatta Designs: Two-tier etagere table from ABC Carpet and Home, 888 Broadway.
Dog portraits from Gracious Home, 1217 Third Avenue.
Blue-and-white porcelain lamp with silk shade; Bostwick faux-brass bamboo floor lamp with black tole shade.
Both from Oriental Lamp Shade Company, 816 Lexington Avenue.
Other items: Antique mirror with gilt sunburst frame; 19th-century mercury-glass ball on stand; 19th-century crystal cornucopia vase on wood base; 19th-century Chinese porcelain bowl; Indian bone-inlaid box; pair of egg-and-spinach Foo dogs; brass candlestick with hurricane shade; small black lacquered penwork-design side table; needlepoint pillow; hand-painted bisque red garden seat.
All from John Rosselli, 523 East 73d Street.
Red-and-gold 19th-century English plate from a set of six with three bowls.
From John Rosselli, 255 East 72d Street.
Faux tortoise tea caddy; iron hurricane globe; pillow made from antique Indian saris.
All from Katie Ridder Home Furnishings, 944 Lexington Avenue.
Set of three paper-covered boxes; silver-plated candlestick; papier-mache and cloth monkey.
All from William-Wayne &amp; Company, 850 Lexington Avenue.
Pair of cachepots; "Tobacco leaf" pottery bowl with cover.
Both from Gracious Home, 1217 Third Avenue.
Telescope from The Sharper Image, 900 Madison Avenue.
"Amaryllis" framed print from J. Pocker &amp; Sons, 135 East 63d Street.
Books from the Madison Avenue Bookshop, 833 Madison Avenue.
Azalea from Simpson &amp; Company Florists, 1318 Second Avenue.


On Bourbon, Near Fifth
Central Park Conservancy's 'Night in New Orleans' jazzed up the park, Sept. 30.


Business Diary/October 3-8
COMPANIES The Town Wasn't Big Enough for Both of Them  Perhaps it was meant to be.
Perhaps the only way The New York Post could survive was without the Newspaper Guild.
Not even Rupert Murdoch is willing to put up with $14 million-a-year losses in exchange for the joys of blaring sensational headlines at New Yorkers, and the job security demanded by the guild just didn't work with the new Murdoch math.
Nine craft unions came to terms with Mr.
Murdoch in recent months, and their pacts are now in force.
But last week, with the guild broken and The Post in Mr.
Murdoch's pocket, humbled guild members, hats and blue pencils in hand, had to reapply for their old jobs as The Post sought "the best and most aggressive" workers.
True, since many of the 287 guild members will not get those jobs, the glass is half empty.
But Mr.
Murdoch seemed fully prepared to drop the glass on the floor.
A broken glass can never again be half full.


THE LOOK OF THE NINETIES
I am sick of young writers telling us how great it is to be old.
Old age is not wonderful.
We tolerate it, because the alternative is so bad.
DORIS THOMSON Staten Island


Literary Voices On Paper
Along with the explosion of book and poetry readings in the city, there is a growing number of small literary publications.
Here are three of them.
OPEN CITY
Identity: Ambitiously highbrow; contributors have included Hubert Selby, Mary Gaitskill and Jeff Koons.


Man Is Arrested in the Killing Of 15-Month-Old Girl in Shelter
A man who was angry because his girlfriend's 15-month-old daughter would not stop crying killed the child by fracturing her skull yesterday at a Bronx shelter for the homeless, the police said.
After the incident, the man, Calvin Salley, 28, took the child, Latisha Lawrence, to the 44th Precinct station house at 1:05 A.M., the police said.
When police officers saw the ashen body of the child in a stroller, they took her to Bronx-Lebanon Hospital Center, where she was pronounced dead on arrival.


For Louis Tiffany, Lamps Weren't the Half of It
Louis Comfort Tiffany's glorious glass lamps, windows and vases have been known the world over since the turn of the century.
But the colorful Art Nouveau jewelry and enameled objects that he produced during the 30 years he worked at Tiffany &amp; Company have only recently been identified as his designs.
Now, some light is being shed on the subject by "The Jewelry and Enamels of Louis Comfort Tiffany," an exhibition at the Manhattan antiques gallery of J. Mavec Company, through Oct. 23.
The show, which was organized by Janet Zapata, archivist at the Fifth Avenue store from 1985 to 1991, is based on her book of the same title, published this month by Abrams ($39.95).


POLLUTION REMEDY IS HOTLY DEBATED
Angela Days's son Joey nearly died of leukemia 13 years ago.
His struggle to survive transformed Mrs.
Days from a homemaker to something of a rabble-rouser.
Convinced that the boy's cancer was caused in part by pollution, she lobbied successfully to have the chemical-laden Achusnet River placed on the 1982 Federal list of the nation's most toxic hazardous-waste dumps.


Crime Rate Drops by Half
After a year of revamping beats, expanding training courses and beefing up patrols, the private police force in Co-op City reports an overall drop in reported crime of nearly 50 percent.
The man behind these changes is Co-op City's new security director, Gerard Tuomey.
A retired captain from the New York City Police Department, Mr.
Tuomey commanded the mounted patrol unit until May 1992 and took his Co-op City post 14 months ago.


The Case for the Defense
To the Editor:
"Health Reform? How About Lawyers?" (Viewpoints, Sept. 26) is nothing more than another example of misinformed lawyer bashing by the medical profession.


BENEFITS
Civil Liberties Evening
TUESDAY -- The New York Civil Liberties Union will benefit from a cocktail party and performance by the comedian and musician Mark Russell.
The evening, at the penthouse of 80 Fifth Avenue at 14th Street, begins at 7 P.M.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 382-0557.
Billiards for M.S.
TUESDAY -- Gene Shalit will be the host of the first Pro/Celebrity Billiards Classic, which will raise moneys for the New York City chapter of the National Multiple Sclerosis Society.
Celebrity players will include Katie Couric, Bryant Gumbel, Bo Derek and Yogi Berra.
The event, at the Pennsylvania Hotel, the former Penta, 401 Seventh Avenue across from Madison Square Garden, begins at 7 P.M. and includes live jazz, hors d'oeuvres and a cash bar.
It is sponsored by Brunswick Billiards and is being held in conjunction with the United States Open Pocket Billiards Championship, which will be at the hotel from Oct. 13 to 17.
Tickets, $30, from (212) 463-7787.
Avant-Garde Dance
TUESDAY -- A performance of two new works and the New York premiere of a third by the choreographer Stephen Petronio will benefit his company.
The works, at the Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue at 19th Street, begin at 8 P.M. and will be followed by a cocktail reception.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 473-1660, or at the door.
Floating Hospital
WEDNESDAY -- The Floating Hospital, which has been serving New Yorkers since 1866, will hold an awards dinner-dance at the Marriott Marquis.
Peter Jennings of ABC News will speak, and Douglas G. Watson, the president of the pharmaceutical division of the Ciba-Geigy Corporation, and Tommy Hilfiger, the vice chairman and designer of Tommy Hilfiger USA Inc., will be honored.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. will be followed by dinner, dancing to the Lester Lanin Orchestra and the awards ceremony.
Black tie.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 267-3561 or (212) 267-3037.
Celebrating an Author
WEDNESDAY -- Elizabeth Janeway will read from her work in progress on aging at a fund-raiser for the Feminist Press, which is celebrating the author's 80th birthday.
Ms.
Janeway will read twice during the event, which will be from 6 to 9 P.M. at the home of Sue Rosenberg Zalk, 310 West 92d Street.
Champagne and hors d'oeuvres from B. Smith's restaurant will be served.
Tickets, $80, from (212) 360-5790, or at the door.
Guitars for Dancers
WEDNESDAY -- A benefit for the American Spanish Dance Theater will open the company's fall season.
Pedro Cortes and Basilio Georges, flamenco guitarists from the group, will be among the performers at the Yale Club, 50 Vanderbilt Avenue, from 6:30 to 8:30 P.M.
There will be a raffle of prizes, including trips to Spain and the Caribbean, and cocktails and hors d'oeuvres will be served.
Tickets, $75, from (212) 674-6725.
First Lady on Health Care
THURSDAY -- Hillary Rodham Clinton will speak on health-care reform at a benefit dinner for the Committee for Economic Development, which finances research and education on economic and social issues.
The First Lady will speak at 7 P.M., following cocktails at 6 P.M.; dinner will be served after her talk.
At the Waldorf-Astoria.
Black tie.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 688-2063.
Young Artists
THURSDAY -- The Lotos Foundation, an organization founded by members of the Lotos Club to support young artists, will present the New York recital debut of Phyllis Pancella, a young mezzo-soprano and the winner of its third annual award, at a fund-raising concert.
Cocktails and dinner beginning at 6 P.M. at the Lotos Club, 5 East 66th Street, will be followed by the 8 P.M. performance at Weill Recital Hall at Carnegie Hall.
Coffee and dessert at Carnegie Hall will end the evening.
Bus transportation will be provided between the club and the hall.
Tickets, $125, from (212) 874-3990.
Fighting Addictions
THURSDAY -- Barbara Walters will speak at the second dinner-dance to raise money for the Arlene Walters Shevell Scholarship Foundation, established in the name of her cousin.
The benefit for the foundation, which supports drug and alcohol rehabilitation, will be at Rainbow's Pegasus Suite in Rockefeller Center.
Jim Jensen, the WCBS-TV News senior correspondent; Geraldine O. Delaney, the founder of Alina Lodge, a New Jersey rehabilitation center, and Riley Regan, the executive director of the New Jersey Governor's Council of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse, will be honored.
Cocktails at 7 P.M. will be followed by supper and dancing to the Hank Lane Orchestra.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 608-2060, ext. 202.
A Puppet Show
THURSDAY -- The Czechoslovak-American Marionette Theater is sponsoring a performance of its "Johannes Dokchtor Faust" to raise money for its 1994 season.
The performance, at 7 P.M. at the National Hall, 321 East 73d Street, will be followed by a reception.
Moravian wine, Czechoslovak beer and food will be served.
An auction of artwork, crystal, books and puppets will be held and a documentary film on antique marionettes will be shown.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 777-3891.
Antiques Show Preview
THURSDAY -- The opening of the International Fine Art and Antiques Dealers Show at the Seventh Regiment Armory, at Park Avenue and 67th Street, will benefit the Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
Guests will preview the show and its special loan exhibition of antique silver toys from the Royal Ontario Museum.
Cocktails and hors d'oeuvres will be served and the winner of a treasure hunt will receive a trip to France to visit the Moet &amp; Chandon Chateau.
Tickets, $500 to enter at 6 P.M., or $250 to enter at 7 P.M., from (212) 874-5457.
Fifth Avenue Antiques
THURSDAY -- A preview of the Fifth Avenue Art and Antiques Show, at which 25 American and European dealer will be represented, will raise money for Children's Hope Foundation, a pediatric AIDS volunteer group.
The show, under the patronage of Lady Hannay, the wife of Britain's Ambassador to the United Nations, runs from Oct. 15 to 19 at the Sinclair-Fletcher Mansion, 2 East 79th Street.
The preview, from 6:30 to 9:30 P.M., includes champagne and hors d'oeuvres provided by Glorious Foods.
Black tie.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 249-4865.
Lesbian and Gay Studies
FRIDAY -- Grace Paley and Stephen Sondheim will be among those reading at a cocktail reception to raise money for the Center for Lesbian and Gay Studies at the City University of New York Graduate School, 33 West 42d Street.
The readings begin at 6 P.M., followed by cocktails.
Tickets, $50, from (212) 929-2639.
Masks for Charity
FRIDAY -- A "Feast of Masks" will benefit the Boys' Towns of Italy, which operates two centers in Rome for children who are the victims of war, neglect and violence.
The event takes place at the New York Prop Gallery, 451 West 54th Street, from 7 P.M. to 2 A.M.
The Prop Gallery will be turned into a 16th-century Roman residence.
Guests may wear masks; there will be a prize for the most creative.
A cocktail reception will be followed by a buffet dinner and dancing to the Bud Maltin Orchestra.
Tickets, $100, for cocktails, dinner and dancing, or $55 for cocktails, dessert and dancing starting at 9 P.M., from (212) 980-8770.
Portraits for Sale
FRIDAY -- An auction of art by Glenna Goodacre, Barbara Lekberg and Bruno Lucchesi, among others, and quick portraits of guests by Mr.
Lucchesi and others will benefit the National Sculpture Society.
The evening, which starts with cocktails at 7 P.M., will be at the Puck Building, 295 Lafayette Street at Houston Street.
Dinner and dancing to the Ray Rivera Sextet will follow.
Black tie.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 758-8041.
Chieftains Benefit
SATURDAY -- The International Breast Cancer Foundation for Ireland, which raises money for research and education, will mark National Breast Cancer Awareness Month with a concert by the Chieftains.
The concert, at the Sylvia and Danny Kaye Playhouse, 68th Street between Lexington and Park avenues, will be followed by a traditional Irish supper with the group at the faculty dining room of Hunter College, across the street from the theater.
The concert is at 7:30 P.M.
Tickets, $150 for the concert and supper, or $50 for the concert alone, from (212) 772-4448 or at the door.
Celebration in the Park
SATURDAY -- The Queens Theater in the Park, in the New York State Pavilion in Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, will celebrate the completion of its restoration, including the foyer reflecting the original New York State Pavilion Complex designed for the 1964 World's Fair by Philip Johnson.
A cocktail reception from 6 to 7:30 P.M. will be followed by performances by the Atlantic Theater Company, the Chinese Folk Dance Company, the No Name Gospel Singers and Jorge Morel, a guitarist and composer.
Kitty Carlisle Hart will be the mistress of ceremonies for the evening, which ends with the best of "Forbidden Broadway" and a dinner planned by the restaurateur Vincent Sardi and prepared by the chef Brendan Walsh.
Tickets, $250 for cocktails, performance and dinner, or $100 for cocktails and the performance alone, from (718) 760-0064.
Honoring a Painter
SUNDAY -- The painter Elizabeth Murray will be the first recipient of the Larry Aldrich Prize at a fund-raiser for the Aldrich Museum of Contemporary Art in Ridgefield, Conn.
The event at the Plaza begins at 7 P.M. with cocktails, followed by dinner and dancing to the Hank Lane Orchestra.
Tickets, $375, from (203) 438-4519.
For Handicapped Children
SUNDAY -- The 18th-anniversary awards dinner of the Keren-Or-Jerusalem Center for Multi-Handicapped Blind Children will raise money for its Sabbah Educational Center in Israel.
Rabbi Basil Herring of the Jewish Center of Atlantic Beach, L.I., and Zmira and Maurice D. Sabbah will be honored at the Pierre.
Cocktails at 5:30 P.M. will be followed by the awards ceremony, and dinner and music by the Neshama Orchestra.
Tickets, $360, from (212) 255-1180.
Anniversary Fete
OCT. 18 -- The University Settlement Society of New York will celebrate its second century of providing social services to the Lower East Side with an awards dinner and performance at the New York Hilton.
The evening begins with cocktails and a silent auction, followed by a performance of the Broadway revue "Forever Plaid," then dinner and the awards ceremony.
Trude Lash, a consultant for the Foundation for Child Development, and Stanley Brezenoff, the executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, will be honored.
Tickets, $250, from (212) 674-9120, ext. 158.
Care for Performing Artists
OCT. 18 -- The St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center's Kathryn and Gilbert Miller Health Care Institute for Performing Artists will benefit from a cocktail reception and performance at the Stanley H. Kaplan Penthouse of the Samuel B. and David Rose Building at Lincoln Center, 165 West 65th Street.
The flautists Eugenia Zuckerman and Marya Martin, the pianists Gary Graffman and Charles Wadsworth, and Harolyn Blackwell, the mezzo-soprano, will perform.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 523-7800.
Food to Aid Dance
OCT. 18 -- Guests at a benefit for the Dance Theater Workshop will be led through a four-course meal at Gabriel's Restaurant, 11 West 60th Street, by Joshua Wesson, a wine and food authority.
The restaurant specializes in Northern Italian cuisine and the courses include salmon cured with grappa and a wild-mushroom lasagna.
The evening runs from 8 to 10:30 P.M.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 691-4823.
Whitney Preview
OCT. 18 -- A preview of the first installation by Adam Weinberg, the Whitney Museum of Art's new permanent collection curator, will raise money for the museum.
The show, which traces the theme of classicism in American art, opens on Oct. 20.
The decor for the benefit will be an extension of the exhibit.
A cocktail reception in the permanent collections at 7 P.M. will be followed by dinner and dancing.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 570-3672.
Winter Olympics
OCT. 18 -- Walter Cronkite will be the master of ceremonies at the Plaza for a Salute to the Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway, to benefit the American-Scandinavian Foundation and the Norwegian-American Chamber of Commerce.
A silent auction of 20 banners painted by Scandinavian and American artists and a raffle of prizes including trips to Aspen, Colo., Norway, Finland, Iceland and the Caribbean will be held.
A 7 P.M. cocktail reception precedes dinner and dancing to the Lester Lanin Orchestra.
Black tie.
Tickets, $275, from (212) 879-9779.
Heart Association Hoedown
OCT. 18 -- The American Heart Association's New York City Affiliate will hold a country-and-western evening at Denim &amp; Diamonds, 511 Lexington Avenue between 47th and 48th Street.
Country foods and dancing will be featured at the event, which runs from 7 to 11 P.M.
Cleve Francis, a cardiologist-turned-country singer, will perform.
Tickets, $150, from (212) 661-5335.
An Evening of Monopoly
OCT. 18 -- The students of New York University's master's in real estate program and Chemical Bank will sponsor a monopoly face-off with some of New York's leaders in the real estate industry.
Proceeds from the evening, which begins at 6 P.M. with cocktails, followed by the games and a buffet dinner, will go to the Food &amp; Hunger Hotline.
It will be at Chemical Bank's headquarters, 270 Park Avenue at 47th Street.
Tickets, $100, from (212) 737-9010.
An AIDS Benefit
OCT. 18 -- Dance performances at Lincoln Center, including pieces by Peter Martins, Twyla Tharp and Bill T. Jones, will benefit the Design Industries Foundation for AIDS.
Costumes for the event have been created by a group of fashion designers, including Donna Karan, Calvin Klein and Isaac Mizrahi.
The evening, presented in collaboration with Broadway Cares/Equity Fights AIDS, will begin with a cocktail reception at 6 P.M., followed by the performance and dinner catered by, among other restaurants, An American Place and Le Madri.
Black tie.
Tickets, $1,000 for the reception, performance and dinner, or $500 for the reception and performance, or $150 for the performance only, from (212) 255-9877.


Rain Goddess II
To the Editor: I empathized wholeheartedly with Rachel Billington after having read her "Confessions of a Rain Goddess" (Sept. 5).
I relived the wet, whirlwind backpacking tour of Western Europe my sister and I experienced this summer.
Through 7 countries and 15 cities in four weeks, the rain followed us and the loads on our backs.


Why Farmers Want To Renege on Contracts
"Farm Plan Upsets Farmers"  [ Sept. 19 ]  should read "Farm Plan Upsets Taxpayers." Suffolk County has spent $40 million on a program that has enriched a few property owners, and now some of these are trying to renege on their agreements.


A TRUCE IS OFFERED BY SOMALI GENERAL TO U.N.-U.S. FORCES
Robert B. Oakley, the American special envoy to Somalia, arrived in Ethiopia today to start a peace overture by the Clinton Administration as Mohammed Farah Aidid, the fugitive Somali faction leader, called for a cease-fire.
General Aidid, in a broadcast from his radio station in Mogadishu, said his Somali National Alliance would no longer attack United States or United Nations forces if they stopped attacking Somali troops.


Quietly, Term-Limit Measure Seems Likely to Pass
The year 2001 could well mean a new kind of space odyssey for all the New York City officeholders who win election this fall and re-election in four years: They might have to move over to make room for fresh faces.
Despite their efforts to block it, City Council leaders say they now assume that a citizens group's proposed referendum to limit local officials to two consecutive four-year terms will appear on the ballot Nov. 2 and, if recent results around the country are any guide, will pass easily.


Oneida Indians' Casino Permits 18-Year-Olds to Gamble
When the Oneida Indians opened the Turning Stone casino here in July, it was heralded as the first legal casino in New York State since the 1870's.
Few noticed that Turning Stone was also the only casino on the Eastern Seaboard where teen-agers can place bets.
The minimum age for casino gambling in most places, including Atlantic City and the Foxwoods casino in Ledyard, Conn., is 21.
At Turning Stone, it is 18.
As a result, the casino, 35 miles east of Syracuse, is quickly catching on with students from two dozen nearby colleges.


Kristen A. Crowe, Mark W. Stevens
Kristen Aldrich Crowe, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur S. Crowe Jr. of Carlisle, Mass., was married yesterday to Mark Walther Stevens, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles P. Stevens of Menands, N.Y.
The Rev.
Nigel Andrews, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the St.
George's School Chapel in Newport, R.I.
Mrs.
Stevens is the assistant director of development at Roxbury Comprehensive Community Health Center Inc., a nonprofit health-care agency in Roxbury, Mass.
She graduated from Franklin &amp; Marshall College and received a master's degree in public administration from New York University.


Coping With a Gray Menace In a Queens Garden of Eden
To the Editor:
Robert Lipsyte's tribulations caused by invading squirrels ("Hasta la Vista, Squirrels: Urban Terminator," Sept. 26) had a very familiar ring.


Sound Bytes; Taking a Whole Store Home In Your Personal Computer
SAT TARA SINGH KHALSA is chairman of the Info Now Corporation of Boulder, Colo., a company developing ways to use computers to forge direct links between companies and their customers, or between companies, bypassing the middleman.
Info Now recently developed a system that allows I.B.M. and Gateway computers to come preloaded with popular software packages that the user can test, buy and activate without going back to a computer store.
It is also working with some of the largest corporations to use similar technology for connecting consumers with the manufacturers of noncomputer products.
Mr.
Khalsa, who was born James Norman Hefty, joined the Sikh religious sect in 1973.


Frequent Fliers
To the Editor: Readers of the Practical Traveler column on frequent flier programs (Aug. 1) may be interested in my experience in using a "partnership carrier."
In February, while we were in New Zealand, my wife and I planned a trip to Australia.
We wanted to fly from Wellington to Melbourne, take a train to Perth and fly back from Perth to Wellington.
Both Air New Zealand and Qantas could provide that service for about the same fare.
We chose Qantas as it was a partner with American Airlines and we had frequent flier miles with American.


Coffee Bars Find Their Place in the State
FOOD trends seem to move across the country from west to east.
Several years ago we began hearing about Seattle as the unofficial coffee capital of the United States, with scores of shops, cafes and espresso bars where elaborately constructed concoctions were drunk on the premises and coffee beans sold by the bag in various blends and flavors.
We realized it was just a matter of time before the coffee craze would head our way.
Well, here it comes, not in a batten-down-the-hatches tidal wave, but as a trickle.
Little coffee shops, also known as espresso bars, have been sprouting all around Fairfield County in recent months.
In addition to dark, medium, flavored and decaffeinated brews, almost all feature espresso and cappuccino, as well as creations like caffe latte (espresso with a high proportion of steamed milk and layer of foam), caffe mocha (similar to latte with cocoa) and caffe americano (a milder espresso).
Most of the shops also sell the newest coffee-making machines and equipment.


Countrified


THE NATION: The Picture From the Census Bureau; Poverty 1993: Bigger, Deeper, Younger, Getting Worse
IN 1971, Robert J. Lampman, one of the intellectual architects of the war on poverty, wrote that poverty could be eliminated before 1980, "at which time the next generation will have set new economic and social goals."
His optimism, as he now recalls, was based on historical trends.
From 1961 to 1971, the number of poor people fell by more than one-third, to 25.6 million from 39.6 million.
Many economists shared Mr.
Lampman's belief that, with an active Government and a growing economy, the poverty problem would be "solved in the near future."


Lee Stevens, Mark Deitch
Lee Stevens, a vice president in fixed-income sales at J. P. Morgan Securities in New York, was married last evening to Dr.
Mark Deitch, a resident in orthopedics at the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York.
Rabbi Jay Rosenbaum officiated at the St.
Regis in New York.
Mrs.
Deitch and her husband, both 28, graduated from Brown University, she magna cum laude.
She is a daughter of Arthur and Lois Stevens of New York.
Her father is a senior vice president and the general counsel of the Lorillard Tobacco Company in New York.
Her mother is a training specialist in New York for the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association-College Retirement Equities Fund.


Kmart's Stock Surge Masks a Weakness at the Core; Too Little, Too Late for Store Make-Overs?
IN 1990, Kmart embarked on an ambitious plan to overhaul and enlarge its discount stores with an infusion of more than $3 billion, to be spent over an unspecified number of years.
Sounds like a lot, until you consider that Wal-Mart invested that much to renovate and improve fewer stores in the last year alone.
Both Target and Wal-Mart spend a bigger percentage of their revenues on prettying up their stores, a vital element of retailing and one that Kmart neglected until 1990.


A Nobelist Delves Into the Language
In awarding the black American author Toni Morrison its 1993 Prize for Literature last week, the Nobel Committee said "she delves into the language itself, a language she wants to liberate from the fetters of race." In one passage of her novel "Beloved," Baby Suggs, a self-anointed holy woman, preaches for men and women who only recently left slavery:


When the Body Politic Is a Diseased King
There has always been a rich lode of theatricality in illness.
A body is besieged.
The mind fights back.
Sometimes, in the course of the battle, a soul is revealed.
Camille coughs bravely, if melodramatically, and slips into the delicately scented night.
The elephant man shows a society of Victorian thrill-seekers that deformity is only skin deep, while Big Daddy tries to outwit the cancer that is devouring his gut by playing king of the plantation.
Since mortality dogs us all, we watch their writhings in horror and sympathy.
We have a direct stake in the outcome, as we don't, say, in the collapse of empires.
Part of us can't help wondering what we would do under the circumstances.


Klein Throws for 6 Touchdowns As Post Extends Victory Streak
C. W. Post 55, Gannon 14
Quarterback Perry Klein threw six touchdown passes to tie a school record and rushed for two more as C. W. Post extended its winning streak to four by defeating Gannon.


Mysteries Circle Vietnamese At Center of Brown Inquiry
He rose at an early age to the top of the South Vietnamese Government, but he refused to flee as Saigon fell.
The conquering Communists did not send him to the prison camps where they banished other South Vietnamese officials.
Instead they gave him a comfortable Government post.
For the last few years, he has been living with his family in a four-bedroom, waterfront house on a cul-de-sac in Coral Springs.
His daughter says he has had no job.
His former business partner says that he has been trying to bribe the Commerce Secretary, Ronald H. Brown, to help lift the trade embargo against Vietnam.


INSIDE
Aftermath of Officer's Death
Detectives sought the killer of a police officer, as Washington Heights residents complained of a towing operation that led to a melee.
Page 33.
Democrat Removes Gloves
The chairman of the Democratic Party leveled an unusually harsh attack against critics of the party and the President's initiatives.
Page 18.
White Sox and Braves Win
Chicago defeated Toronto, 7-4, and Atlanta beat Philadelphia, 9-4.
Some copies of SportsSunday went to press before the games ended.
Section 8.


Making the Journey Back From the Desolation of Head Injury
PEARL LEWIS went to bed a wife, a mother and a teacher.
When she awoke the titles remained, but their meaning had disappeared.
In the middle of the night she had suffered a brain aneurysm.
Much of her memory and other retentive powers were gone.
"I taught math for 25 years," said Mrs.
Lewis, a petite 54-year-old from Dix Hills.
"Now my mind is blank of math. I look at the books I have at home, and nothing means anything."


Alexis Winter and Rene-Pierre Azria
Maria Alexis Winter, the daughter of Janice J. Wren of Charleston, W.Va., was married last evening to Rene-Pierre Azria, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles Azria of Paris.
Rabbi Ronald B. Sobel officiated at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
Mrs.
Azria, 29, is known as Alexis.
She is a fiction writer in New York.
She graduated cum laude from West Virginia University.
Her mother is an offset printer for the city of Charleston.


Palestinians Slay 2 Israeli Hikers; Israelis Kill Suspected Guerrilla
Palestinian gunmen shot and killed two Israeli hikers today near the occupied West Bank town of Jericho, and the Israeli navy foiled a seaborne raid by a heavily armed guerrilla riding a jet ski off the coast of southern Lebanon.
The episodes were the latest in a series of attacks in recent weeks by militants opposed to the agreement signed last month between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization on Palestinian self-rule in Jericho and the Gaza Strip.


Clinton Emboldens Advocates of More Pacific Trade
EVEN as it struggles to gain Congressional approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement, the Clinton Administration is casting its eyes across the Pacific.
It envisions a gradual dismantling of trade barriers between the United States and Pacific nations and perhaps someday a free trade area similar to that of Nafta.
A Pacific free trade area could bring even more rewards to the American economy than some people expect from Nafta, but might be an even harder sell domestically.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen
106.20
105.95
121.85
per Dollar
German Mark
1.6035
1.6309
1.4958
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar
1.3304
1.3385
1.2493
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound
1.5355
1.5085
1.6840
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold
$359.75
$355.00
$349.75
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


On a First Cruise, Merrily Unwinding
PERHAPS it was sitting at the midnight buffet with Natasha, a former Miss Teen Yukon, as she described the six feet of snow in her backyard.
Maybe it was attending the passenger talent show, when a lawyer from Scotland sang "Jamaica Farewell" and four petite Taiwanese women lifted the less-than-petite Australian cruise director high into the air.
Possibly it was just relaxing on deck late in the evening under a full moon, holding hands with my wife, Ruth, and listening to the reggae beat of a Caribbean band.
Whatever the reason, early on in my weeklong cruise of the western Caribbean in July, I decided that a floating vacation, of which this was my first, was a perfect way to put aside, however briefly, the tensions of work and city life -- to unwind, and to enjoy.


Oct. 3-9: House Republicans Reshuffle; Bipartisan Bob Bows Out, Nettlesome Newt Is Next
Only one Republican has ever served longer in the House of Representatives than Bob Michel of Illinois, the minority leader.
When he announced Monday that his 19th term would be his last, he was praised by President Clinton and Speaker Thomas S. Foley for having supported Republican Presidents, right or wrong, and Democratic Presidents, if he could.
His all-but-certain successor, Newt Gingrich of Georgia, does not look at things that way.
He fought President Bush over the 1990 budget and he fights Mr.
Clinton over almost everything.
Known for attacking his opponents' integrity, he insisted when he announced his candidacy Thursday that he was not so much a "bomb thrower," as a "truth thrower." In fact, most of those he accused were guilty of something.
So were some he did not accuse, like Mr.
Gingrich himself.
He urged younger members to raise the devil over the House bank; it turned out he once paid his income taxes with a bounce-proof overdraft on that institution.


Stevens Muscles Devils Over Washington
With Jacques Lemaire being a defense-oriented coach, Scott Stevens is the Devils defenseman likely to thrive the most this season.
The rugged team captain played like a man possessed for the second night in a row and was the leader in tonight's 6-4 triumph over the Capitals, a victory that came just 24 hours after a 6-3 triumph in Landover, Md.


Subdivisions for Houston's Ghostly Business Parks
WHEN Julie and Michael Marczak bought a home in a new subdivision in northwest Houston last year, they didn't think of themselves as pioneers.
But they were among the first home buyers in one of several new residential communities sprouting up around Houston in underdeveloped business parks.
The Marczaks -- he is an electrical engineer, she an elementary school music teacher -- said location was a top priority when they began house-hunting last year.


Corrections
A letter to the editor on Sept. 26 from Francis X. Dealy Jr., quoting his book "The Power and the Money: Inside The Wall Street Journal," misspelled the name of a correspondent cited in the book as one of the "primary club of Vietnam correspondents." He was Charles Mohr, not Moore; he covered the Vietnam War for Time magazine in 1962-63, and for The New York Times from 1964 to 1970.


JoAnne Cahill and A. B. Houghton 3d
JoAnne Marie Cahill, a vice president of Scudder, Stevens &amp; Clark, an investment counseling company in New York, was married yesterday to Alanson Bigelow Houghton 3d, an associate in New York for Inter-Asia Venture Management, a Hong Kong venture capital concern.
The Rev.
Mark Anschutz and the Rev.
Alanson B. Houghton 2d, the bridegroom's father, officiated at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Houghton graduated from Boston College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Cahill of Pleasantville, N.Y.
Her father, who is retired, was a manager for Pepsico Inc.


Here's How the Show Really Goes On
OH, sure, the show must go on.
This is the prime Broadway directive.
But how?
The house lights dim, the curtain goes up.
Actors appear, sets change, doorbells ring on stage.
The illusion is that it all happens effortlessly.
By magic.
Right.
The reality is that someone must make the show go on.
More than 50 someones, in the case of "She Loves Me," the Jerry Bock-Sheldon Harnick-Joe Masterson musical that began its Broadway run on Thursday at the Brooks Atkinson Theater, where it moved after rave reviews at the Roundabout Theater Company.
With quick costume and scene changes on a revolving turntable and with a cast of 19, it is one of Broadway's most complicated demonstrations of backstage choreography.


THE LOOK OF THE NINETIES
In the text you asked, "Could the best of the new fall clothes transcend age, hype and circumstance?" Perhaps you should have taken a good look at the photos.
The answer would have been as obvious as the oversize Adidas sneakers paired with an elegant, unconstructed, two-piece dress, worn about six sizes too large.
LYNN KEARCHER Sharon, Conn.


Indomitable Agnes de Mille
Several years after a devastating cerebral hemorrhage in 1975, the choreographer Agnes de Mille supervised a new production of her famous "Rodeo." Just before Miss de Mille, who died last week at 88, arrived in a wheelchair pushed by an attendant to view a rehearsal, her assistant said, "She won't like it."
He was right.
"She recast it," recalls a young dancer who appeared in the ballet.
"And I remember how she had us, droves of us, running across the stage again and again until we got it right. She worked on our gestures, simple, human gestures, endlessly. What a presence! Yet she herself could only move one arm, and could scarcely speak clearly."


Ashley Jones And C. J. Tagatac
Ashley Hyde Jones, the daughter of Dana Hyde Burden and Peter D. Jones, both of New York, was married yesterday to Christopher Joseph Tagatac, a son of Henry and Mary Ann Tagatac of Guilford, Conn.
The Rev.
Mary Cushman performed the ceremony at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
Mrs.
Tagatac, 30, is an associate, in Brooklyn, of the global securities unit of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company.
She graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father, a founder of Food &amp; Wine magazine, is the credit manager at the American Express Publishing Corporation in New York.
Her mother is a photographer in New York.
The bride's late grandfather B. F. Jones 3d was the vice president and secretary of the Jones &amp; Laughlin Steel Corporation in Pittsburgh, now part of the LTV Corporation.


Tailhook Gathering Is a Far Cry From the Last One
Beauty queens preparing for the Mrs.
America pageant and naval aviators attending the Tailhook convention at the Town and Country Hotel here milled around the same swimming pool this weekend, ringed by news photographers eager to capture the least indiscretion.
But this was a far different gathering from the notorious 1991 Tailhook event, a four-day bacchanal in Las Vegas, Nev., that ended careers, ruined reputations and led the Navy to withdraw its support from the 1,400-member aviators' association.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN


Familiar Rutgers Story: Can't Beat the Big Boys
A wonderful opportunity to make a mark in Big East football went right by Rutgers today.
The Scarlet Knights, who seem to take two steps forward and then one step back season after season, held a 14-3 lead over Boston College early in the contest but then succumbed, 31-21.
Darnell Campbell, the runner, and Glenn Foley, the passer, provided the punch for Boston College that knocked Rutgers out of any serious consideration as a Big East contender, a possible top 25 team or even a bowl candidate.


Boston Services By Telephone
The shops, theaters and restaurants of Boston are just one phone call away with a new service introduced by the Greater Boston Convention and Visitors Bureau.


Last Chances to Caulk Before Winter's Onslaught
ALL houses eventually need fresh caulking.
The purpose of the compound, often called caulking or caulk, is to seal gaps and cracks that develop between materials.
Unless the openings are sealed drafts can develop.
Even worse, moisture can penetrate walls.
Any season except winter is a good time to renew caulking.
In the winter temperatures are generally too cold to apply caulking.
It flows poorly and will not harden when the thermometer dips below 50.


Leashing the Pit Bulls
To the Editor:
This litigation is getting out of hand.
Mr.
Lerach's motives and virtues aside, most observers would agree, I believe, that most of these actions are simply blackmail -- and blackmail that is ultimately paid by the presumably injured shareholders, who typically see less than 15 cents of each dollar collected.
MICHAEL SEELY New York City, Sept. 22 The author is president of the Investor Access Corporation.


Homecoming for a Native Long Islander
NO, 1496 is not the year that Columbus sailed the ocean blue.
Rather it is the name and address of one of Manhasset's newest restaurants.
With the opening of 1496, its owner and chef, Jeffrey Segal, turned two dreams into realities.
The Roslyn native has returned to Long Island and become the chef at his own restaurant.
Mr.
Segal, a graduate of the Culinary Institute of America, has a long and impressive pedigree that includes experience at Arcadia, Jams and Corrado in Manhattan and stints at restaurants in England, France, California and Connecticut.


Scorers Who Believe In Full Disclosure
SHOULD the consumer be told what goes into a sausage?
Would he wish to be told?
In a bridge context, the European answer is "no" and the American answer is "yes."
Eight years ago, the Europeans, headed by Jose Damiani of France, pioneered the Epson Worldwide Game.
Preselected deals with predetermined match points are played around the world, but the organizers have never explained how the deals are derived or the scores assigned.


Kristina Chaikin, Jeffrey Clarke
Kristina Sofia Chaikin, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lionel E. Chaikin of Laurel Hollow, L.I., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Floyd Clarke, a son of Susan H. Clarke and Dr.
David R. Clarke, both of Denver.
The Rev.
T.
Carleton Lee performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
John's Church in Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
Mrs.
Clarke graduated from St.
Lawrence University and is studying for a master's degree in education at the University of Colorado at Denver, of which her husband is a graduate.
Her father, who is retired, owned Quoizel Inc., a lighting manufacturer in Hauppauge, L.I.


Let Medicare Carry New Plan Piggyback
To the Editor:
Stuart M. Butler's suggestion that the Federal employees health program be the basis for a national program (Op-Ed, Sept. 28) is good.
However, there is a better and simpler one: base any program on Medicare.
It is national, it is here, and it works.


Now For Russia's Biggest Job: A New Government
With the vicious battle for supremacy between the executive and legislative branches resolved in fire and blood, Russian analysts and Western diplomats agree that a real revolution may now begin, bringing with it fundamental changes in the way Russia is governed.
The most recent warfare between President Boris N. Yeltsin and Parliament was all about unfinished business from the failed putsch of August 1991.
It sealed the end of the Soviet Union four months later, but it left the fundamentals of the political system almost unaltered.
"The Second Russian Revolution," as it was called, was foreshortened and incomplete: the ruling class received a nasty shock, but remained in place.


Invisible Investments
MY HUSBAND thought me quite mad two years ago when I spent the first two weeks in our new apartment unpacking nothing and agonizing instead over structural minutiae: scraping paint flecks off bathroom tile, persuading carpenters to use plaster instead of wallboard in closets, making sure all the doorknob screws matched.
I have since convinced my husband that my obsession with perfect backdrops places me in a long and noble continuum.
The architect Vitruvius, for example, wrote in the first century B.C. that thoughtful craftsmanship gives a structure "strength and brilliancy, and an excellence that will last to a great age." The 19th-century critic John Ruskin believed that "thoroughness in the substance" must precede all architectural ornament.
And today, craftsmen with philosophical tendencies might find, as James Boorstein of the Manhattan-based restoration firm Traditional Line puts it, that rooms in which strict attention has been paid to detail have an almost tangible ambiance.
"You can feel a powerful sense of presence," he says, "something inside that's satisfying and that can't be put into words."


Clinging to Sox
To the Sports Editor:
I've been a Chicago White Sox fan since I was 11 years old.
While this may not be that unusual for someone who grew up along the banks of Lake Michigan, it is for a kid who grew up on the streets of Brooklyn and Queens.


Corrections
The Your Home column on Sept. 12 about landlords' access to tenants' apartments misstated New York State law regarding extra keys.
The Multiple Dwelling Law indeed requires that tenants provide keys to their landlords.


Liete Kidd, Mark Eichorn
Jane deDoliete Kidd, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Barron U. Kidd of Dallas, was married there yesterday to Mark D. Eichorn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Eichorn of New Haven.
The Rev.
Stephen Swann performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Incarnation.
Mrs.
Eichorn, 28, is known as Liete.
She is a publicity agent and the editor of the auction newsletter at Christie's in New York.
She graduated from the University of Virginia and received a master's degree in English literature from New York University.
Her father owns Kidd Oil and Gas, an exploration and production company in Dallas.
Her grandfather the late Pierre S. du Pont 3d was an executive at the Du Pont Company.


Public &amp; Private; Our Radical, Ourselves
The smart scholarship girl from a sheltered environment whose self-image goes south in the polyglot and high-pressure world of college is a staple, of modern fiction and of life.
I know her.
I was her.
And that is why I recognized Katherine Ann Power when she turned herself in and was sent to jail, understood how it was possible in four years to go from the valedictorian of a Catholic girls school to a campus radical who drove the getaway car in a 1970 bank robbery.


THE UNITED STATES OF ASYLUM
Just what this country needs ("The United States of Asylum," by Ted Conover, Sept. 19)!
We already have sexual harassment, misogyny galore, discrimination in the workplace, in religious institutions, in the military, etc., etc.
Now we're going to import more?
Dong Yishen, a refugee from China who came to this country aboard the Golden Venture, says, "In China we really want to have a son." (He had already fathered two girls.)


'The Deadly Game': A Twisted Mock Trial
THE Rainbow Theater is upscaling by downsizing.
With its move from a theater at Norwalk Community-Technical College that holds more than twice as many people as its new home -- the Leonhardt Studio at the Rich Forum, a black-box space with a capacity of 120 -- the six-year-old company is now right in the hub of theater life in Fairfield County.
But there's no sign of it in "The Deadly Game," which was adapted by James Yaffe from "Trapps," a novel by Friedrich Duerrenmatt.
The story was once seen on the Alfred Hitchcock television series.


Cutting? Trim All Sides Evenly
IF companies want to pare away at health insurance costs, the easiest way to do it and avoid a discrimination complaint is to make sure the cuts have a comparable impact on everyone involved.
"There are nondiscriminatory ways to save money, if that's the motivation," said Cary LaSheen, a lawyer at New York Lawyers for the Public Interest.
Ms.
LaSheen is working on behalf of defendants in the next critical A.D.A.-AIDS case, a suit filed by the Mason Tenders District Council Trust Fund in New York to have its AIDS exclusion declared lawful.


A Theme Park Of Itself
To the Editor:
Jean Baudrillard, it seems, is finally right: we live in a culture of the simulacrum.
Robert A. M. Stern, Tibor (Benetton) Kalman and company are about to turn Times Square (certainly one of the last of the "real" places) into a theme park of itself  [ "42d Street Plan: Be Bold or Begone!," Sept. 19 ] .


Mr. Clinton's Dark Night
President Clinton hasn't found the time to speak out publicly as House Democrats toy with ways to weaken his proposed campaign finance reform legislation.
But he did manage to squeeze in an appearance last week at the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee's $1,500-a-plate fund-raising dinner.
It was a sneak appearance in the truest sense.
To avoid embarrassing pictures of the populist-sounding President hobnobbing with lobbyists and the other influential high-rollers who populated most of the tables at the black-tie event, the White House took an extraordinary step.
It barred reporters, photographers and camera crews from the room.


Waffles Aren't Just for Breakfast Anymore
RECENTLY, my husband and I bought an old house in northwestern Connecticut, one of those buildings laughingly described as "needing work." Among the things left behind by the previous owners was a gleaming Art Deco waffle iron.
I had never made waffles before, so being the mother of a 5-year-old, it seemed a good time to learn.
In the back of a cupboard I discovered a mildewed cookbook missing its cover and first few pages.
It looked as though it dated back to the 1940's, and in it I found a recipe for waffles.
The previous afternoon my son and I had picked apples and raspberries in a local orchard, so I decided to add those to the recipe, and in the interests of health, I cut down the butter and used skim instead of whole milk.


25 Seasons Ago, Namath Was a Star, but 'Heidi' Ruled the Airwaves
In this 25th anniversary of the Jets' most glorious season, they may be reminded today of their most notorious loss.
They will visit the Raiders, the team that helped them define 1968 and linked them forever to the "Heidi" game.
There was the Super Bowl championship, of course, after the 1968 season.
There also was a game on Nov. 17, 1968, when the Jets and Raiders played a regular-season contest that was to be overshadowed by the children's story.


THE KILLER FROM CULIACAN
Leerhsen describes Chavez as "square, handsome, the classic Mexican mixture of Spanish, European and Indian influences." I believe your writer is referring to the mestizo, the predominant Mexican mixture of Indian and Spanish, not Spanish, European and Indian.
The Spanish are European.
I have noticed a puzzling increase in defining Spanish as non-European or non-Caucasian.
ROSALEE VALENT-TORRES Brownsville, Tex.


Elena Zazanis, Yannis Moutafidis
Elena George Zazanis, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
George A. Zazanis of New Vernon, N.J., was married yesterday to Yannis Pantelis Moutafidis, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Pantelis I. Moutafidis of Athens.
The Rev.
Basil Gregory performed the Greek Orthodox ceremony at the Cathedral of the Holy Trinity in New York.
Ms.
Zazanis, 28, is keeping her name.
She is a doctoral candidate in developmental psychology at the City University of New York Graduate Center.
She graduated cum laude from Wellesley College.
Her father is the chief of neurosurgery and a professor of neurosurgery at the Robert Wood Johnson Medical School in New Brunswick, N.J.
Her mother, Marina P. Zazanis, is the president and chief executive of Neogenix Inc., a biotechnology research and development company in Cedar Knolls, N.J.


Studies Find Benefits of Subsidies are Meager
Supporters of the Agriculture Department's export subsidies say the programs opened new markets for American farm products and helped preserve old markets in the face of large European subsidies.
But trade statistics and Government reports, including the Agriculture Department's own studies, provide little evidence that the programs have helped American exports substantially.


Towns Want Help To Replenish Shellfish
FOR 20 years Long Island Oyster Farms of Northport grew shellfish eggs, or "seeds," to help replenish the dwindling shellfish population using the warm water discharged into a lagoon at the Long Island Lighting Company plant at Northport as a giant incubator.
Since 1969 hundreds of millions of seeds have been transplanted into Long Island waterways.
But an electrical fire in 1991 destroyed the nurseries of Oyster Farms and six smaller companies.


Appeasing Hitler
To the Editor:
"Morally sickening" is the fitting epithet that your reviewer, Gaddis Smith, applies to John Charmley's pathological reasoning in "Churchill: The End of Glory" (Aug. 29).


Enlisting Churches to Battle AIDS
Five years ago, Pernessa Seele began sitting in churches all day Sunday so she could catch a moment with their pastors.
Back then, few Harlem ministers were willing to admit even that congregation members could become infected with the AIDS virus, much less discuss ways to help ease their pain.
But Ms.
Seele persevered, soliciting support for a small event she called the Harlem Week of Prayer for the Healing of AIDS.
"I didn't see people from the churches near the bedsides of the sick," said Ms.
Seele, then an administrator at Harlem Hospital.


MISSION IN SOMALIA IS TO SECURE CITY
The American command hopes to use the armor and infantry units now reinforcing the Somali capital to evict heavily armed Somali militia forces that have surrounded allied bases in downtown Mogadishu.
The militia members, loyal to Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, also control all the main roads.
In the last week, they have used their positions to kill and wound American soldiers by laying mines in the roads and shelling the bases with mortars.


Mall Evolution
THOSE who've seen it are calling it, variously, "Pee-wee meets Blade Runner" or "Russian Constructivism meets Virtual Reality."
Whatever.
What was once the ground floor of a Macy's warehouse in Long Island City, Queens, is now a mall that's a walk-in interactive sculpture.
In 1991, the Corporate Life Insurance Company and SIG Partners, the owners of 47-44 31st Street -- a million-square-foot structure, the largest in Queens -- gave three sculptors the run of its public spaces.


Eritrean Criticizes America's Strategy On Crisis in Somalia
The President of Eritrea, one of several regional leaders the Clinton Administration has asked to help negotiate a political settlement in Somalia, said today that the United States has behaved "like Rambo" thus far and has misread the intricacies of Somali clan politics.
In an interview, Isaias Afewerki also urged Washington to build new ties to the fugitive Somali leader, General Mohammed Farah Aidid, and called for an "impartial commission" to investigate accusations that he committed war crimes.


Testing Workers for Drugs Reduces Company Problems
Back in the mid-1980's, Daniel Burke worried about the growing national drug problem and whether his children might be tempted to experiment.
But he never thought of drugs as a problem for his company until an employee in New York City died of a cocaine overdose in an office stairwell.
"It turned out this guy had been dealing, too," said Mr.
Burke, the president of Capital Cities/ABC Inc.
"And a great number of our employees knew it."


Jerusalem Hotel
To the Editor: In "What's Doing in Jerusalem" (Sept. 5), Clyde Haberman was right to rave about the American Colony Hotel, whose physical beauty and historic appeal are very alluring.
But based on an experience we had two years ago, those reserving there should be sure to get a room in the old building.
A newer building has rooms that are infinitely less charming than the main building; indeed, they're rather lifeless.
We had specified the old building, got a room in the new building, didn't like it, and successfully insisted on a room in the old building.
There's no comparison.
DAN HARRISON  Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
Clyde Haberman responds: While rooms in the new wing may lack the grace of those in the old, some visitors consider them to be more comfortable and also quieter.
The morning call to prayer from the loudspeakers of the nearby mosque is charming.
But not everyone can catch the spirit at 4:30 A.M., and the new wing provides enough distance for those preferring muffled muezzins.


Is That Really South Africa?
Maybe one day Hollywood will make a movie set in South Africa that features some of the following:
* An Afrikaner leader who repudiates apartheid.


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: The Food Chain; Pesticide Plan Could Uproot U.S. Farming
GRAIN combines, vegetable harvesters, and tractors towing loads of fruit boxes are on the move this month as the nation's vast agricultural bounty is brought in from the fields.
But even as farmers try to focus on keeping their machines straight in the furrows and orchards, their eyes are nervously straying towards Washington.
Last month, three senior Administration officials trooped to Capitol Hill and said the White House was thinking about a change in pesticide policy that would drastically alter practices in food production, the nation's second largest industry. (The largest is health care, which the Administration also has its eyes on.)


Gloria von Oiste, Romulo Perez-Segnini
Gloria Da Silva von Oiste, a daughter of James and Aida von Oiste of Belle Terre, L.I., was married yesterday to Romulo Perez-Segnini, a son of Ambassador and Mrs.
Ildegar Perez-Segnini of Caracas, Venezuela.
The Rev.
Donald Brouillard performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Francis Xavier Church in New York.
Mrs.
Perez-Segnini, 30, is the assistant director of the art therapy program at Kings County Hospital-Downstate Medical Center in Brooklyn.
She graduated from Indiana University and received a master's degree in art therapy from New York University.
Her father is a lawyer in Port Jefferson, L.I., and her mother is a lawyer in Smithtown, L.I.


Croatia: The Once and Future Battleground?
AS the war in Bosnia grinds mercilessly on, diplomats and military planners are worrying that the Balkan-shattering conflict that pre-dated it -- the war in Croatia -- is about to erupt again.
"If anything, the situation here is today, in some ways, even more dangerous than that in Bosnia and Herzegovina," Cedric Thornberry, deputy chief of the United Nations force in the Balkans, said recently.
"One would be very myopic to fail to see and warn about the gathering clouds of war. It will need a major focused effort by the international community, and a real will for peace, if a second Serbo-Croat conflict is to be averted."


World Markets; Rice Trading Rises, but Will It Last?
WITH harvest shortfalls developing in many leading rice-growing countries, prices for the world's second-most-popular food after wheat have jumped rapidly in recent weeks to their highest level since the late 1980's.
Just where prices are headed is hard to say because so little of the rice grown enters into the flow of world trade.


POSTINGS: Brownstoners as Guides; Tour and a Workshop In Bedford-Stuyvesant
A combination of the neighborhoods of Bedford and Stuyvesant Heights, the name Bedford-Stuyvesant was created by the Brooklyn Edison Company in an early 1930's survey.
It has long been known for its blocks of beautiful town houses, and Saturday from noon to 5 P.M. the Brownstoners of Bedford-Stuyvesant, a nonprofit organization, will run its 16th annual house tour.


Racial Jokes Spur Apology From Friars
The head of the New York Friars Club apologized yesterday for racial jokes made on Friday at a celebrity roast of Whoopi Goldberg.
Mayor David N. Dinkins and others had criticized the roast, at which the actress's companion, Ted Danson, appeared in blackface for a routine and frequently used the word "nigger."
"While raucous and X-rated humor are usually the tradition of these annual events, they are never intended to ridicule or disparage any segment of our society," Jack L. Green, the dean of the New York Friars Club, said in a statement released yesterday.


Purdue Scores 56, and Loses
Scott Eckers capped a spectacular first collegiate start with a 55-yard pass to Antonio Carter that set up Mike Chalberg's 18-yard field goal with 8 seconds left, helping Minnesota to a record-setting 59-56 Big Ten victory over Purdue at Minneapolis last night.
The 56 points by Purdue (1-4, 0-2 Big Ten) was the most ever in a losing effort for a major-college team.
San Diego State previously held the mark, losing 52-51 to Wyoming in 1990.


If You're Thinking of Living In/Noroton and Noroton Heights; A Sailor's Heaven Where Darien Began
WHEN supplying phone numbers, Information does not recognize Noroton, nor does the post office deliver Noroton mail separately from Darien's, as it once did.
Real estate agents regard Noroton and Noroton Heights as neighborhoods in Darien, which they are, and so do newcomers.
But the old-timers of English, Irish, Italian, German and Hungarian stock, some living in the same houses their forebears occupied three to five generations ago occupied, cling to Noroton and the Heights as special -- the place where Darien, the smallest town on Fairfield County's Gold Coast, began.


Nursing Becomes A Feminist Battlefield
CALL them the guerrillas of the breast-feeding wars.
They appear at hospitals, nutrition conferences, and in countless child-care books with a simple proviso: breast milk is the best milk.
The subtext read by many mothers, however, goes more like this: if you do not breast-feed your children, you are not a good mother.
And as they are compelled to worry whether they are being good mothers, women are asked to consider whether they are being good feminists.
Some activist feminists insist that breast-feeding is just another male trick to keep women at home.
Others insist that it is a way for women to regain control over their bodies, showing men that breasts are more than just sex objects.


Old Friends
DAISY FUENTES, 26, the MTV personality and soap opera actress who recently signed a multiyear international contract with Revlon, has the kind of friends who know how to keep a rising superstarlet's feet on the ground.
In fact, there are so many of them that she could lend them out as a grounding service.
On Monday, Ms.
Fuentes, who was born in Cuba and grew up in Harrison, N.J., was in the V.I.P. area of Dish, a new Upper West Side restaurant she co-owns.
Surrounded by the unpretentious people who knew her when she was her high school's first Hispanic homecoming queen, she seemed more at home in their company than with the snooty-looking models and trend-eaters who were drinking for free nearby.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE WAY TO COOK.
By Julia Child.
Photographs by Brian Leatart and Jim Scherer.
Knopf, $30.
This is not your usual paperback price, but this is not your usual paperback volume.
In 1989 our reviewer, Richard Flaste, found the book "so large (more than 800 recipes), colorful and exuberant that it seems to be an almost living representative of Mrs. Child herself."  DOCTOR CRIMINALE By Malcolm Bradbury.
Penguin, $11.
It's the end of the century, the world as we know it is falling apart, and all intellectuals seem capable of doing is commenting on those facts.
Bazlo Criminale, a with-it philosopher, can deconstruct with the best of them -- if only the narrator, a harried journalist, could pin him down.
"It is greatly to Mr. Bradbury's credit that a work showing how skim milk tends to masquerade as cream is itself the real thing, creme de la creme de la creme," Joel Conarroe said here last year.
Current events, treated more somberly, are also the backdrop for THE PORCUPINE, by Julian Barnes (Vintage International, $9), in which the scions of a Communist regime become the less-than-totally-principled avengers bringing it to its knees.
Last year our reviewer, Robert Stone, said the book "brings to mind . . . Andre Malraux, George Orwell and particularly the Arthur Koestler of 'Darkness at Noon.' "


Developer Taking Over Former Macy's Property
A DEVELOPER who has built more than 50 community shopping centers in the Northeast agreed to purchase the former Macy's department store here this month and revitalize the surrounding 600,000-square-foot mall.
Bernard J. Rosenshein, president of Rosenshein Associates in New Rochelle, said he will build a 14-screen, 3,500-seat movie theater on the third floor of the building that Macy's vacated last summer -- bringing to this city, which has several old movie marquees outside buildings but no active movie theaters, the largest multiplex in Westchester.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Wednesday
Auto sales, early Oct., millions, ann. rate
6.7
6.5
Thursday
Producer prices, Sept., percent change
-0.6
0.2
Retail sales, Sept., percent change
0.2
0.4
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
320
345
Friday
Consumer prices, Sept., percent change
0.3
0.2
Capacity utilization, Sept., percent
81.8
81.9
Industrial production, Sept., percent change
0.2
0.3
Business inventories, Aug., percent change
-0.5
0.2
Monday Columbus Day: financial markets open, most banks closed Tuesday Greenspan to speak to House Banking Committee


Some of the City's Schools Opened Right on Time
To the Editor:
Some were bright-eyed and smiling, others a little teary, as they bid their mothers goodbye outside the Epiphany School on East 22d Street on opening day, Sept. 8.
But there were none of the customary back-to-school pictures on the evening television news nor in the next day's newspapers.
Nothing but closed public schools and their asbestos problems.
There were no pictures or news stories about the 145,000 black, Hispanic and white kids going into their certifiably clean parochial schools in the South Bronx, Harlem, the Lower East Side, Brooklyn and Queens and here at the Epiphany School.


Last Chances to Caulk Before Winter's Onslaught
ALL houses eventually need fresh caulking.
The purpose of the compound, often called caulking or caulk, is to seal gaps and cracks that develop between materials.
Unless the openings are sealed drafts can develop.
Even worse, moisture can penetrate walls.
Any season except winter is a good time to renew caulking.
In the winter temperatures are generally too cold to apply caulking.
It flows poorly and will not harden when the thermometer dips below 50.


Beyond Foley Square: Acting Like a Tourist Close to Home; The Bronx
Forget everything -- well, almost everything -- you may have ever heard or read about the lurking dangers of the South Bronx if you find yourself assigned to jury duty there behind the imposing limestone walls of the Bronx County Building.
Granted, several side streets near the 60-year-old building, like Walton and Sheridan Avenues, are often busy with illicit drug deals, police officers say.
"But it's good if you stay around the courthouse and the Grand Concourse," advised an officer assigned to the densely packed neighborhood that spills back from the shadow of Yankee Stadium.


A Playwright-Actress Puts Herself on Stage In Fact and Fiction
Catherine Butterfield is at it again, "Doing the Moliere thing," she says with a laugh, acting a major role in a play that she's written.
This can get confusing.
Rewriting lines during rehearsals, she has to go about memorizing them.
"I can't very well be angry at the playwright," she says.
Ms.
Butterfield won critical praise for both her writing and performance in "Joined at the Head" last year at the Manhattan Theater Club, when she played a long-suffering cancer patient with a persistent comic sense.
The play explored powerful emotions of loss and focused on a relationship between Maggy-with- a-y, who is dying, and Maggie-with-an-ie, the former girlfriend of Maggy's husband.


Bulletin From the Great Fish-Window Wars
Citarella, the Broadway fish store whose elaborate window displays of fish-flesh mosaics have drawn customers for almost a decade, seems to have some artful competition.
Fourteen blocks uptown, between 89th and 90th Streets, the ice tank in the window of Jake's Fish Market, a two-year-old challenger in high-priced, high-quality fish, holds its own carefully designed still life of the catch of the day.


Tanker Aground Near Greece
The Greek-owned oil tanker Iliad ran aground off the Peloponnes today and started to spill its cargo of crude oil, a Greek coast guard spokesman said.
An oil slick three miles long and about 30 yards wide spread from the tanker, stuck off the island of Sfakteria, the spokesman said.
He said cleanup vessels were on the scene.
The Iliad was on its way from Syria to the Croatian port of Rijeka when it ran aground.


Mondo Cane
You arrive at the house, and when you ring the bell the chime becomes a howl.
A manservant answers the door, a Groucho Marx look-alike who says, in mockery of the archetypal British butler, "You screamed?".
You're in the world, or at least the home, of Dylan Dog, comic-book antihero, pursuer of ghoulish phenomena, and best-kept secret of the Italian cult world.


SURFACING
IMAGE: Team logo license plates: The New York State Department of Motor Vehicles is selling plates with the logos of New York's sports teams.
So far, the Yankees' plates are the best sellers.
RELATIONSHIPS: Power couples redux: The competition for America's most impressive power couple is particularly stiff this fall.
Take your pick: Bill and Hillary, John Jr. and Darryl, or Lois and Clark, from ABC's new Superman series.
ATTITUDES: The age of age: "Beauty Isn't About Looking Young" read posters plastered around Manhattan by Clinique.
The message is a radical and revisionist twist on the business of beauty, and one that nicely echoes the thesis of Betty Friedan's new book, "The Fountain of Age."


Kmart's Stock Surge Masks a Weakness at the Core; After Years of Bloated Overhead, It's Time to Get Lean and Mean
KMART's overhead -- what it spends on payroll, utilities and other operating expenses but not the cost of the goods it sells -- is much higher than Wal-Mart's.
Analysts estimate that Kmart spends about 22.5 cents of every dollar of sales in its discount stores on overhead, while Wal-Mart spends about 17.5 cents.
That means Wal-Mart can offer its customers lower prices on merchandise, which gives it a tremendous edge.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3 There's one thing the audience at "She Loves Me" never gets to see (or applaud) -- one of the Broadway theater's most complicated demonstrations of backstage choreography and drama.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4 From a cramped office on the Upper West Side, Helmer Toro runs H &amp; H Bagels, a $6 million-a-year empire that each day sells 100,000 bagels -- and counting.
MOVIE CLOCK 13 What's showing at the local movie theaters, today through Thursday.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 14 World-class pool on the Upper West Side; "Forbidden Broadway" in Flushing Meadows Park.
SOAPBOX 17 Grading schools on a curve: an alibi for educational failure?
Plus, letters and "Eye of the Beholder."


A Tiepolo Transplant in Texas -- and It Takes
If so inclined, you could measure the great frescoes of Giambattista Tiepolo in acres.
His decoration of the ceiling above the grand staircase at the Residenz in Wurzburg, Germany, his crowning achievement and one of the cornerstones of 18th-century art, has been called the biggest painting in the world. (For the record, Guinness gives the honor to a 300,000-square-foot mural covering the side of a condominium in Key Biscayne, Fla.)
It's a paradox, then, that Texas, of all places, where hats are measured in gallons and ranches are the size of Rhode Island, should play host to an exhibition of Tiepolo's smallest paintings.
About 60 diminutive works have been brought together here at the Kimbell Art Museum in a beautiful show called "Giambattista Tiepolo: Master of the Oil Sketch." (The exhibition, on view through Dec. 12, will not travel.)


U. S. Pays Dearly For an Education In Somalia
HOW did an operation that began with American soldiers feeding starving Somalis wind up with an American soldier's corpse being dragged through the streets of Mogadishu by Somalis starving only for revenge?
The answer is a tangled web of good intentions gone awry, political miscalculations and military blunders.
Together they add up to a chilling object lesson for American engagement abroad in the post-cold war world.


The Sum of His Parts
THE ROAD TO SAN GIOVANNI By Italo Calvino.
Translated by Tim Parks. 150 pp.
New York: Pantheon Books. $19.


CONAN AND ME
My thanks to Rachel Cline for coining the phrase, "the sin of Conan" (Hers: "Conan and Me," Sept. 5).
Not only was the piece funny, I finally have a name for my affliction.
For most of my adult life, I've suffered from the condition of not being able to talk about the only interesting things I've ever done without what seems to be the flagrant dropping of names.


Seesaw Stops, and the Improbable Sox Are Even
So Frank Thomas finally hit a home run, and the Chicago White Sox won the game and evened the American League pennant playoff with Toronto at two games each.
But the White Sox did not beat the Blue Jays, 7-4, tonight because Thomas hit a mere bases-empty home run.
The White Sox insured at least one more game in their home park because Lance Johnson did the expected and the unexpected, the probable and the improbable.


Beethoven, in Recital And Symphonic Works
TO play the Beethoven String Quartets is a challenge that has been undertaken by the Tokyo Quartet, and for the second of the group's six recitals at Sprague Memorial Hall, you can hear one masterwork from each of the composer's major creative periods, the C Minor, Op. 18 No. 4, the Opus 74 in E Flat, and the C-Sharp Minor, Op. 131.
The 8 P.M.
Tuesday concert is part of the Chamber Music Society at Yale season; for ticket information, call 432-4158.
Friends of Music has come up with a fascinatingly different way of presenting the Beethoven Quartets: in five concerts by as many different ensembles.
Thus the first program, 8:30 P.M.
Saturday at the Westport Unitarian Church, finds the Alexander String Quartet tackling four Quartets: No. 2 and No. 5 from the Op. 18 set, the second Razoumovsky, and the Opus 127.
In November the Ying Quartet will perform, while taking their turns in the spring are the Talich from the Czech Republic, Ysaye from France and Fine Arts from the United States.


The Grand Old Fun Park in Its Autumn: a Lament
It's high noon at Coney Island, and for once the gulls and pigeons outnumber the humans.
In fact, the birds seem to be the only ones bathing, as a flock of dingy gray gulls dip their beaks and flap their wings into a puddle off the boardwalk and waddle off to face the autumn sun.
The wide wooden boardwalk, which a few months ago was a teeming maze of families, tourists, hawkers and photographers, is now a lazy route for bicyclists who glide by, right past the signs that say riding is allowed only from 5 to 10 in the morning.
On some benches, people chat quietly as they face the beach, where a few hardy sun worshippers stretch out on the sand, which has been packed hard by rain.


Pianist's Progress


Sarah Wendt, Rick Del Sontro
Sarah Emily Wendt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gary C. Wendt of Stamford, Conn., was married there yesterday to Rick Nicholas Del Sontro, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dominick W. Del Sontro of Lakewood, N.J.
The Rev.
Dennis Albrecht officiated at St.
John's Lutheran Church.
The Rev.
Walter Tomme, a Southern Baptist minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Wendt-Del Sontro, 24, is a fund-raising director for the American Heart Association in Gaithersburg, Md.
She graduated from Gettysburg College.
Her father is the president and chief executive of the G.E.
Capital Corporation in Stamford.


Last Chances to Caulk Before Winter's Onslaught
ALL houses eventually need fresh caulking.
The purpose of the compound, often called caulking or caulk, is to seal gaps and cracks that develop between materials.
Unless the openings are sealed drafts can develop.
Even worse, moisture can penetrate walls.
Any season except winter is a good time to renew caulking.
In the winter temperatures are generally too cold to apply caulking.
It flows poorly and will not harden when the thermometer dips below 50.


Amy Hoadley, Edward Dirnfeld
Amy Helen Hoadley, a daughter of Thomas A. Hoadley and Marilyn H. Farrag, both of Palm Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Edward Bonivento Dirnfeld, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Manfred Dirnfeld of Monte Carlo, Monaco.
The Rev.
Orlanda Brugnola, a Unitarian minister, officiated at the Lotos Club in New York.
Ms.
Hoadley, 31, who is keeping her name, is a public relations coordinator for the fashion division of Chanel Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Southern Methodist University.
Her father is a partner in Hoadley &amp; Noska, a law firm in Palm Beach.
Her mother is the president of the Leonard and Sophie Davis Foundation, a philanthropic organization in Palm Beach.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-17 SOMALI CALLS FOR CEASE-FIRE  Robert B. Oakley, the American special envoy to Somalia, arrived in Ethiopia to talk about peace in Somalia as Mohammed Farah Aidid, the fugitive Somali factional leader, called for a cease-fire.  1  U.S.
But blacks and whites have started working together to heal their district.  18  PREVENTING BIRTH DEFECTS  Seeking to reduce birth defects, the Food and Drug Administration will require all makers of bread and grains to add folic acid to products labeled "enriched." 25  New theories about all that dark matter in the universe.  27  Metro 33-45  SEEKING WOMEN'S VOTES  In New York City's very bitter, down-to-the-wire mayor race, women could play a crucial role.
People there say they know that they need police officers, but many deeply mistrust the people who are supposed to protect them.  35  Police hunt for suspects in killing of officer.  33  Obituaries 44  Karl G. Henize, a NASA scientist.


Rocket Begins to Fly For Raider Offense
Raghib (Rocket) Ismail calls his quarterback "dude." He does not yet fully comprehend the Los Angeles Raiders' offensive language, and the Raiders cannot even begin to decipher his.
The day the former prodigy Todd Marinovich was waived, for instance, Ismail's bug-eyed response was, "Holy commotion."
Who taught him that?


Dolphins Show Off Muscles
Theories abound on the American Football Conference-National Football Conference series, about why the N.F.C. has won the last nine Super Bowls, three of the last five Pro Bowls and has not lost in overall interdivision play in any season since 1988.
Many answers can be found up front.


In 'My Heart,' Memories of Vietnam
"YOU never get over it," says one of six women, among the thousands who returned, unacknowledged, from serving in Vietnam.
In the second act of "A Piece of My Heart," at Stamford Theater Works, four nurses, one intelligence officer and one singer begin to deal with the emotional wreckage, the physical and psychological fallout of a war without honor, without victory, without closure.
A final tableau of the actresses appearing before a representation of the "Vietnam Women's Memorial Project" startles the audience.
The devastating effect is built into Shirley Lauro's theater collage.
If the intention is to reflect upon an ignominious episode in history, the political statement inherent in Ms.
Lauro's piece, a theater's mission is accomplished.


Learning to Keep Prison Gates From Being Revolving Doors
To the Editor:
Our son, serving 20 years to life in a New York State prison, recently graduated from college.
We would have been happy, as parents, to pay the tuition for four years at the school that accepted him, but with his conviction and sentencing (for culpability in the death of a drug dealer), that opportunity was no longer ours.


THE LOOK OF THE NINETIES
Congratulations to Polly Hamilton for producing "The Look of the Nineties" (Fashion, Sept. 12).
And to Kurt Markus, the photographer, thanks for capturing with warmth and dignity what words often fail to convey -- that "old age," truly, is just a state of mind.


Toni Morrison Casts Spell For Students at Princeton
Toni Morrison, winner of the Nobel Prize in Literature, is world famous for her books "Beloved," "Jazz" and "Song of Solomon." On the Princeton campus Ms.
Morrison is renowned for Studies in American Africanism, the seminar she teaches twice a week to a dozen rapt students.
The course, taught to a group that sits in an informal circle, centers on the way literary works have adapted to the presence in America of Africans and their descendants.
Students must apply to qualify, and the extensive reading list ranges from Edgar Allan Poe to Herman Melville to Professor Morrison herself.


Jordan's Retirement Puts the Reality Back in Our Court
Look at their faces, Woody Allen and Arnold Schwarzenegger, courtside, ringside, behind the dugout, Jack Nicholson and Spike Lee, stars with stars in their eyes, watching a large child in a playsuit hook, jab, swing away.
Even celebrities love the air that celebrities breathe, and no air is sweeter and purer than the air above the rim, inside the ropes, between the white lines where athletic celebrities do actual things that can be counted and measured.
Maybe not important things, but certainly real things, hard things, no stunt doubles, no scripted endings.


Marnee Hall, B. D. Anderson
Marnee Chandler Hall, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
E.
Clifford Hall Jr. of Westfield, N.J., was married there yesterday to Brendan Dale Anderson, a son of Katherine Z. Anderson and Dale D. Anderson, both of Canton, Ohio.
The Rev.
Jeffrey Chesebro officiated at the Presbyterian Church.


Canyon Rafting
To the Editor: I read Aaron Latham's article on white water rafting through the Grand Canyon (Sept. 5) with a great deal of interest and pleasure.
My wife and I were on the Colorado (along with 12 other passengers on a motorized raft) at about the same time as the Latham family, and there are a few things that your readers might like to know if they are contemplating running the river.
It isn't necessary to take that 9.5-mile hike down into the Grand Canyon to take one of these trips.
Our trip, with Grand Canyon Expeditions, began at Lee's Ferry, Ariz., about 90 miles upriver from the Latham starting point.
We reached it by bus, thus saving that daunting descent into the canyon.


Victorious Bosnian Serb Now Talks of Conciliation
Radovan Karadzic, the leader of the Serbian nationalists who have seized 70 percent of the country, has said that his forces consider the war in Bosnia to be over and has promised that his troops will not renew their attacks on Sarajevo, the capital, and other strongholds of the Muslim-led Government.
Dr.
Karadzic said in an interview Friday night that the ethnic Serbian leadership planned to turn its efforts instead to rebuilding the shattered economy of the parts of Bosnia they control and mending relations with Bosnian Muslims.


More 'Padlocking' to Close Drug Sites
The Tanisha "Tobaco" Shop awning at 199 East Third Street advertises newspapers, magazines, soda and cigarettes.
But inside, the police say, there were no such things: the real merchandise was cocaine.
On Monday, a dozen officers and three city officials shut down Tanisha in a procedure known as padlocking.


Ikea
Function equals un is one rule that could apply to any successful family room.
And the architect Walter Chatham has found that the Swedish emporium Ikea never disappoints when it comes to stocking functional furnishings with a sense of flair.
"I love Ikea because they make everyday objects that aren't only amusing to look at but work," he says.
Chatham is a self-avowed "modernist with a sense of humanity" who likes basic shapes and colors.
"When you work with solids, it's hard to go wrong," he emphasizes.
Shopping to fill a loft-sized family room, Walter Chatham went for extremes in terms of shape: Two voluptuously overstuffed leather sofas are flanked by skinny six-foot metal lamps with yellow shades that reminded the architect of the sculptor Giacometti's attenuated figures.
But Chatham's overall intention was to use furnishings to create a pleasantly neutral background - one that could both absorb and encourage an active family life.
The following items are available at Ikea, Baltimore; Elizabeth, N.J.; Hicksville, L.I.; Houston; Los Angeles; Philadelphia; Pittsburgh, and Washington.
To order a catalog, call (215) 834-0180 (Philadelphia) or (310) 217-8005 (Los Angeles), or write Ikea U.S., Plymouth Commons, Plymouth Meeting, Pa. 19462. 1.
"Orgryte 3" sofa, 87 inches long, in green, red, black, blue, brown or purple leather with hardwood frame and feather-and-fiber-filled cushions, $1,995. 2.
"Mard" plastic storage crate in yellow, red, blue, black or white, $9. 3.
"Lavin Upp" floor lamp with black metal base and "Kon 40" shade, available in yellow, turquoise or purple, $85. 4.
"Stilist" handmade glass vase in blue or clear, $9. 5.
"Cacao" handmade glass bowl in pink or citrine, $19. 6.
"Cobus" chalkboard, 47 inches by 31 inches, $11.95. 7.
"Lack" triangular table with fiberboard top and plastic legs in white, red, eggshell, blue, black or gray, $16.95. 8.
"Kombi-Lux" floor lamp with metal mesh shade and "Ton" lacquered metal base in white or black, $69. 9.
"Orgryte 2" leather loveseat, 71 inches long, with hardwood frame and feather-and-fiber-filled cushions, $1,795.
For colors, see item 1. 10.
"Lack" fiberboard and particleboard shelf in white, red, eggshell, blue, black or green, $39. 11.
"Fibbel" wood blocks, set of 34 in burlap bag, $11.95. 12.
"Haluna" stool with natural-finish wood seat and lacquered wood legs in green or white, $35. 13.
"Kreti" anodized aluminum whistling teakettle in yellow or red, $34. 14.
"Faktum" rolling storage cart, 27 1/2 inches high, 23 1/2 inches wide and 22 3/4 inches deep, with "Metod" white doors in melamine-coated particleboard, "Adverb 128" brushed aluminum handles and "Objektiv" laminated particleboard counter top, $128. 15.
"Faktum" wall cabinet, 27 1/2 inches high, 23 1/2 inches wide and 13 3/4 inches deep, in melamine-coated particleboard with "Metod" glass doors and "Adverb 128" brushed aluminum handles, $80. 16.
"Najad" handmade glass bowl, $14. 17.
"Lack" table, 21 5/8 inches square and 17 3/4 inches high, with fiberboard top and plastic legs, $19.95. (For colors, see item 7.) 18.
"Spara" rattan firewood basket, $12. 19.
"Bratten" cotton rag rug, 4 feet 7 inches by 6 feet 7 inches, in red, blue or purple, $49. 20.
"Padu" plastic child's chair in blue or red, $5.
Rattan chaise, 1950's Italian, from the private collection of Eric Michaels.


Mr. Jordan, Already Unforgettable
Who's the only person who could stop Michael Jordan?
The punch line: Dean Smith, his coach at North Carolina, who kept Mr.
Jordan's talents so tightly wrapped that the world's best basketball player was only the third player selected in the 1984 professional draft.
But now there's a new answer: Michael Jordan.
"I've lost interest," Mr.
Jordan said, not last week but last year -- before the season began, before the stories about gambling debts and a late-night Atlantic City junket, and before the death of his father.
And it was obvious in last spring's playoffs that he was playing not with joy but with grim determination to win a third straight championship.


FOLIC ACID SOUGHT IN SOME PRODUCTS
Seeking to reduce birth defects, the Food and Drug Administration said Friday that it would require all makers of bread and grains to add folic acid to products labeled "enriched."
The agency also said that makers of vitamins and supplements who put folic acid in their pills would soon be able to say on the labels that their products will help reduce birth defects.
This will be the first new health claim the agency has allowed since a new food labeling law was passed by Congress in 1991.


Molitor Will Play Now and Reflect Later
Someday, Paul Molitor will think about the memorable decision.
Someday, he will remember the choice he made to uproot his 15-year career in Milwaukee and transplant it to Toronto.
Someday, when he has stopped ruining pitchers, Molitor will reflect and smile.
But not today.


Anne Holtzworth, Hugh Simons
Anne Stuart Holtzworth, a daughter of James W. Holtzworth of Gloversville, N.Y., and the late Elizabeth W. Holtzworth, was married yesterday to Hugh Anthony Simons, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Francis Simons of Dublin.
The Rev.
Edmund T. Freeborn 3d, a Presbyterian minister, performed the ceremony at the Memorial Church at Harvard University in Cambridge, Mass.
Ms.
Holtzworth is keeping her name.
She is a product manager at the Gillette Company in Boston.
She graduated magna cum laude from Harvard, from which she also received an M.B.A..


Oct. 3-9: Guns in the Home; Staying Unarmed is Safer, A New Study Finds
Surveys show that the reason people give most often for buying a handgun is protecting themselves in their homes.
Now, a study published last week challenges this common assumption, concluding that keeping a handgun at home nearly triples the likelihood that someone in the household will be murdered there.
The researchers studied murders in the homes of more than 400 victims in populous counties that included Seattle, Cleveland and Memphis.
It found no evidence that guns at home offer protection that outweighs the risks of keeping them, said researchers from three universities.
They found that 76.7 percent of the victims were killed by a family member or someone they knew, and that in 85 percent of the cases there was no forced entry.


Somalis Can Well Govern Themselves
To the Editor:
While "Somalia, Through a Glass Darkly" (Op-Ed, Sept. 30) by George F. Kennan reflects the wisdom to be expected from an almost unique American foreign policy sage, and offers an eerily accurate description of the tragic United States morass in Mogadishu, it is, unfortunately, based on an erroneous and offensive premise that "the people of Somalia are wholly unable to govern themselves." Mr.
Kennan also states that any resolution "could not be a democratic one, because the very prerequisites for a democratic political system do not exist among the people in question."


Dish to Go Up, Over Protest
In what Channel 13 thought was an act of good will, the station recently wrote to neighbors advising them that part of West 58th Street would be temporarily closed.
The public television station, which planned to construct and install a satellite antenna on the roof of its headquarters at 356 West 58th Street, expected some annoyance for the inconvenience.
But the reaction was anger.
Both neighbors and Community Board 4, citing the continuing debate over the risk of radiation exposure from such technology, last week sent letters to city, state and Federal officials protesting the antenna.


Spared


A Cautionary Tale
To the Editor:
In "Worry Time for Wall Street?" (Sept. 26), one of the featured sources, Hancock Institutional Equity Services technical analyst Justin Mamis, said of Money magazine's advice to small investors, " [ Money ]  has told them it's a long bull market and don't worry about corrections."


Plant Now for Best Results in Spring
THIS is an odd time of year for most gardeners.
The tree leaves are beginning to turn.
There are signals everywhere that the growing period is going fast.
Some may think about moving activities indoors.
Yet there is reluctance.
It is so delightful to be outside.
Lawns still need mowing.
There is an enormous amount of yardwork still to be done.
Don't put the tools away.
Savor the month.


Q and A
A Wheelchair at Sea
Q.
My wife is confined to a wheelchair.
We would like to take a cruise in the Caribbean.
Which lines can accommodate us? -- Hyman D. Friedman, Brooklyn


Reconciling Art And Commerce
To the Editor:
Edward Rothstein laments the passing of two WQXR radio programs and the programming tradition they represent  [ "No Room on Radio for the Classics?," Sept. 19 ] , but he ignores the station's successful efforts to adhere to a mission more worthy than classical Top 40.
Virtually all the attributes that Mr.
Rothstein ascribes to "First Hearing" and "The Listening Room" are present with regularity and frequency elsewhere in our broadcast week.


Data Bank/October 10, 1993


Motorman Should Have Seen Train He Struck, Official Says
The motorman who operated the subway train that crashed last Thursday in Brooklyn should have been able to see the train that had stopped in front of him and then apply his brakes in time to avert the accident, a state investigator said yesterday.
"From the time he came around the curve to the point where he could view the train stopped in the station, he had ample time to stop," said Bill Dayton, a supervisor with the State Public Transportation Safety Board, who was at the scene yesterday.
"This is provided that the brakes worked, and I'm expecting to find that they did."


Neighbors Seek to Raze a Racial Wall
For years, nothing ever happened to persuade the residents of Van Buren Avenue and the tenants of the Ravine Park Village public housing development to put away their fears and share a cup of coffee the way neighbors often do.
Separated by a lonely field and a generation of suspicion and stereotype, the middle- and working-class whites of Van Buren and the harder pressed blacks of Ravine Park followed the same code: you stay in your world and we'll stay in ours.


Dinnerware All Dressed Up For a Party
The MacLachlin dinnerware at MacKenzie-Childs combines scenes from upstate New York, where it is made, with stripes and a checkerboard pattern.
The dinner plate ($175) shows the combination to dramatic effect, but the serving box ($150) is the most adorable piece.
There are also lunch plates, teacups and rectangular bread and butter plates.


Expansion Hopefuls Polishing Their Acts
With 16 days to go before the National Football League club owners choose two expansion cities, some bidders are making last-minute pitches to improve their chances.
The St.
Louis group, for one, is trying to strengthen its finances.
A key figure may be John E. Connelly, who owns a floating gambling boat in Iowa and has applied for a license for a gambling riverboat in St.
Louis.
One report said league officials had rejected Connelly as a prospective minority partner.
A league source said Connelly remained in the picture.
Another source said Connelly was ready to put up $40 million of the $140 million franchise cost, but wanted some control.


At Yale, a Grand Tour of Prints to Exacting Specifications
A STANDARD chronology for Joseph Mallord William Turner (1775-1851) would doubtless highlight 1794 as the year in which drawings by the artist were first engraved for reproduction.
It would also note that the first subscription engraving for a painting, "The Shipwreck," was published in 1807.
But given the artist's output of paintings -- his bequest to the nation alone numbers 300 canvases and 20,000 watercolors -- it is about as far as such a chronology would go with his prints.


Advertising Was Always Part of Public Toilet Deal
To the Editor:
In 1991, when J.C.
DeCaux first showed city officials its automated self-cleaning public toilets, the firm proposed to install and run them for free in return for advertising kiosks.
Contrary to what Phillip Lopate wrote in his Sept. 26 essay, "Public Amenities, Private Profit," the city did not "suddenly," after a trial period, announce a "tradeoff" involving advertising kiosks.
In fact, such a kiosk was on display outside the General Motors Building during the trial period.


FISHING WITH PRESIDENTS
As a young man, I had the privilege of getting to know Herbert Hoover in the outdoor surroundings of California's Bohemian Grove as well as in the more rarefied setting of his "retirement" home in New York's Waldorf Towers ("Fishing With Presidents," by Howell Raines, Sept. 5).
A true citizen of the world, Hoover was happiest when tramping through a forest path or baiting a hook.
He hauled in his first catch at the age of 8.
Far from being a fishing snob, Hoover described fishing as a lesson in democracy, if only because "all men are equal before fish." As the line suggests, his humor was as dry as the flies he preferred to Calvin Coolidge's worms.


The Bagel Maven . . . From Puerto Rico
HELMER TORO was not to the bagel born.
When he was growing up on his father's struggling sugar cane farm in Puerto Rico, there were no bagels in his house.
Or in his vocabulary.
But then he moved to New York City, where the bagel is as unavoidable as crowds on the IRT.
Here he took his first bite of a warm, sweet-smelling, doughnut-shaped roll that had been boiled and baked to shiny perfection.
He fell in love.


The Duke's Stomping Ground
THE Museum of the City of New York will offer three walking tours this month to accompany its current exhibition "Beyond Category: The Musical Genius of Duke Ellington." The first tour, this afternoon, will explore the neighborhood where Ellington worked and played.
Arthur Marks, a veteran guide, will take his charges to 333 Riverside Drive, near 105th Street, where Ellington's sister lived and where he composed much of his music.
Also on the route: the Birdland Jazz Club at Broadway and 105th Street and the First Church of Christ Science at Central Park West and 96th Street.


How Minority Businesses Are Holding Up
THIRTEEN years ago, Everett L. James Jr. began operating his White Plains company, E. J. Excavating, out of a one-room office in his home, with little more than a pickup truck to his name.
At the time, he said, he was low on capital and high on pluck.
Today, after steering the business through several ups and downs, Mr.
James has a larger office, 10 full-time employees and a fleet of equipment.
On the whole, the ledger looks healthier, but his spirit is flagging.
"I'm beat," the 50-year-old entrepreneur said.
"I think I've lived through every obstacle a black businessman could come up against. I've been fighting for a long, long time."


Dallas Skating
To the Editor: I read with great interest "What's Doing in Dallas" (Aug. 29).
Anyone planning a visit in the next few weeks might like to know about the Skate America International Figure Skating Competition to be held Oct. 20 to 25.
This event features skaters such as Brian Boitano and Viktor Petrenko, both Olympic gold medalists, as well as Oksana Baiul, the current world figure skating champion.


Protest Jeopardizes Hispanic-Hasidic Housing Venture
An agreement between Hasidic Jews and Hispanic residents to rehabilitate an apartment building to be shared by the two groups may be in jeopardy after 200 squatters took over a new housing project last weekend, saying they feared most apartments would go to Hasidim.
Leaders of the Southside Housing Development Fund Corporation, or Los Sures, and the United Jewish Organization of Williamsburg began discussing the joint housing venture a year ago after tempers flared over a Hasidic proposal to seek Federal money to convert two housing projects into cooperative projects.


After Weicker, New Candidates, New Strategies
AS a politician, Gov.
Lowell P. Weicker Jr. has conducted his affairs rather like one of the opera stars he so admires: larger than life, full of grand passions, and capable at any moment of springing an improbable plot twist on his audience.
The election campaign that has now begun, following Mr.
Weicker's decision to leave the stage after one term, promises to be on a more human scale, for better and worse.


THE WORLD: Jordan Has Its Own Palestinian Problem; The Mideast Kingdom Threatened by Peace
JORDAN, its politics intractably complicated by the birth of Israel in 1948 amid warfare, finds itself in the throes of a profound identity crisis now that Israelis and the Palestine Liberation Organization have embarked on the road to peace.
During the Arab-Israeli war that immediately followed Israel's creation, Jordan absorbed the West Bank and later gave citizenship to its Arab population and to a large number of refugees from the territory that became Israel.
It took in still more refugees in 1967, when it lost the West Bank and East Jerusalem to Israel in the second Arab-Israeli war.
Largely as a result of the two conflicts, and a more recent Palestinian influx during the Persian Gulf crisis, as much as 70 percent of Jordan's population is Palestinian.


Elissa Rueben, Howard Kenny Jr.
Elissa Beth Rueben was married last evening to Howard Ambrose Kenny Jr.
They are associates in the New York law firm of Lord Day &amp; Lord, Barrett Smith.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman officiated at the Parker Meridien Hotel in New York.
The Rev.
Raymond Conlin, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.


A Postcard From Coney Island


Flyers' Nattress Retires
RIC NATTRESS, a defenseman with the Philadelphia Flyers, announced his retirement from hockey on Friday after 11 seasons in the National Hockey League.


Interface: People and Technology; All Quiet in Economy Class
NO, I didn't sleep.
I can never sleep on airplanes.
But after more than eight hours overnight from Kennedy International Airport I arrived in Vienna surprisingly rested and fresh.
The Noise Buster, a new portable device to combat stress and fatigue caused by noise, did the trick.
Basically a small electronic box wired to a pair of Sony MDR-84 stereo headphones, the system can create what seems like a personal island of quiet in noisy settings like planes, trains, buses or factories.


When Jury Duty Calls
YOU reach into the mailbox and this, you realize, is it.
J Day is just around the corner.
No more excuses.
No more deferments.
No more whining that dentists, podiatrists, embalmers and others are exempt from jury duty in New York, so why not you?
Ralph Lauren served, if that helps.
Chuck Scarborough, Jacqueline Onassis, Woody Allen, Barbara Walters, Robin Byrd of cable TV, all have done time in the state courthouses around Foley Square in lower Manhattan.


Tara K. Kenny, Stephen McKenna
Tara Kristin Kenny, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
H.
James Kenny Jr. of Bernardsville, N.J., was married yesterday to Capt.
Stephen Gerard McKenna, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert McKenna of Edison, N.J.
The Catholic ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Paul Wickens at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
McKenna, 26, and her husband are pursuing master's degrees in international transactions at George Mason University.
She graduated from St.
Thomas University in Miami.
Her father, now retired, was a senior partner with La Branche &amp; Company, a specialist firm on the New York Stock Exchange.
She is a grandaughter of the late Christopher J. Devine, founder and managing partner of the former New York securities firm C. J. Devine &amp; Company.


A Fearless Kukoc Joins N.B.A.
Back home in Split, Croatia, war has been waged 20 or 30 miles from his parents' house.
Every couple of days, Toni Kukoc calls to make sure the house is still standing and that his parents are still in it.
Here, in a suburban Chicago labyrinth of freeways, toll ways and too many ways to get lost, Kukoc's most feared enemy is traffic.


Just Tossing and Turning
The fact that Americans are having dreams about celebrities has inspired a mini-trend in publishing -- books cataloguing dreams that people have about famous people whom, in most cases, they've never met.
Some people, for instance, get under the covers and have visions of Madonna.
Kay Turner, a folklorist and the lead singer of a band called Girls in the Nose, has collected 50 dreams about the pop star in a new illustrated book called "I Dream of Madonna: Women's Dreams of the Goddess of Pop" (Collins Publishers San Francisco, $14.95.)


Fate-of-the-Earth Furniture
THESE DAYS, MORE AND MORE of us are thinking green.
We bring string bags to the supermarket and buy biodegradable detergents, organic vegetables, even recyclable teakettles.
Yet how many of us think of the fate of the earth when selecting a new sofa or table?
It's difficult to imagine them as a threat to the environment, much less to one's health.
But the truth is that furniture manufacturing is a fundamentally polluting business: Companies often use pesticide-treated wood and apply paints and finishes that contain volatile toxic solvents, as well as glues made with formaldehyde, a likely carcinogen.
Not to mention the millions of acres of rain forest that are destroyed in the demand for tropical woods such as mahogany and rosewood.
Troubled by this environmental toll, a growing number of designers, manufacturers and marketers have embarked on an ecological odyssey in search of cleaner and safer materials and renewable wood sources.


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: Home Design: Magazine Part 2
What is good value? Standards that work.
*
The hunt for good value.
Three well-known designers -- Mario Buatta, Victoria Hagan, Walter Chatham -- shop the chain stores, then furnish rooms.


Mall Evolution; . . . and in the East Village, the renovation of Tompkins Square Park brings new shops selling new looks to a strip of boutiques.
ONCE, life around Tompkins Square Park required any or all of the following wardrobe staples: nose rings, a skinhead or mohawk, junk jewelry, distressed leather and anything from a thrift shop, the riper the better.
Then, fashion rehab found the East Village.


AIDS and Public Health
To the Editor:
In his letter of Sept. 5, Dr.
Warren W. Francis complains that "the basic public health principles for epidemic control" have been, in the case of AIDS, "condemned by the 'AIDS activists.' " He implies that such "principles" as "testing," "notification of known contacts" and "isolation where necessary" should be enacted as policy for AIDS, as they were for tuberculosis.


Holiday Tomorrow
The Columbus Day holiday will be observed tomorrow.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK
PARADE Today, the Hispanic Columbus Day Parade begins at 12:30 P.M. at Fifth Avenue and 44th Street, going north to 72d Street and east to Third Avenue.
Tomorrow, the Columbus Day Parade begins at 10:15 A.M. at Fifth Avenue and 44th Street, going north to 86th Street and east to Third Avenue.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal, state and municipal closed.
POST OFFICE Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS Closed.
PARKING Alternate-side rules suspended on Monday.
SANITATION No collections, street cleaning or recycling.
SCHOOLS Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS Open.
TRANSPORTATION Subways, buses, Metro-North and Long Island Rail Road on regular schedules.
NEW JERSEY
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Federal and state offices closed; municipal option to close.
POST OFFICES Closed.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Local option.
TRANSPORTATION N.J.
Transit trains on regular schedules, bus schedules vary, holiday or regular.
CONNECTICUT
GOVERNMENT OFFICES Closed.
POST OFFICES Closed.
BANKS Closed.
SCHOOLS Local discretion.
TRANSPORTATION New Haven Line on regular schedule. Traffic Alert Today
SECOND AVENUE FAIR Second Avenue between 42d and 53d Streets will be closed from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Second Avenue Festival.
Amsterdam Avenue between 77th and 86th Streets will be closed from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. for the Victim Services Festival.


Oct. 3-9: Small Bomb, Big Problem; Chinese Explosion Puts Another Dent In Relations With U.S.
At 80 to 90 kilotons, the nuclear bomb tested by China last week is deemed medium-sized.
But arms-control advocates worried that the blast could set in motion an international chain reaction as well.
President Clinton had urged China not to carry out the test, and the day after it took place he directed the Department of Energy to plan for resuming America's own nuclear tests, which were halted a year ago.
The disarmament advocates worry that Russia, France and Britain could follow suit.


Growing Up Today; Tales From the Street
FOUR young men were talking about a book in which they tell of the life they know.
In that life, "to survive, you do negative things. I come from it; I understand it," Marquai O'Neal said.
They wanted to help with the book, Akida Ellis said, because "things were going on that needed to be addressed. People were getting hurt, dying."


Watson Fulfills Dream With Astros Job
Major league baseball needs one commissioner and two league presidents.
Last week the league lost a good candidate to replace Bill White as National League president.
"That's way, way down on the priority list now," said Bob Watson, who had aspired to the league job.
"This is something that was a dream. The National League job was not a dream. I wanted the opportunity, and now I have the opportunity to put together a winner for a team I started with way back in 1965. Now it's my team, and I have a chance to take it to the next level."


POSTINGS: For Architects and Others; Airport Access Panel and a Screening
Ever had a plane to catch and been stuck in traffic as takeoff time drew nigh?
Well, then, you might be interested in a panel discussion Wednesday at 6 P.M. sponsored by the Municipal Art Society called "Airport Access: What's Manhattan Got to Do With It?" The topic is the Port Authority's plan to build an airport access transit system between Manhattan and La Guardia and Kennedy International Airports.
Panelists include Edward O'Sullivan, director of the Port Authority's airport access program; Janette Sadik-Khan, director of the Mayor's Office of Transportation, and Jeffrey Zupan of the Regional Plan Association.
The moderator is Ellis Henican, subway columnist for New York Newsday.
Admission is $5 ($3 for members).
The site is the Urban Center, 457 Madison Avenue, at 51st Street.
For reservations, which are required, call 935-3960.


THE WORLD: Moderate Meddling; From Asia, Models for Growing Economies
FOR more than a decade, economists and politicians have been looking for a secret formula in the waters that run from the Sea of Japan to the South China Sea.
No other region of the world has seen such remarkable economic growth, nor such dramatic improvements in everything from education to life expectancy.
For a world stuck in economic stagnation, what common lessons are there in the experiences of Japan, the "four tigers" -- Hong Kong, Taiwan, Singapore and South Korea -- and now the other booming economies of Southeast Asia?
For a while, no one was sure they wanted an answer.


Nancy Alper and Bruce Friedberg
Nancy Pearl Alper, a daughter of Eileen Alper Trattner of Hewlett Harbor, L.I., and the late Dr.
Conrad Alper, was married last evening to Bruce D. Friedberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Alan B. Friedberg of New York.
Rabbi Stuart Geller officiated at the Inwood (L.I.) Country Club.
Mrs.
Friedberg is an industrial psychologist with R. R. Donnelley &amp; Sons, the printing concern, in New York.
She graduated from George Washington University and received a master's degree in industrial organizational psychology from Columbia University.
The bride's stepfather, Richard Trattner, is a founding partner of Israeloff &amp; Trattner, an accounting firm in Valley Stream, L.I.


Jobs at Prisons Go Beyond License Plates
ON a recent Thursday, Joy Whitted awoke about 7 A.M., put on a flowered skirt and jacket, slipped a bright turquoise clip into her carefully combed hair and applied some finishing touches to her makeup.
At 8 A.M., she was seated in front of her computer console, ready for a day's work.
"Thank you for calling New Jersey Travel and Tourism," she said into the telephone headset.
"My name is Joy. How can I help?"


Congressional Bill To Save Forests
It was gratifying to read about Carl Ross's work to save the old-growth forests that are being logged practically into extinction  [ "From Hicksville and Its Trees, a Leader in Forest Preservation," Sept. 19 ] .
However, I wish the article had included the number of the forest-biodiversity and clear-cutting-prohibition act, so readers could write to Congressmen and identify the bill more easily.
It is H.R. 1164 and currently has 60 co-sponsors.


Who Says College Can Only Last Four Years?; The M.B.A. Example
To the Editor:
Before moving too quickly toward three-year bachelor's degrees (Education page, Sept. 29), the academic community should study a similar situation at the graduate level.


Hoechst to Pay $546 Million To Gain Control of Copley
In yet another marriage of drug- development and generic drug businesses, the Hoechst Celanese Corporation, the chemical and drug concern, said on Saturday that it had agreed to buy 51 percent of Copley Pharmaceutical Inc. for $546 million.
If the deal goes through as planned, a newly formed Hoechst Celanese subsidiary, the HCCP Acquisition Corporation of Delaware, will buy 9.9 million Copley shares at $55 apiece.
Copley, which will continue to trade as a publicly held company, closed on Friday at $49.75, down 25 cents.
Hoechst Celanese of Somerville, N.J., is a unit of Hoechst A.G. of Frankfurt.


CHRONICLE
The Pulitzer Prize-winning cartoonist, also a playwright and novelist, JULES FEIFFER , has written and illustrated his first children's book, "The Man in the Ceiling." It tells the tale of Jimmy Jibbett, a boy who is lousy at sports but excellent at drawing.
Just like Mr.
Feiffer, when he was a boy.
"Nothing in the book ever happened, but everything in the book is true," Mr.
Feiffer said Saturday evening, at a book party on Martha's Vineyard given by his friends and neighbors, the novelist WARD JUST and his wife, SARAH CATCHPOLE .
Mr.
Just greeted 30 or so guests, including LINDA A. FAIRSTEIN , Manhattan's chief sex crimes prosecutor and author of "Sexual Violence," and ROBERT BRUSTEIN , the artistic director of Boston's American Repertory Theater.


Novell to Let Industry Group Have Unix Software Rights
Novell Inc.'s on-again, off-again plans to give rights to the Unix software operating system to an independent industry consortium are on again, Novell officials have said.
Novell plans on Monday to announce that it will turn over the Unix trademark, as well as responsibility for maintaining the operating systems' specifications, to the X/Open Company, a London-based consortium of 14 companies dedicated to maintaining Unix standards.


Nazi Understaffing Helped Danish Jews
To the Editor:
"Danes Commemorate Rescue of Danish Jews" (news article, Sept. 28) conveys the significant role played by the German occupation authorities in Denmark in facilitating the successful escape of some 7,000 Danish Jews right under Nazi noses.
You also identify some underlying motives for this manifestation of German connivance in helping Jews escape.


Review/Fashion; Four Designers In the Vanguard Hold the Line
Anyone looking for an example of the hollow politicization of fashion need look no further than the runway of Corinne Cobson.
The designer sent out T-shirt after T-shirt with "stop racism" on them, but used only white models in the show.
The genuinely disruptive messages in fashion now are not ones that can be printed on a T-shirt.
Young designers are caught in a curious game, of trying to mimic and anticipate the radical trendsetters -- Martin Margiela, Dries van Noten, Ann Demeulemeester and Helmut Lang -- who are cautiously dismantling the staid ideas of beauty in fashion.
This season, some collections here have the frantic feeling of a chase.
But in fact, the quarry has stopped short; the four radicals barely changed at all, while others are taking their ideas to extremes.


The Times Names A New Puzzle Editor
Will Shortz, former editor of Games magazine, will become puzzle editor of The New York Times next month.
His appointment was announced yesterday by Jack Rosenthal, editor of The Times Magazine.
Mr.
Shortz will edit Sunday puzzles for the magazine and crosswords for the daily paper.
He succeeds Eugene T. Maleska, who died in August after editing The Times's puzzles for 16 years.


Review/Fashion; Artful, but Will It Wear?
Conventional clothing was an endangered species in the first days of the French ready-to-wear shows for spring and summer.
Thin shrouds of fabric lightly veiled the body, baring all.
Paper hats filled up with air like balloons, and hair was sprayed and knotted to look like birds' nests.
The shows were like very advanced art exhibits, except the products were to be worn, not hung on walls.
Still, there were moments of beauty.
Christian Lacroix provided the most luxurious versions of wearable art in a collection of remarkable complexity that will probably stand as one of the wonders of the season.


Review/Television; Where Protection Is as Important as Education
All the children at the M. Hall Stanton Elementary School, in a rundown neighborhood of Philadelphia, are black; almost all live in single-parent homes and in poverty, and some have been exposed to crack before birth.
They are the subjects of Alan and Susan Raymond's strong new documentary, with its flares of brightness on a dark canvas.
The story of "I Am a Promise" is told mainly through Deanna Burney, the school's principal.
It's a nonstop job.
We see her playing many parts: cheerleader, assuring fourth and fifth graders that they are all "genius children"; disciplinarian of hard cases, by turns coaxing along and cracking down; social worker, trying to help parents help the school to help their children; supervisor, cushioning criticisms of teachers in soft language, and alert guardian, keeping watch over the dangerous streets outside her school at dismissal time.


When an Investor Chooses a Professional Mutual Fund Planner
To the Editor:
"Paying a Professional to Run No-Load Funds" (Your Money pages, Sept. 11) does an excellent job of comparing and contrasting how professionals use load or no-load mutual funds.
However, I believe more needs to be said for individual investors.


Market Place; To invest in new braking systems, investors stop at Varity.
AFTER air bags, which are gradually becoming standard equipment on every vehicle built in this country, four-wheel antilock braking systems -- or A.B.S., as they are commonly known -- are the fastest-growing new automotive safety device.
They are also the reason for investor interest in an up-and-coming company in this field, the Varity Corporation.
Until now, the Kelsey-Hayes subsidiary of Varity has been a leading manufacturer of two-wheel antilock brakes, mostly for pickups and other light trucks.
As such, the company has benefited much less than its competitors have from the enormous popularity of the devices in smaller vehicles.
Those competitors include the ITT Corporation, the Bendix unit of Allied Signal, Robert Bosch G.m.b.H., and the Delco Chassis division of General Motors.


Who Says College Can Only Last Four Years?
To the Editor:
"Completing College in Only 3 Years? Idea Is Gaining Support Nationwide" (Education page, Sept. 29) discusses the possibility of offering accelerated bachelor's degrees.


Amanda Rose and David Campbell
Amanda Esther Rose, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Irving M. Rose of Princeton, N.J., was married there yesterday to David Barrington Campbell, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Albert B. Campbell of the Bronx.
Rabbi Joseph Gelberman performed the ceremony at the American Boychoir School.
Ms.
Rose, 27, is keeping her name.
She is the managing director of Stanford Coaching Inc., a private tutoring and test-preparation firm in New York.
She graduated from Cornell University.
Her father owns I. M. Rose Associates, a management consulting company in Princeton.
Her mother, Merle B. Rose, is an English teacher at Princeton High School.


Dolphins Lose Marino but Not the Victory
In a football game that was more like a thrill-a-second carnival, the Miami Dolphins may have lost quarterback Dan Marino for the season due to an injury to his right Achilles' tendon and they may have found a wonderful replacement in backup lefty Scott Mitchell.
At the same time, the Miami defense bottled up Cleveland Browns quarterback Bernie Kosar after Kosar had some early success this afternoon and pushed him out of the game and a job: Vinnie Testaverde again relieved Kosar, and he will start next Sunday when Cleveland plays at Cincinnati.


Elf Fairservis, F. Pieter Lefferts
Elf L. Fairservis, a daughter of Dr.
Walter and Jano Fairservis of Sharon, Conn., was married yesterday to F. Pieter Lefferts, a son of Farnham and Irene Lefferts of Litchfield, Conn.
The Rev.
Russell Eidmann-Hicks, a Congregational minister, performed the ceremony at the home of the bride's parents.
Mrs.
Lefferts is an associate underwriter at the Home Insurance Company in New York, as well as an Off Off Broadway director and actress.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father, who is retired, was the curator of the Peoples of Asia Hall at the American Museum of Natural History in New York and a professor of anthropology and archeology at Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
Her mother is an illustrator of children's books.


CLINTON CARE PLAN MAY CUT BENEFITS TO SOME CHILDREN
Some Administration officials and advocates for children are saying President Clinton's health plan would eliminate some benefits received by millions of poor children on Medicaid, including many who are disabled.
Under the health plan's package of basic services, some Medicaid recipients under 21 could lose benefits they now have, including transportation to and from a doctor, certain types of hearing and vision care, physical rehabilitation and special education services.


Labor Wants Shorter Hours To Make Up for Job Losses
Union leaders and some economists are beginning to talk seriously about what once seemed a far-fetched remedy for disappearing high-pay jobs: a shorter workweek.
This may not sound like a particularly novel idea; millions of part-timers already work far fewer than 40 hours a week.
But the unions would insist that regular full-time workers whose weeks are cut to 35 hours or so keep their 40-hour pay and benefits.


The Future of Lenin's Tomb Is Still in Doubt


Wisconsin Is No. 2 and Awakening Its Faintest Echoes
Michigan and Penn State have never played, and the 1,000th game in Penn State's history this weekend was supposed to be the big one to determine which team might go to the Rose Bowl from the Big Ten.
Michigan looked like a final No. 1 team to some.
But Michigan's stunning 17-7 setback at Michigan State on Saturday has made Wisconsin, Ohio State and Penn State leading contenders for the Rose Bowl.
All three are 5-0 over all.


John Harrison and Helen Strauch
Helen Melissa Strauch, a daughter of James and Margaret Strauch of Tenafly, N.J., was married yesterday to John Clarke Harrison, the son of Clarke and Patricia Harrison of Evanston, Ill.
Cantor Joan Fuerstman performed the ceremony at the Highlawn Pavilion, a restaurant in West Orange, N.J.
Ms.
Strauch, 27, is keeping her name.
The bride is an English lecturer at the University of Pennsylvania, where she is also a Ph.D. candidate in educational linguistics.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College and received a master's degree from Penn in the teaching of English to speakers of other languages.
Her father is a retired certified public accountant in Tenafly, where her mother, also retired, was a speech therapist.


Russian Showdown, Hour by Tense Hour
Before the shooting died down and the fires were extinguished, the questions were raging in Russia.
One week ago, armed Communists and nationalists broke through police lines to the Parliament building, the fortress of legislators hostile to President Boris N. Yeltsin.


Financial Woes Imperil a Container Redemption Center
We Can, a nonprofit group that aids the homeless in New York City by redeeming returnable bottles and cans, is facing extreme financial difficulties and may have to shut down its 220,000-container-a-day operation, officials of the group say.
The six-year-old organization has been hurt by long delays in receiving reimbursements from beverage distributors and by a per-container handling fee that organization officials say is inadequate, as well as by labor disputes and poor management decisions.
Without increased donations from foundations or individuals, the group says, it may no longer be able to make ends meet.


Pan Am Suspects Advised Not to Surrender
A team of international lawyers representing two Libyans accused in the 1988 bombing of an American airliner over Scotland, said today that they had advised the suspects not to surrender to the Scottish authorities for trial, citing a "grave concern" that pretrial publicity could prevent the suspects from receiving a fair hearing.
After two days of meetings with the two suspects in Tripoli, the defense team said they would contact the Governments of Britain and the United States in the next few days "to discuss future progress" in the case.


Increase in Attacks Feared, Government Tells Israelis
A day after two Israeli hikers were killed in a part of the West Bank previously assumed to be safe, Government officials and army officers warned today of the likelihood of stepped-up attacks by Palestinian militants who want to undermine the agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
"We are in a sensitive, I would even say dangerous, period," Environment Minister Yossi Sarid said.
A senior army officer cautioned, "The presumption is that there is going to be a concerted effort by a large group of people to make things very difficult."


Nature, And Man, Cloud Fate Of Levees
On an insolently beautiful morning in September, Allen Rodewald toed the jagged edge of a quarter-mile gap in the levee that had stood here unbroken for decades.
He tried to find words to explain how utterly baffled and deserted he felt.
Behind the 40-year-old farmer, the Mississippi was 14 feet above flood stage and surging through a stand of cottonwoods with the sound of an ocean gale.
In front of Mr.
Rodewald was 26,000 acres of bottom land, some of it his, that had become a 40-square-mile lake so deep that the water lapped at the second floors of farm houses.


Paramount To Weigh QVC Talks
Bowing to the pressure of a hostile but attractive takeover bid from QVC Network Inc., the board of Paramount Communications Inc. is expected to approve exploratory merger talks with QVC when it meets this morning, according to an executive close to the Paramount board.
Separately, QVC is continuing talks on a cash infusion of as much as $1 billion from a group of investors said to include BellSouth and Cox Enterprises among others.
Details of the deal were still being worked out last night, according to several executives close to QVC.


Timing (i.e., Wisdom) of Yeltsin's Trip to Tokyo Is Stirring Anxiety
If President Boris N. Yeltsin does go ahead on Monday with his twice-postponed visit to Tokyo, which he has vowed to do, there are serious questions about what he's going to be able to accomplish there -- and what might happen in Russia while he's away.
It was quiet today in Moscow, with the population still shellshocked by the violent confrontation between Mr.
Yeltsin and his parliamentary rivals.
The city remains under a curfew and state of emergency decrees that ban all political demonstrations.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Nordiques Finish Fast  Andrei Kovalenko and Joe Sakic each scored two goals and the Quebec Nordiques used a four-goal third period to beat the Pittsburgh Penguins, 7-4, last night in their home opener.
The Nordiques, who are 11-2-3 in home openers, began the third period tied, 3-3, but settled the outcome with three goals in the first six minutes. (AP) Blackhawks 4, Jets 3: Dirk Graham scored with just 10 seconds left in overtime, giving Chicago a 4-3 victory against Winnipeg at Chicago.
Brent Sutter won a faceoff with 15 seconds left and Steve Smith got the puck to an onrushing Graham, who beat Stephane Beauregard with a 15-footer from the left corner. (AP)


TRANSACTIONS
Football  National Football League
HOUSTON OILERS -- Signed Jeff Alm, defensive tackle, to a one-year contract.


Mary Gene Tuthill, John C. Clavin
Mary Genevieve Tuthill, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph E. Tuthill of Rowley, Mass., was married yesterday to John C. Clavin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Clavin of Fishers Island, N.Y., and Vero Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
Owen Lally performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Louis de Gonzague in Newburyport, Mass.
Mrs.
Clavin, who is known as Mary Gene, is the director of the annual fund at Emmanuel College in Boston.
She graduated from Boston College, as did her husband.
Her father is a cardiologist in Newburyport.


World Economies


British Statement Restarts Debate on Ulster
The debate over a new peace initiative for Northern Ireland accelerated today after the British Secretary for the north, Sir Patrick Mayhew, explained the conditions under which he would negotiate with Sinn Fein, the political wing of the outlawed Irish Republican Army.
In the first elaboration of British policy on the initiative since it won the approval last Thursday of the Irish Prime Minister, Albert Reynolds, Sir Patrick said in a radio interview on Saturday that only an unconditional guarantee from the I.R.A. that its campaign of violence had ended would lead to a negotiating role for Sinn Fein.
A temporary cease-fire would not suffice, he said.


Tollbooth Is Robbed on Bridge
A gunman in a rental van robbed a tollbooth on the Triborough Bridge on Saturday night, sped through another booth on the Bronx-Whitestone Bridge, struck four cars during a chase that followed and, after the van overturned, escaped with an estimated $2,500, the head of the union representing bridge and tunnel officers said.
The robbery was the 25th this year, said Peter Lukas, the president of the Bridge and Tunnel Officers Benevolent Association, and occurred even as the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority had begun beefing up security measures at its two tunnels and seven bridges to halt a record number of tollbooth robberies.


Ricardo D. Kohn, Lisa J. Markovits
Lisa J. Markovits, the daughter of Barbara A. Markovits of New York and Robert L. Markovits of Middletown, N.Y., was married yesterday to Ricardo D. Kohn, a son of Doris Deitel and Pedro Kohn, both of Quito, Ecuador.
Rabbi Irving J. Block performed the ceremony at the Brotherhood Synagogue in New York.
Ms.
Markovits, 24, is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from Cornell University and received a master's degree in law and diplomacy from Tufts University.
Her father is a partner in Markovits &amp; Markovits, a law firm in Middletown, and a principal in the Brotherhood Winery in Washingtonville, N.Y.
Her mother is an accountant in New York.


Earle Palmer Plans Sale of Atlanta Shop
Earle Palmer Brown, continuing to reduce the number of its offices, has agreed in principle to sell its Atlanta office to Cole Henderson Drake there.
Terms were not disclosed.
Earle Palmer's Atlanta office, which has fewer than 10 employees, has billings estimated at $5 million from clients like Atlanta Gas Light.
Dick Henderson, the chief executive and executive creative director of Cole Henderson, said Friday that some Earle Palmer employees would be absorbed into his agency, which has 50 employees and billings estimated at $25 million from clients like the Ritz-Carlton Hotel Company.


Reporter's Notebook; Books Are a Big Deal But Writers May Not Be
It was Thursday at the Frankfurt Book Fair, the international publishing world's weeklong frenzy of deals, near deals and partying that ends on Monday, and Sandra Dijkstra, an American agent, was doing what she always does at Frankfurt: trying to sell foreign rights to the books she represents.
Never mind that she was stuffed into a riotously noisy room with dozens of editors, agents and publishers doing essentially the same thing, or that she had just 30 minutes to pitch her list to a pair of French publishers, or that she would be spending the next five days in the same room, repeating herself.
Foreign-rights deals are so important to the book business -- as a way to defray the costs of huge advances and to earn more money for the publishers, agents and authors -- that the role of Ms.
Dijkstra and others like her is critical to the workings of the fair, which this year drew 6,102 exhibitors from 95 countries.


Miscellany
*
Publishers Information Bureau, New York, said magazine advertising pages in September fell 1.5 percent, to 15,803, from September 1992.
For the first nine months of 1993, pages rose eight-tenths of 1 percent, to 118,289.6, from the corresponding period a year ago. *
Lobsenz-Stevens Inc., New York, acquired Renee Sacks Associates, a public relations agency in New York, which will continue operating as a separate unit.


Joy Marcus, David Rosenberg
Joy Marcus, a lawyer at MTV Networks in New York, was married yesterday to David Rosenberg, a law clerk to Judge Phyllis W. Beck of the Superior Court of Pennsylvania in Bala-Cynwyd.
Rabbi Marc Disick performed the ceremony on Clearwater Beach in East Hampton, L.I.
Ms.
Marcus, who is keeping her name, is a daughter of Thelma Marcus of Riverdale, the Bronx, and the late Rubin Marcus.
The bride graduated magna cum laude from Princeton University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a law degree from New York University.
Her father was the president of Fordham Boy's and Men's Clothes, a retailer in New York.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Dr. Neuman, Mr. Hammond 2d
Dr.
Miriam Liz Neuman, a daughter of Samuel and Lilly Neuman of Santurce, P.R., was married yesterday to Henry Hedge Hammond 2d, the son of Mr.
Hammond of Boston and Yvonne Hammond-Homans of Canton, Mass.
Rabbi Philip Aronson performed the ceremony at the Dorado Beach Hotel in Puerto Rico.
Dr.
Neuman, 28 and known as Mimi, is keeping her name.
She is a resident in radiology at Tufts-New England Medical Center Hospital in Boston.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received her medical degree and a master's degree in public health from Tufts University.
Her parents own two jewelry stores in Old San Juan, P.R.


Dr. Gerald Oster, 75, Who Found Op Art In Eye Experiments
Dr.
Gerald Oster, a biophysicist who used his discoveries in photochemistry in the 1960's to pursue a career in art, died at his home in Sud Cabaret, Haiti, on Oct 8.
He was 75 and had lived in Haiti for more than 10 years.
He died of injuries suffered when he was attacked during a robbery three months earlier.


Elizabeth Jorgenson, William Sherman
Elizabeth Ann Jorgenson, a daughter of David and Carol Jorgenson of Lisle, Ill., was married yesterday to William Robertson Sherman, a son of Joyce Sherman of Kendall Park, N.J., and the late Richard Sherman.
The Rev.
Carol A. Munro Mosley officiated at St.
Paul's United Church of Christ in Chicago.
Mrs.
Sherman graduated from Grinnell College and received a law degree from Boston College.
She was until recently an associate at the law firm of Chadbourne &amp; Parke in Washington.
Her father is a lawyer in Lisle and her mother is a paralegal at the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company in Oakbrook, Ill.


Stacey Spiegel, Michael Darr
Stacey Kay Spiegel, the daughter of Patricia K. Wohl of White Plains and Joel R. Spiegel of Southampton, L.I., was married yesterday to Michael John Darr, the son of Sara and John Darr of Port Washington, L.I.
Rabbi Joel S. Goor performed the ceremony at Singers, a caterer in Spring Valley, N.Y.
Mrs.
Darr, 24, is a classified advertising representative at The New York Times.
She and her husband graduated cum laude from the State University College at Oneonta, N.Y.
Her father is the president of Deutsch, Shea &amp; Evans, an advertising agency in New York.
Her mother is a teacher at the Westchester Reform Temple Nursery School in Scarsdale, N.Y.


Abroad at Home; Foreign Policy Morass
The world has caught up with Bill Clinton.
If you ever believed that as President he could keep his attention on domestic affairs, that illusion is gone.
Russia, Somalia, Haiti, Bosnia: The list of foreign crises is growing, and they will not go away.
For two reasons foreign policy is a difficult area for this President.
One lies in himself, the other in the nature of international problems today.


Youth Arrested in Shooting
A teen-ager was arrested yesterday in the shooting of a 13-year-old Brooklyn girl who was paralyzed by a bullet fired at her on Thursday night by an assailant looking for her brother, the police said.
The girl, Jennifer Davis, opened the door of her apartment in the Tilden Houses in Brownsville to three teen-agers seeking her brother, said Amanita Duga-Carroll, a spokeswoman for the Housing Police.
When the girl told them he was not home, Ms.
Duga-Carroll said, they shot her.
The suspect was identified as Rashaid Dayshawn Robinson, 15, of 365 Sackman Street in Brooklyn.
Arrested at his home at 1:30 P.M. yesterday, he is being charged as an adult with attempted murder, assault, and criminal possession of a weapon.
The girl was still listed in critical condition at Brookdale Hospital last night.


Do Not Let Farrakhan Use Stadium, Giuliani Says
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor, said yesterday that he strongly disagreed with the Dinkins administration's plan to allow Louis H. Farrakhan, the leader of the Nation of Islam, to rent Yankee Stadium for a rally this month.
Citing Mr.
Farrakhan's past statements that many consider anti-Semitic, including referring to Judaism as "a gutter religion," Mr.
Giuliani compared the planned rally to allowing "neo-Nazis or skinheads to rent Yankee Stadium."


Dispute Stirs Over Status Of After-School Program
Parents of 75 children who attend this community's only after-school program say the children have so much fun that it's difficult prying them away at 5:30 when the day is over.
But despite rave reviews throughout the community, the program is fighting to stay open.
The trouble is no one wants to sponsor it and without sponsorship the after-school program cannot get the rent-free room it needs to stay in business.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Publishing
IN its salad days after World War II, the Frankfurt Book Fair was a big genteel book party for the world's publishers, a place where they could gather to learn about one another's books and go about the gentlemanly business of publishing.
But publishing is no longer gentlemanly, Frankfurt is not what it was either, and faxes, conference calls and overnight mail have all but supplanted face-to-face meetings.
And with European and American publishers laying out huge sums of money for transportation, hotels, meals, photo-copying, taxis, and the extravagant tips demanded to insure any sort of service in Frankfurt, many publishers are beginning to wonder why the weeklong fair, which ends today, seems to grow bigger each year.


Dance in Review
'Cave of the Heart'  Martha Graham Dance Company City Center 131 West 55th Street Manhattan
"Cave of the Heart," a retelling of the Medea legend that the Martha Graham Dance Company presented on Friday night, is the most flamboyant example of Graham's preoccupation with the essence of emotion: what she called "the thing itself."


Sports of The Times; Moment of Truth at the Skydome
CLIP this column.
That's right, cut it out and put it in your wallet.
That's the nice thing about newspapers, you can clip 'em.
Save this column, and the next time you're at a bar and somebody. . . .
Oh, you don't go to bars.
Fine.
The next time you're at the health club and somebody on the exercise bicycle next to you says, 'Baseball just isn't what it used to be," this little slip of paper will help you argue that baseball sometimes is exactly what it used to be -- superb players pushing each other in a crucial little moment of truth.


Ruth E. Sacks and Charles A. Marlin
Ruth Esther Sacks, the daughter of Drs.
JoAnn and Stanley Sacks of Stapleton, S.I., was married yesterday to Charles Avram Marlin, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Robert E. Marlin of Miami.
Rabbi Andre Ungar performed the ceremony at the Richmond County Country Club in Todt Hill, S.I.
Mrs.
Marlin, 29, graduated cum laude from Tufts University and received a law degree from the University of Miami.
Her father, a psychologist, is the deputy director of the Center for Therapeutic Community Research in New York.
Her mother, also a psychologist, is the executive vice president of the Institute for Community Living, a placement organization in Brooklyn for mentally ill and homeless adults.


Alomar Near the Top If You Add It All Up
Roberto Alomar was asked if Roberto Alomar was the best player in the American League and he was foiled for the first time in a hectic day.
He smiled, he shrugged and he stammered.
This was one situation the smooth second baseman was fumbling.
On a day when Alomar raced for three steals to help produce a typical Toronto performance, when he smacked three hits and walked twice to revive a sluggish offense and when he also made two neat defensive plays to resurrect discussions about whether he is the premier player in the league, Alomar was humble enough to scamper from the prestigious title pinned today by Chicago's Joey Cora.
He sort of avoided it.


Dr. Gershman, E. M. Kennedy Jr.
Dr.
Katherine Anne Gershman, the daughter of Elizabeth G. Gershman and James D. Gershman, both of Stamford, Conn., was married yesterday to Edward Moore Kennedy Jr., a son of Senator Edward M. Kennedy of Hyannis Port, Mass., and Joan Bennett Kennedy of Boston.
The ceremony was performed at St.
Andrew's Roman Catholic Church on Block Island, R.I., by the Rev.
Donal R. Kehew.
Mr.
Kennedy, 32, is known as Ted.
He works for the department of pediatrics at the Yale University School of Medicine, where he is the director of the New Haven Lead Safe Home Project, which provides medical aid to lead-poisoned children there.
He graduated from Wesleyan University and received a master's degree in forestry and environmental studies from Yale, where he met his wife.
He is studying for a law degree at the University of Connecticut.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-9  U.S.
ENVOY MEETS SOMALIS  As the U.S. envoy to Somalia, Robert B. Oakley, arrived in Mogadishu and met with members of the clan led by Mohammed Farah Aidid, Washington endorsed the creation of an African commission to investigate the killings of peacekeepers.
A1  SOMALIA CONFERENCE PLANNED  The U.N.
Secretary General said that African, Arab and Muslim leaders would meet with him next week in Ethiopia to map out a strategy to prevent Somalia from collapsing into anarchy.
A8


Chevy Chase's Ratings Deliver Frowns at Fox
It isn't called the "late-night war" for nothing.
"The Chevy Chase Show" enters its sixth week on the Fox network tonight with signs of becoming the new season's first post-prime-time casualty.
The show, which was savaged by critics from the start, has fallen significantly short of the ratings that Fox had guaranteed advertisers.
And many affiliates, which got higher ratings with syndicated fare in the same time slot, are restless.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; A shake-up of agencies by Coca-Cola may be just the beginning of a wider 'Ideas Wanted' push.
TWO advertising agencies known for risk-taking, rule-breaking creativity have been selected by the Coca-Cola Company to work on special projects for the soft-drink giant.
The regional midsize agencies Coca-Cola added to its official roster of shops on Friday specialize in campaigns with hip, contemporary points of view.
One is Fallon McElligott of Minneapolis, which humorously dramatizes the difficulties of wearing too-tight jeans for Lee.
The other is Wieden &amp; Kennedy of Portland, Ore., which helps Nike wage the sneaker wars by urging the world to "Just do it."


Judith D. Seidel, Marvin Milbauer
Judith Day Seidel, the daughter of Betty and Herbert Seidel of Mountainside, N.J., and Marvin Elliot Milbauer, the son of Blanche and Perry Milbauer of New York, were married yesterday.
Rabbi Charles A. Kroloff performed the ceremony at the Ryland Inn in Whitehouse, N.J.
Ms.
Seidel is keeping her name.
She is the coordinator of computer instruction at the Brearley School in New York.
She graduated from Yale University and received a master's degree in computers and education from the Bank Street College of Education.


Dance in Review
'Deep Song' and 'Frontier'  Martha Graham Dance Company City Center
It is easy to forget that Martha Graham, a tempestuous storyteller, could outrefine the best of them.
The Graham company offered a reminder of that gift in two early dances, presented on Saturday night.


Review/Television; PBS Revives a Series On Race and America
The award-garlanded dramatic series "I'll Fly Away" shows up on public television tonight and, in terms of the general outlook for television in this country, it is an occasion for both cheers and tears.
Yes, it's wonderful that the distinguished NBC series is getting a public-television showcase.
But that doesn't negate the fact that the show was canceled on commercial television, despite widespread protests by critics and viewer organizations.
Obviously, they are not nearly as powerful as network accountants.
And the good intentions of public television, tin cup always in hand, are severely limited.
This "second life" for the series consists of tonight's two-hour movie, "Then and Now," and weekly reruns of all 38 original episodes broadcast between 1991 and this year.


Courtesy and Senator Helms
For months, under a strange definition of "senatorial courtesy," Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina has blocked confirmation of Walter Dellinger, a well-qualified candidate from his home state, to be the Justice Department's legal counsel.
Last week Mr.
Helms staged a filibuster, which survived a motion to close debate by one vote.
He charged rudeness on the part of the Clinton Administration for hiring Mr.
Dellinger over his objection.
The Senate's excessive deference to the growling of Mr.
Helms stands as another unhappy exhibition of fear and cowardice.
Fortunately Senator Helms, perhaps aware that another cloture vote on Wednesday would go against him, now says he won't continue to block the full Senate from voting on the nomination.
That should let the Senate come to its senses and judge the candidate on his merits.


Review/Music; Romantics, Often Linked, Are Seen in a Fresh Light
A basic law of optics -- that neighboring objects blur together as the eye goes away from them -- applies equally to history.
Indeed, perceived from a distance of 150 years, Chopin, Liszt and Schumann seem somehow all of a piece, as willing cohabitants in that world we have come to call Romantic piano music.
Charles Rosen's deftly chosen program of piano pieces at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater on Thursday night separated the three all over again.
Call it, if you will, a kind of musicological optometry.
If time has made it hard for us to see Chopin clearly, familiarity makes it even harder.
Chopin's piano music is perhaps the most useful repertory that ambitious virtuosos possess, and its ubiquitous presence dulls the impact of music that ought to startle us.
Mr.
Rosen's first service here was to find pieces still capable of doing so: the late B-major Nocturne and its catalogue of shockingly beautiful modulations; the Barcarolle, whose smooth surfaces scarcely conceal a dying man's sarcasm and despair.


Patents
SILK, linen and cashmere make beautiful clothes, but they have a costly liability.
A closet full of wool trousers or silk blouses can mean many dry-cleaning errands and bills.
While many silks can be hand-washed, it is hard to imagine soaking a $700 business suit in a tub of Woolite.
To fill this laundry gap, a company in North Caldwell, N.J., has patented an at-home dry-cleaning kit.
Creative Products Resources Inc. designed a heavy-duty plastic bag and sheets of thick paper coated with a cleaning gel.
As many as four garments can be put inside the bag, along with one of the moist cleaning sheets.
The bag is then put into a dryer and tumbled for 20 minutes.


'Yes . . . but Is It Art?'
To the Editor:
Re your Oct. 4 article on the reaction of the art world to my "60 Minutes" segment titled "Yes . . . but Is It Art?": Far from "questioning the very premises of abstract art," as you declaim, I was questioning the pretension and esthetic sensibilities of a number of dealers and the talents of certain artists.


Phillies Use Pitching And Defense To Tie Series
There was no pretense about it.
The Philadelphia offense and the Philadelphia pitching staff were desperately seeking something, anything, from each other in the way of a lift.
Before they found themselves staring up from an incredibly deep hole in the National League Championship Series.
Before their quest for a World Series was ended in lopsided fashion by the increasingly strong Atlanta Braves.
Well, the Phillies got just one of their wishes tonight, but it was enough.
For Danny Jackson, a savior by any definition, stopped the Atlanta offense on nine hits and one run over seven and two-thirds innings and drove in the decisive run in a 2-1 Phillies victory in Game 4 that evened the four-of-seven-game series at two games apiece.


CHESS
Nigel Short was hanging on grimly against Gary Kasparov's persistent positional pressure until he panicked, opened the center and was quickly crushed by the Russian's juggernaut in Game 15 of their world championship match on Saturday in London.
Kasparov is cruising to victory with a six-point lead, the score now standing at 10 1/2-4 1/2 in his favor.
Short dug in behind a barrier of almost invisible traps, but Kasparov was not fooled.
He patiently sidestepped the venom and methodically strengthened his position.
Short at first accepted the necessity for groveling, but when Kasparov had readied all his forces for a storm of the black king position at Move 28, the Englishman could stand it no longer and tried for dynamic counterplay.
That only fueled Kasparov's attack and the game was soon over.


Who Says College Can Only Last Four Years?; Consider the Negatives
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 29 Education page article on completing college in three years makes some interesting points about receiving a bachelor's degree in three years versus the traditional four.
Despite the perceived economic benefit in the expedited degree, the negatives should be considered.


First Step In Making An Eyesore An Asset
For Brooklyn's Gowanus Canal, June 21, 1911, was a glorious day.
A new system to flush out the putrid industrial canal was installed, as 350 dignitaries applauded from a barge and a young woman tossed red carnations on the still waters.
The system, which involved a tunnel to bring clean water from New York Harbor to the head of the canal to get the stagnant waters moving, functioned for about half a century before breaking.
Now, a mere 33 years later, the city is finally getting around to fixing it.
Money has been appropriated, parts have been ordered, and bids have been invited.


PULSE: On Broadway
With 17 new shows due to open this fall, expectations are high on Broadway following a record-breaking 1992-93 season.
Unlike recent years when many shows opened late in the season, just before the deadline for the Tony awards, productions that have received much advance notice, including "Perestroika," or part two of "Angels in America," and "The Kentucky Cycle," which won the 1992 Pulitzer Prize for drama, will debut this fall.
Last year's gross of $327.7 million broke the record set the year before.
Attendance and the gross of shows on tour have also risen according to the League of American Theaters and Producers.
The top Broadway ticket price for the start of the season is $65; it was $55 in 1988-89. (Source: League of American Theaters and Producers)


'Ask First' at Antioch
The comedy routines almost write themselves.
A recent "Saturday Night Live" segment featured a game show called "Is It Date Rape?" Confronted with hypothetical situations, a male and female contestant had to say whether each constituted date rape.
Predictably, the woman (a prim, bespectacled Shannen Doherty) always said yes, and the driveling fraternity slob said no.
Much of the script was lifted almost verbatim from the sexual offense policy of Antioch College.
Antioch's policy is easy to parody.
That's too bad, because it's a serious, if touchingly earnest, attempt to deal with a real problem.
Date rape is no joke, but in trying to stop it, Antioch, along with scores of other colleges across the country, sets out to codify the sexual behavior of adolescents.
That's not a bad goal, but it's awfully tricky, and inherently almost impossible to implement.


Homer Giles, 73, Dies; Headed a Foundation
Homer W. Giles, a lawyer and the chairman for two decades of the American Economic Foundation, which advocates limited interference of government in business, died on Sept. 30 at his home in University Heights, Ohio.
He was 73.
The cause was prostate cancer, his family said.


Mayoral Campaign Tests The Loyalty of Democrats
"I GUARANTEE you," Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said last week, urging that New York City's mayoral candidates define the issues that separate them, "that they'll be out of time before you get to 'R' in the alphabet for race, religion or even rhetoric."
Neither Mayor David N. Dinkins nor Mr.
Cuomo, though, has been reluctant to invoke the symbolism of another R-word: Republican.


Joy M. Messer, Bennett J. Cohen
Joy Melinda Messer, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
I.
Leonard Messer of Elmont, L.I., was married yesterday to Dr.
Bennett Joseph Cohen, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sheldon Cohen of Bayside, Queens.
Rabbi Samuel Kehati officiated at the Old Westbury (L.I.) Hebrew Congregation.
Ms.
Messer, 34, is keeping her name.
She is a training and documentation specialist at Sigma Imaging Systems Inc., a software development company in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Albany.


Doris R. Pastore, Eric A. Berk
Dr.
Doris R. Pastore, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank Pastore of Bayside, Queens, was married yesterday to Eric Andrew Berk, a son of Mrs.
Sheldon Denburg of South Orange, N.J., and the late Robert E. Berk.
The Rev.
Jeffrey White, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the United Nations Chapel in New York.
Dr.
Pastore is keeping her name.
She is a pediatrician at Mount Sinai Hospital in New York.
She graduated from St.
John's University in Queens, and received her M.D. from New York Medical College.
Her father owns the Pastore Agency, an insurance brokerage, and the Pastore Realty Corporation, a real estate company, both in Woodside, Queens.


Claudia S. Trupp, Charles N. Panzer
Claudia Sue Trupp, the daughter of Dr.
Michael Trupp and Irma Trupp of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married yesterday to Charles Noah Panzer, the son of Shayna Alterman and Dr.
Arthur Panzer of Bernardsville, N.J.
Cantor Mark Lipson officiated at Temple Shaaray Tefila in Bedford, N.Y.
The bride, 26, is a lawyer with the Legal Aid Society of New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Rochester, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She and her husband received their law degrees from New York University.


Corrections
A picture in some copies yesterday with an article about a dispute over a Democratic Party advertising campaign, showing Rudolph W. Giuliani and Herman Badillo standing near campaign signs, described the situation incorrectly and misidentified the man with them.
They were at a Columbus Day parade in Astoria, Queens, and were talking to Peter F. Vallone, Speaker of the City Council.


Kathryn Beebe, Robin Vandoren
Kathryn Emily Beebe, the daughter of Walter H. Beebe of New York, and Robin Vandoren of Ojai, Calif., was married yesterday to James William Reilly, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Harold F. Reilly Jr. of Todt Hill, S.I.
The Rev.
Charles Temple, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Church of the Transfiguration in New York.
Also taking part in the ceremony was the Rev.
Edmund J. Dobbin, a Roman Catholic priest who is an uncle of the bridegroom and the president of Villanova University.
Mrs.
Reilly, 25, is a clinical social worker at the Bridge Inc., a nonprofit community mental health center in New York.
She graduated from New York University, from which she also received a master's degree in social work.


Essay; Son Of Synfuels
Who is the most powerful business executive in the United States today?
She is Dr.
Mary Good, President Clinton's Under Secretary of Commerce for Technology, who has quietly been designated czar of the U.S. automobile industry.
The heads of her divisions -- G.M., Ford and Chrysler -- are delighted with the Government's friendly takeover.
These newly middle managers no longer bear responsibility for R.&amp; D., can relax about antitrust, and can forget about the old competition among one another and from abroad.
Fatigued by the stress of capitalist risk?
Dr.
Good will see you now.


John A. Ogden, Judith E. Kalb,
Judith Ellen Kalb, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Kalb of Cambridge, Mass., and Chevy Chase, Md., was married yesterday to John Alexander Ogden, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Ogden of Winnipeg, Manitoba.
Rabbi Richard A. Block performed the ceremony at Temple Sinai in Washington.
Ms.
Kalb is keeping her name.
She graduated summa cum laude from Princeton University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Ms.
Kalb and her husband are doctoral candidates in Slavic languages and literature at Stanford University, from which they received master's degrees in Russian.


Smoltz Is Perfect No More in Post-Season
This night was supposed to be worth the wait.
For 10 days, John Smoltz had waited for his first start in this series against the Philadelphia Phillies, to take his perfect record in post-season play to the mound at Atlanta-Fulton County Stadium and help the Atlanta Braves take an important step toward a World Series championship.
Smoltz was surprised when he was passed over by Manager Bobby Cox at the start of the series.
And when his wait was finally over, Smoltz felt something strange.


Look Familiar? Jets Build Lead, Jets Waste Lead
This is turning into a nasty habit.
For the second consecutive week the Jets went ahead by a large margin in the first half only to see it dry up and blow away.
Last week they led the Eagles by 21-0 only to lose, 35-30.
Today against the Raiders, the Jets (2-3) went ahead by 17-0 and then lost, 24-20, on a 1-yard touchdown run by Nick Bell with 4 seconds to play.
But this was no ordinary comeback for the Raiders (3-2), who benefited from confusion over the timekeeping in the final seconds while trailing, 20-17.


Sky Beauty Might Be Ahead of Them All
Racing form returned to Belmont Park yesterday when Sky Beauty won the Rare Perfume Stakes with graceful command, enhanced her ranking as the best filly in the business and even raised the suspicion that she might be the best horse of either gender in the business.
Her performance was dramatized by the fact that she succeeded on a weekend when Star of Cozzene, Fraise, Alydeed and Ibero didn't.
In fact, half an hour before she took the track, another favorite bit the dust when Virginia Rapids ran sixth in the Jamaica Handicap behind Mi Cielo.
But if Allen Jerkens felt regret over Virginia Rapids, one of the stars of his barn, he was uplifted by Sky Beauty, the superstar of his barn.
A Consistent Winner
Sky Beauty now has gone to the races 11 times in her career, finished first in 10, ran second in the other and has gone 7 for 7 at Belmont Park.
She won the Triple Tiara there last spring, won the Alabama Stakes at Saratoga in August, returned yesterday after two months of rest, carried 12 pounds more than her five rivals and still won by nearly two lengths.


Mother's Homemade Marijuana; A Plan to Aid Her Son Leads to Arrest and Push for Change
The annals of crime do not record many 79-year-old grandmothers who have been arrested for growing marijuana in their backyards, and even Mildred Kaitz has an explanation that she thinks makes her offense pardonable.
She did it for her son, Barton, who lives in Brooklyn and who, at 49, has been suffering from multiple sclerosis, a chronic disease of the nervous system, which has progressively crippled his legs, blurred his vision and deadened his appetite.
Smoking marijuana, she discovered, made him eat with gusto, so she did what she says any loving mother would do in similar circumstances: grow the marijuana for him.


Car Wreck Closes Tunnel
A car flipped in the Lincoln Tunnel late last night, injuring four passengers and closing the tunnel to all traffic for more than an hour, a Port Authority spokesman said.
Among the injured were a 2-year-old child and a pregnant woman, said the spokesman, Peter Yerkes.


U.N. Asking the Region To Help on Somalia Plan
The United Nations Secretary General said today that African, Arab and Muslim leaders would meet with him next week in Ethiopia to map out a strategy to prevent Somalia from collapsing into complete anarchy after the United States withdraws its forces at the end of next March.
The Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, said in an interview that President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt, the current chairman of the Organization of African Unity, had agreed to attend the meeting on Oct. 20 in Addis Ababa along with President Meles Zenawi of Ethiopia and the Secretaries General of the the Organization of African Unity, the Arab League and the Organization of Islamic Conference, a grouping of Muslim countries.


Donald Schapiro and Linda Solomon
Linda Newman Solomon, head of the Nightingale-Bamford Upper School in New York, was married yesterday to Donald Schapiro, a senior partner at the New York law firm of Chadbourne &amp; Parke.
Rabbi David Posner performed the ceremony at the Yale Club in New York.
Mrs.
Schapiro, 52, graduated from Bryn Mawr College and received a master's degree in English literature from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Eric and Evelyn Newman of St.
Louis.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about rivalries in Britain's Conservative Party misidentified a newspaper that has published excerpts from memoirs by Lady Thatcher, the former Conservative Prime Minister.
It was The Daily Mirror, not The Daily Mail.


IN PROTEST, AGENT TO LEAVE THE F.B.I.
A decorated agent at the Federal Bureau of Investigation who says her superiors refused to take seriously her complaints of sexual harassment is planning a highly unusual protest on Monday: turning in her badge.
The agent, Suzane J. Doucette, said in a recent interview that her career at the F.B.I. had come to a standstill after she filed complaints against the bureau maintaining that she was sexually assaulted in 1988 by a supervisor.
Ms.
Doucette, who is on administrative leave, describes her pending departure from the agency not as a resignation, but as a forced dismissal.


Revolt in Moscow: How Yeltsin Turned the Tide, Hour by Hour
As Russia's fate hung in the balance one week ago, President Boris N. Yeltsin's Government seemed almost paralyzed.
While bands of Communist and nationalist gunmen broke through to the Parliament building, the headquarters of President Yeltsin's foes, and battled for the state television center, the large force of special police around the building disintegrated, presidential aides were in disarray, the President dallied at his dacha and soldiers from elite units were out picking potatoes.


Taxi Jumps Curb, Injuring 7 People, 2 Critically
A taxi lurched out of control and onto a busy midtown Manhattan sidewalk yesterday, pinning a woman against another taxi and injuring six other people before it was finally stopped by an off-duty police officer, the police said.
The woman, Lora Kluckowski, 30, a graduate student at Syracuse University, was waiting with a classmate at a taxi stand outside the entrance to the New York Hilton at 53d Street and the Avenue of the Americas when the accident occurred about 1:30 P.M., said a police spokesman, Sgt.
Joseph Gallagher.


Discounting Finally Makes It to Japan
Japan's new leaders were swept to power amid promises that the Government would no longer tolerate ridiculously high prices and that companies would have to stop enriching themselves at home while offering deep discounts on cameras and television sets in Manhattan and Hong Kong.
Still, no one in the Japanese bureaucracy was quite prepared to deal with retailers like Ken Fujisawa, who had the temerity, in a family-owned store on a back street of Tokyo, to do what no one else had in a generation -- offer Japanese women a 20 percent discount on cosmetics made by the giant of the Japanese industry, Shiseido.


Mexico City Journal; Underground Economy Popping Up at Curbside
There's money to be made in the clamor of the streets, and Mario Garcia is intent on making it.
Starting at around 10 in the morning, and lasting until 3 in the afternoon when he heads for the technical school where he said he is studying to be an electrician, Mr.
Garcia, all optimism and energy at 21, scurries around the traffic of one of Mexico City's busiest intersections trying to interest motorists in buying red-and-yellow plastic baby gyms.


Greeks Restore Former Leader In Ballot Upset
Four years after corruption charges, ill health and scandal drove him from office, Andreas Papandreou, the former Prime Minister, clinched one of Europe's most stunning political comebacks tonight when his Pan-Hellenic Socialist Movement surged decisively back to power.
With an absolute majority in national elections, Mr.
Papandreou and his party pushed the conservative Constantine Mitsotakis from power, settling for the time being the deep personal feud between the two 74-year-olds, whose rivalry has propelled Greek politics for years.


Bozell Plans to Buy Stakes in 2 Agencies
Bozell Worldwide Inc. is expanding its network by taking stakes in two agencies.
Effective at the end of the month, Bozell will acquire what it called a significant equity investment in the Advertising Works Inc. in Honolulu, with which it has been affiliated for five years.
Advertising Works, which has 28 employees and billings estimated at $20 million from clients like Budget Rent a Car and American Express, will be renamed Bozell Advertising Works; its public relations unit, Adworks Public Relations, will be renamed Bozell Public Relations.


Rebecca Landes, Timothy Kolman
Rebecca M. Landes, an associate with Lipman, Freiberg, Comroe &amp; Hing, a Philadelphia law firm, was married yesterday to Timothy M. Kolman, the managing partner of Kolman &amp; Lea, a law firm in Langhorne, Pa.
Rabbi Aaron Landes, the father of the bride, officiated at Beth Sholom Congregation in Elkins Park, Pa., where he is the senior rabbi.
Mrs.
Kolman, 34, graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received a law degree from Temple University.
She is also a daughter of Sora E. Landes.
Her parents live in Elkins Park.


George W. Beiswanger, 91, Dies; Dance Critic and an Esthetician
George W. Beiswanger, a dance critic, esthetician and philosophy professor who explored the relationships between dance and the other arts, died on Wednesday in the DeKalb Medical Center of Decatur, Ga.
He was 91 and lived in Atlanta.
The cause was pneumonia, said Gordon Hamrick, his lawyer and friend.


U.S. ENVOY MEETS CLAN LEADER'S KIN IN SOMALI CAPITAL
President Clinton's envoy to Somalia, Robert B. Oakley, arrived in Mogadishu today and met with members of the clan led by Mohammed Farah Aidid, the faction leader blamed for the killings of American and other United Nations peacekeepers.
While senior Clinton Administration officials insisted that the United States would not engage in direct talks with General Aidid, the Administration endorsed the creation of an African commission to investigate the killings of the peacekeeping troops.


18 Holes, Open to the Putting Masses
Faced with rejection by a country club, John A. Segalla did what any red-blooded American golfer might dream of doing -- he built his own golf course.
Today, the Segalla Country Club, an 18-hole course, is open to anyone who wants to drive to northeastern Dutchess County and plunk down the greens fee.


Mary E. Dearth, Richard J. Brauer
Mary E. Dearth, a vice president in the special loan group at Chemical Bank, was married yesterday to Dr.
Richard J. Brauer, a clinical assistant professor of otolaryngology at the New York University Medical Center.
The couple work in New York.
Rabbi Robert B. Lennick performed the ceremony at the Homestead Inn in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Brauer graduated from Occidental College and received an M.B.A. from Fordham University.
She is the daughter of Sherman H. Dearth of Gilber, Ariz., and the late Marie V. Dearth.
The bride's father, now retired, was a professor of business at Mesa Community College in Mesa, Ariz.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


Accounts
*
Reebok International Ltd., Stoughton, Mass., to DeWitt Media Inc., New York, to handle the media portion of its $80 million Reebok brand account in the United States.
The decision followed a review between DeWitt and the Leo Burnett Company, Chicago, which will handle the media assignment in the rest of the world after the consolidation at Burnett last month of the creative portion of the brand's global account.  *
H.
J.
Heinz Co., Pittsburgh, narrowed the review on its Ore-Ida specialty-products division to 6 agencies from 12.
The finalists are Chiat/Day, Venice, Calif.; Foote, Cone &amp; Belding, San Francisco; Goodby, Berlin &amp; Silverstein, San Francisco; Ketchum Advertising, San Francisco; Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners, Los Angeles, and Riney, Angotti, Hedge, New York.
A decision is expected early next month.


Seconds Thoughts on Stopped Clock
If you ask the Jets, the clock operator deserves an assist for their 24-20 loss to the Raiders at the Los Angeles Coliseum this afternoon.
With 32 seconds to play, the clock never started when the Raiders snapped the ball and advanced to the Jets' 1-yard line on a pass play.
In the confusion that ensued, the Raiders ended up with a chance to regroup, and they pulled out the victory on the subsequent play when Raiders running back Nick Bell ran into the end zone with 4 seconds to go.


100 FEARED DEAD OFF SOUTH KOREA
More than 100 people were feared dead tonight after a ferry carrying more than 200 passengers and crew sank off the western coast of South Korea, police officials and the official television network reported.
Police officials said the 110-ton ferry, filled mostly with tourists returning from overnight fishing expeditions, capsized in a storm off the coast of Puan county, 135 miles south of Seoul.


Risa Shames, Neil Silverston
Risa Shames, a daughter of Harold and Elaine Shames of Ardsley, N.Y., was married yesterday to Neil Silverston, a son of Carol and Jay Silverston of Lexington, Mass.
Rabbi Carey Yales performed the ceremony at the Doral Arrowwood resort in Rye Brook, N.Y.
Ms.
Shames, 29, is keeping her name.
She is an assistant manager of the managed-care health insurance program at the Massachusetts Division of Medical Assistance in Boston.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received a master's degree in health policy and management from Harvard University.


Corrections
A picture caption on Tuesday about a supporter of President Boris N. Yeltsin who hoisted a flag on a barricade near the White House in Moscow misidentified the flag.
It was the flag of Russia, not of the Commonwealth of Independent States.


Robin Mendelson, Ronald Slye
Robin Holbrook Mendelson, the marketing coordinator at the publishing company of W. W. Norton &amp; Company in New York, was married yesterday to Ronald Carter Slye, the associate director of the Orville Schell Center for International Human Rights at Yale University in New Haven.
Rabbi Ari Fridkis officiated at Wave Hill in Riverdale, the Bronx.
Ms.
Mendelson, 27, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Duke University.
She is a daughter of Jon Mendelson of Park Forest, Ill., and Dr.
Ellen B. Mendelson of Pittsburgh.
Her father is a professor of environmental science at Governors State University in University Park, Ill.
Her mother, a radiologist, is the director of the Breast Diagnostic Imaging Center at the Western Pennsylvania Hospital in Pittsburgh.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Judy Mendelson of Park Forest.


SOCCER: World Cup USA '94 QUALIFYING; Zambia's Quest to Qualify Is Unfulfilled
The Moroccan faithful danced in place and brandished their makeshift torches: thousands of burning, rolled-up newspapers sending ash careening upward into the clear North African sky; thousands of burning newspapers sending out word that the bright, shining Zambian dream was done.
There will be no historic first berth in the final round of the World Cup, no national holiday declared on Monday, no better-than-fiction comeback from the wreckage of the military transport plane that crashed into the sea off Gabon in April and took the lives of 18 Zambian national team players and their two coaches.


A Monitor For Police
At some point over the next year, this moment is bound to happen: a police sergeant, say, in Queens, will become suspicious that one of his officers is somehow involved in corruption.
He is repulsed by the thought but unsure what to do.
The outside monitor that a mayoral panel is likely to call for after its two weeks of hearings may even be in place by then, but the immediate sense of mission created by those hearings will have long faded.
This officer has put his life on the line for me, the sergeant tells himself, and besides, how can I be certain that my suspicions are correct in the first place.


Keenan Opens the Doghouse
After two losses and a comeback victory against Tampa Bay, a second-year expansion club, in the Rangers' opening three games, Coach Mike Keenan is quick to insist that it is early, and his players still "have a lot to learn."
The players have already learned a great deal about Keenan -- and in a most obvious way.
In the first game of the season, Keenan benched Darren Turcotte and Tony Amonte in the second period..


Muni Industry Trying to Fix Itself
It is rare that the "bad guys" get together to fix the system.
But that is what the municipal bond industry is trying to do.
Most of the big firms on Wall Street are banding together in an effort to limit what has become an embarrassing flow of political contributions to elected officials and candidates for office who may be able to award the firms billions of dollars in municipal bond business.
But if they are successful, it will not be because they have taken the "high road" -- a road that Congress has yet to get to on the way to campaign-finance reform on the receivers' side.


Apple to Offer Disk Product
Apple Computer Inc. plans to announce on Monday that it will begin marketing software for Macintosh and Windows-based computers delivered on a CD-ROM disk.
The new system will allow personal computer users to try demonstration programs on their systems, then call an 800 number and receive a numeric unlocking key upon purchase of the application.


Corrections
An article last Monday about organized labor's reaction to the North American Free Trade Agreement referred incorrectly in some copies to a union member who is seeking a seat on the A.F.L.-C.I.O.'s executive council.
He is Harry Kelber, not Kelper.


White House Memo; President Strives Mightily to Shift From Troubles Abroad to Goals at Home
There was an October game plan at the White House, and it did not involve Somalia.
President Clinton wanted to focus on health care, push a little harder for the North American Free Trade Agreement and step up his campaign for crime and gun control legislation.


Sports of The Times; Meggett Improves On Reeves's Option
THE Giants had jumped to a quick 13-0 lead and now they suddenly had the ball again at the Redskin 42-yard line.
Linebacker Carlton Bailey had forced Richard Brooks's fumble that safety Greg Jackon recovered.
In the huddle, Phil Simms called the option pass-run for David Meggett.
As the huddle broke, Simms turned to Meggett and said, "Just be smart."


Kathryn Doolan, Keith Pagnani
Kathryn Mary Doolan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James E. Doolan of East Islip, L.I., was married yesterday to Keith Andrew Pagnani, a son of Virginia M. Pagnani of Greenwich, Conn., and Frederick J. Pagnani of Rye, N.Y.
The Rev.
Edward Sullivan performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of the Immaculate Conception in Westhampton, L.I.
Mrs.
Pagnani, 29, is an associate in the real estate department of the New York law firm of Dewey Ballantine.
She graduated from Boston College and received a law degree from the Catholic University of America.
Her father is a former principal of West Islip (L.I.) High School and a former president of the School Administrators Association of New York.


In Campaign for the Health Care Plan, Hillary Clinton Is the Top Candidate
Catchy slogans, far-fetched television commercials, fund-raising appeals in the mail.
The election-style battle over health care legislation already has many trappings of the modern campaign.
Much of it, from the slogan "Health Care That's Always There" to the pretentiously titled "War Room" at the White House where the battle is being directed, was predictable enough.
But what sets this one apart from most propaganda efforts for legislation from the civil rights bills of the 60's to the tax cuts of the 80's is that this campaign looks as if it has a candidate -- Hillary Rodham Clinton.


Books of The Times; Growing Old With a Can-Do Attitude
The Fountain of Age  By Betty Friedan  671 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $25.
The fragments of a powerful, inspiring message are scattered among the more than 600 pages of Betty Friedan's cleverly titled new book, "The Fountain of Age," unquestionably her most important work since her pioneering first book, "The Feminine Mystique," was published in 1963.
America is in love with youth, she reminds us.
So, considering age to be a problem, Americans fail to consider the problems of age.
Or as she puts it, "Seeing age only as decline from youth, we make age itself the problem -- and never face the real problems that keep us from evolving and leading continually useful, vital, and productive lives."


Diane Tolan, Lawrence Marget
Diane Helen Tolan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Alfred Tolan of Southport, Conn., was married yesterday to Lawrence Robert Marget, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard Marget of Chelsea, Mass.
Rabbi Robert J. Orkand officiated at the Silvermine Tavern in Norwalk, Conn.
Mrs.
Marget, a graduate of Simmons College, was until recently the associate editor of Mutual Fund Market News, a weekly trade journal, in Boston.


The Best Bosnia Can Expect May Be 'No War, No Peace'
Nobody will say this for the record, but leaders on all sides in the war in Bosnia are acknowledging that the most acceptable plan for peace may be no formal peace plan at all.
While the Serbs and Croats have accepted a peace proposal, the Muslim-led Bosnian Government has not, and although talks are expected to resume, there is little inclination here to believe in peace any time soon.
Instead, the prevailing view is that what lies ahead is a new kind of misery, a situation described in a common aphorism as "necemo rat, necemo mir" -- Serbo-Croatian for "no war, no peace."


No Headline
"The United Nations exists to help countries solve their problems. If it helps the Americans solve theirs by blaming me, I'll be a scapegoat." -- BOUTROS BOUTROS-GHALI, the United Nations Secretary General.  [ A8:6. ]


Giants' Magic Makes Redskins Disappear
It was just moments before the Giants would take the field and blow out the Washington Redskins when Lawrence Taylor looked at Phil Simms and told him how bad he wanted this victory, that this might be the last time the two have a big game at Robert F. Kennedy Stadium.
Simms looked at Taylor and sensed that when he said that, it was more than just L. T. wanting to win every game.


Lisa M. Bergson, Jeremiah Riddle
Lisa Marie Bergson, the president and chief executive of Meeco Inc., a manufacturer of industrial analytical equipment in Warrington, Pa., was married yesterday to Jeremiah Richard Riddle, a vice president of Johnson &amp; Higgins, an insurance brokerage in New York.
Richard Kiniry, the leader of the Philadelphia Ethical Society, officiated at the society's offices there.
Mrs.
Bergson-Riddle, 43, graduated from Goddard College and received a master's degree in journalism from New York University.
She is the daughter of the late Dr.
Gustav Bergson, a physicist who founded Meeco, and the late Emma Beck.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce, as did the bridegroom's.


For Magazines, a Multimedia Wonderland
As magazine publishers become dazzled by the seductive possibilities of interactive electronic media, a sea change is occurring in the magazine industry.
Nowhere is this more evident than at the annual American Magazine Conference, which opens here today with almost a third of the sessions devoted to multimedia publishing.
Indeed, this conference, which has traditionally dealt only with magazines, could now be called the Mostly Magazine Festival.


Dividend Meetings


The Case for Clean Needles
It now seems clear that providing clean needles to drug addicts can slow the spread of the AIDS virus without increasing drug abuse.
If that conclusion holds up under Federal review, there is no longer any good reason to block the spread of pioneering needle exchanges that serve addicts in scattered cities.
Any program that can slow the transmission of AIDS among drug addicts is desperately needed.
Although the AIDS epidemic initially hit homosexuals hardest, it has rapidly infected addicts who inject their drugs; the virus is spread from one addict to another when they share a needle.
Fully one-third of all AIDS cases in the United States have occurred in drug addicts or their sex partners and children; the toll is particularly high among blacks and Hispanics.


Review/Television; Taking a Look at the Deep Pockets of High Style
Like the fashion industry it exhibits and exposes, "The Look" displays the latest in haute couture while keeping its eye on the bottom line.
There are enough supermodels striding, sauntering and swirling along catwalks in this tony, two-part BBC documentary to populate one of the glittery Paris showings on which the cameras dote.
But the narration is wry and dry, as the program explores the mix of "desires and dollars, myth and money" that propel a trillion-dollar industry.
It's a cool look at a hot game.
The stars are big-name designers, big-circulation-magazine editors, big-salaried models and big-deal buyers for big stores, with a few celebrities (notably rock stars) sewn on like rhinestones. (The horde of conspicuously unglamorous photographers at the ultraglamorous, ultraexpensive seasonal shows are described as the "worker ants of the industry," yet it is they who represent "the media's magic eye.")


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Abraxas Petroleum Corp., San Antonio, 2.7 million shares. Jefferies &amp; Co.


Review/Music; A Chamber Ensemble With a Billing to Live Up To
"Founded in 1991, this trio has established itself as one of today's foremost chamber ensembles," proclaims the artist biography for the Moscow Conservatory Trio.
It sounds improbable, but on the evidence of an outstanding concert at Merkin Hall last Monday night, it might be the honest truth.
After less than two years of collaboration, Paul Ostrovsky (pianist), Oleh Krysa (violinist) and Suren Bagratuni (cellist) are a trio of startling expressive powers.
At the very least, they soar far above the workmanlike norm.
All three players share a background at the Moscow Conservatory.
Mr.
Ostrovsky, widely admired as a chamber musician, supplies a bedrock of cultivation and control.
Mr.
Krysa, who has pursued a brilliant if somewhat esoteric solo career, brings a searching interpretive intelligence.
If the group has a flaw, it lies in Mr.
Bagratuni's sometimes brusque attack.
But the overall sound is appealingly balanced and versatile.


Dance in Review
'Seraphic Dialogue'  Martha Graham Dance Company City Center
In "Seraphic Dialogue," presented by the Martha Graham Dance Company on Thursday night, Graham once more examines a woman's memories as she looks back over the stages of her life.
The subject of this 1955 dance, set to a distractingly hollow score by Norman Dello Joio, is Joan of Arc.
Fierce passion and devotion are tempered by a mood of religious contemplation.


A Company Under Investigation, But Its Shareholders Aren't Told
For nearly three years, Erly Industries of Los Angeles has endured a Federal investigation of its rice sales to Iraq, which were financed by the Atlanta branch of Banca Nazionale del Lavoro, the state-controlled Italian bank that is the focus of a continuing Federal inquiry.
But Erly has not formally told its shareholders of the investigation.
Gerald D. Murphy, Erly's chairman, said the investigation delayed a crucial merger between the Comet Rice unit of Erly and American Rice Inc. of Houston, which Erly also controls.
That brought American Rice's principal rice-processing plant in Freeport, Tex., to the brink of foreclosure by its banks, and pushed Erly's slender net worth so low that last November it lost its license as an approved warehouse for Federal crop programs.


Slump in Business Lending Has Prime Rate Stuck at 6%
While the Clinton Administration counts on low interest rates to revive the economy, the banking industry is coming to a different conclusion: The demand for loans to expand business activity is so weak that lowering the prime rate is not worth their while.
"Simply stated, my customers don't borrow more because we lower rates; they borrow if they see an opportunity to use the borrowed money, and they don't see that opportunity," said Frank Lourenso, an executive vice president at Chemical Bank.
His view was echoed in a half-dozen interviews with other bank executives and industry officials.


Who Says College Can Only Last Four Years?; Not at Oberlin
To the Editor:
Lest readers be misled by the news media offensive of S. Frederick Starr, Oberlin College's president -- in "Tuition Relief for the Middle Classes" (Op-Ed, Oct. 6, 1991) and now on the Sept. 29 Education page -- Oberlin College does not offer a three-year degree.
It does not plan to do so, and it does not advocate students trying to finish college in three years.


In Wake of Officer's Slaying, a Call for Calm
As investigators continued searching for leads in the killing of a housing police officer Friday night in Washington Heights, a note of conciliation was sounded yesterday in the neighborhood where he was slain, with some residents urging cooperation with the authorities, and a neighborhood priest issuing a plea for calm.
At the Church of the Incarnation, the Rev.
Msgr.
Gerald T. Walsh spoke to his congregation about Officer John Williamson, slain a few blocks from the sanctuary, and the melee that preceded his death.
"This afternoon we'll offer this Mass for two intentions," he said.
"One is for peace in the neighborhood. The other is for the soul of Officer John Williamson."


Corrections
An article on Sept. 25 about a study of women with silicone breast implants coated with polyurethane included an erroneous reference from the Food and Drug Administration to the presence of a substance called 2-toluene diamine, or TDA, in their bodies. (TDA has been found to cause cancer when fed to rats.) The study found small amounts in the women's urine, not in their blood.
An agency spokeswoman, Betsy Adams, said, however, that the substance would not be in the urine if it had not also been in the blood.
The article also misstated a finding about women without implants who were included in the study for comparison.
Small amounts of the substance were found in the urine of some of them.


Judith Weiler, Eric Sohn
Judith Elaine Weiler, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Shelly Weiler of Cortlandt Manor, N.Y., was married yesterday to Eric Alden Sohn, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Marvin Sohn of Baldwin, L.I.
Rabbi A. David Arzt performed the ceremony at the Colonial Terrace in Peekskill, N.Y.
Mrs.
Sohn, 27, is the studio manager at Lotas Minard Patton McIver, a New York advertising agency.
She graduated summa cum laude from the Savannah College of Art and Design.


Andrew Caffrey, 73, Federal District Judge
Andrew A. Caffrey, a former chief judge of Federal District Court in Boston, died Wednesday in West Palm Beach, Fla., where he was attending a judicial conference.
Judge Caffrey, who lived in Andover, Mass., was 73.
The cause was a heart attack, a spokesman for the family said.


John J-H Kim and Kathleen Choi
Kathleen Choi, a daughter of Sook Nyul Choi of Cambridge, Mass., and the late Nung Ho Choi, was married yesterday to John J-H Kim, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Dong Won Kim of Fort Lee, N.J.
The Episcopal ceremony was performed by the Rev.
Michael Kuhn in the Lindsey Chapel of Emmanuel Church in Boston.
Ms.
Choi is keeping her name.
She is an assistant vice president at First National Bank of Boston, and a former child actress on "Sesame Street." She and her husband graduated from Harvard University, from which she also received a master's degree in public policy and he an M.B.A..


'It's Not a Pleasant Feeling,' for Ex-Giant Banks
How bad were the Redskins in today's humiliating 41-7 loss to the Giants?
"We obviously got our rears kicked," said Coach Richie Petitbon.
"It was probably the longest day I've ever spent at this stadium. I think we stunk. The defense was absolutely terrible. You can pick out any areas you want. Our tackling was atrocious. Our pass rush was nonexistent and we didn't cover anything. You never expect them to be as bad as they were."


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
In an examination of the cozy relationship between corporate agriculture and the Federal Government, the case of Erly Industries discloses how easily a politically connected agricultural company can reap rewards by exploiting loosely managed Federal programs.
Dozens of interviews, court and corporate documents and hundreds of Federal documents obtained through the Freedom of Information Act provide details about how Erly used an obscure Government program to corner a valuable market.  [ Page A1. ]
The board of Paramount Communications is expected to approve merger talks with QVC when it meets this morning, an executive close to the board said.
Also, QVC is soon expected to announce a cash infusion of up to $1 billion from a group of investors that is said to include BellSouth and Cox Enterprises.  [ D1. ]


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  CRIME'S PLACE ON MAYORAL AGENDA
Rudolph W. Giuliani believes crime in New York City is as dire today as it was in 1989 when the crack epidemic was peaking.
Mayor Dinkins says the city is less on edge and the crime rate is down since he took office.
In their conflicting views, the two candidates for mayor lay the groundwork for sharply different proposals for combatting crime.
Law-enforcement experts say it is too soon to know whether the city is more or less dangerous than when Mr.
Dinkins was elected.
But either way, the winner of the Nov. 2 election will confront a problem whose causes, manifestations and scope have changed little in four years, they say.
A1.
FARRAKHAN USE OF STADIUM DRAWS FIRE
Mr.
Giuliani said that he strongly disagreed with the Dinkins administration's plan to allow Louis H. Farrakhan, the leader of the Nation of Islam, to rent Yankee Stadium for a rally, citing Mr.
Farrakhan's past statements that many consider anti-Semitic.
But Mayor Dinkins reiterated the administration's view that the city has no choice but to make the Stadium available.
B3.


Brenda Haas, Richard Albert
Brenda Paulette Haas, a daughter of Dr.
Lawrence M. Haas of Tucson, Ariz., and the late Marilyn G. Haas, was married yesterday to Richard Franklin Albert, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Harvey D. Albert of Massapequa, L.I.
Rabbi Joseph Weizenbaum officiated at the Skyline Country Club in Tucson.
Ms.
Haas, 26, is keeping her name.
She is a counselor at Fiorello La Guardia High School in New York.
She graduated cum laude from Brandeis University and received a master's degree in education from Harvard University.


Corrections
An article on Sept. 28 about the indictment of Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison of Texas misstated her lawyer's first name.
He is John Dowd.


What a Difference a Day Makes


People
*
Stephanie L. Becker was named executive vice president and group account director on the Castrol account at Scali, McCabe, Sloves, New York, succeeding Dennis Zolnierzak, who continues as an executive vice president handling new business.
Ms.
Becker was previously a senior vice president and management supervisor at Lintas New York.


Michelle Mallin, Terence Schayes
Michelle Gayle Mallin, a daughter of Hedy Geary of Ronkokoma, L.I., and Dr.
Robert Mallin of Anchorage, was married yesterday to Terence Lee Schayes, the son of Fred and Florence Schayes of Bayside, Queens.
Rabbi Michael Ehrlich officiated at the Huntington Town House, a catering establishment in Huntington, L.I.
The bride is a marketing assistant in the college-book division of HarperCollins Publishers in New York.
She graduated cum laude from the State University at Albany.


The Barkley Collapse: A Scare, but No Surgery
Charles Barkley, who carries the Phoenix Suns on his back, needs to put them down for a while.
The 6-foot-5-inch forward collapsed during an impromptu training-camp run in Flagstaff, Ariz., Saturday night, and -- although he later showered, signed autographs and barhopped -- doctors told him tonight he needs to lighten up on his vertebrae.
After a battery of medical exams here today -- magnetic resonance imaging, a CAT scan and a neurological test -- Barkely likely has what the Suns' owner, Jerry Colangelo, called a "thickening" disk tendon.


Rose E. Kriger, Dan H. Renberg
Rose Elaine Kriger, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Morris J. Kriger of Memphis, was married there yesterday to Dan H. Renberg, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Werner Renberg of Chappaqua, N.Y.
Rabbi Rafael Grossman performed the ceremony at the Baron Hirsch Synagogue.
Mr. and Mrs.
Renberg, both 29, are associates at Washington law firms, she at Patton, Boggs &amp; Blow, he at Wiley, Rein &amp; Fielding.
The bride graduated from the University of Michigan and received a law degree from Duke University.
Her father is a partner in the Memphis law firm of McDonnell Boyd.


Executive Changes At Saatchi New York
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising in New York has, as expected, made a series of changes involving top management.
Harvey Hoffenberg, 43, was promoted to chairman and chief executive, succeeding Joseph P. Mack, 60, who will retire at the end of the year after 35 years at the agency and its predecessor shops.
Mr.
Hoffenberg, who was vice chairman and chief creative officer, will retain the latter position.


Review/Opera; Esther Lives in Modern Musical Terms
Hugo Weisgall's compositional career has been a distinguished but not a smooth one, and its course is easily traced in the three premieres given his work by the New York City Opera.
In 1959 "Six Characters in Search of an Author" was a great successs that confirmed Mr.
Weisgall's reputation as a major American composer.
In 1968, though, the premiere of "Nine Rivers From Jordan" was a fiasco.
Mr.
Weisgall was devastated.
He considered himself a "dead composer." It took years before he had the courage to write another opera.
But on Friday night, when the City Opera presented his 10th and latest opera, "Esther," as part of its World Premiere Festival, the composer's triumph could not have been more complete.
By the opera's end there was a sense of genuine excitement in the audience.
Originally commissioned by the San Francisco Opera, which withdrew from the project in 1990, the opera was resurrected by Christopher Keene for the City Opera's 50th-anniversary celebrations.


INSIDE
Cutting Hours to Save Jobs
Union leaders and economists are seriously considering what once seemed a far-fetched remedy for disappearing high-paying jobs: a shorter workweek.
Page A10.
The Pop Star of Health Care
The battle over health care legislation carries many trappings of the modern political campaign, with Hillary Rodham Clinton its popular, versatile star.
Page A12.
Marijuana, Not Chicken Soup
A 79-year-old grandmother grew marijuana in her yard because she hoped it would help her ill son -- and she doesn't apologize for it.
Page B1.
Blue Jays and Phils Win
Toronto beat Chicago, 5-3, to move within a victory of a pennant.
Philadelphia won, 2-1, over Atlanta to even its series.
SportsMonday, page C1.
Title Talk for Giants?
Phil Simms threw three touchdown passes as the Giants crushed the Redskins, 41-7, starting talk about a division title.
SportsMonday, page C1.


More Height Rejected for Towers in 42d St. Plan
Heeding a flurry of objections, New York State officials said yesterday that they would not allow an increase in the height of four office towers that are to rise over Times Square early in the next century.
Under an increase sought by the developers, the towers would have grown more than 100 feet each from the plans originally approved.
The tower eventually planned on the east side of Broadway, between 42d and 43d Streets, for example, would have grown to 895 feet, dwarfing One Times Square Plaza across Broadway and almost rivaling Citicorp Center, which is 915 feet tall.


Broncobusters Try New Tack: Tenderness
At high noon in a crook of the Bighorn Mountains, the sorrel danced nervously inside the corral, as a lanky cowboy moved in to start breaking the colt, a practice as old as the Old West.
But this cowboy wore no spurs on his boots.
He did not bark at the horse to show who was boss.
He did not sneak around to throw a saddle on its back to climb aboard until it stopped bucking.
Instead, he offered an outstretched hand, let the horse sniff it, and then gently stroked its neck and back.


CHRONICLE
TONYA PINKINS , the Tony Award-winning star of "Jelly's Last Jam," has become a rallying point for people who believe that the judicial system treats women unfairly.
A month ago, Ms.
Pinkins, who has a role in the television soap opera "All My Children," lost custody of her two sons, Maxx , 5 , and Myles, 3, to her estranged husband, RON BRAWER musical director for "Another World."


Bridge
One of the minor mysteries of bridge history concerns two articles that appeared in "The Bridge World" in 1970.
It concerned a convention that quickly became popular, calling for an artificial bid of two no-trump to demand a three-club rebid after a one no-trump opening has been overcalled.
The articles named the idea Lebensohl, and credited a young expert from M.I.T.
That was Ken Lebensold, who denied the authorship, denied any desire to use the idea, and objected to the misspelling of his name.


Let Insurance Avert Financial Catastrophe
To the Editor:
The debate over medical care and insurance stemming from the health proposals of President and Mrs.
Clinton seems to have ignored one crucial fact: the original purpose of all types of insurance is to prevent financial catastrophe.


Brooklyn Legends Thrive On Banks of the Gowanus
The Gowanus Canal is the stuff of Brooklyn legend, a murky stream where bodies have been found and suicides attempted and foolhardy children have dipped toes in polluted waters.
"Anything that comes out of there, you better run for the hills," said John Bevins, a car service driver, who grew up playing along the canal, delighting in watching the tugboats and drawbridges.
"I didn't leap in there, believe me."


Treasury Auction Confined To Bill Market This Week
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week is confined to the bill market, beginning with today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
On Thursday, the Government will auction a one-year bill.
According to traders, at the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 2.97 percent and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.06 percent.
The rate for the one-year bill was 3.17 percent.


Dance in Review
Emma Diamond  Cunningham Studio
Emma Diamond is a dancer of extraordinary lightness and speed, whose feet seem to have an exhilarated life of their own.
Her performances with the Merce Cunningham Dance Company suggest she is also a brainy dancer.
And so an evening of her own choreography, presented on Friday night, promised much.


Review/Film; Vision of a Vietnam as Yet Unscarred
"The Scent of the Green Papaya" is Tran Anh Hung's tranquilly beautiful film about a lost Vietnam, a peaceful, orderly place not yet touched by wartime.
The film begins in Saigon in 1951, in a household safely insulated from the first rumblings of trouble.
The family in question has more personal problems, since these people are still mourning the death of a young daughter several years earlier, and since the husband (Tran Ngoc Trung) has a history of disappearing for long periods with his family's money.
The wife (Truong Thi Loc) endures these desertions with the stoicism the film generally ascribes to Vietnamese women.
Into this family comes Mui (Lu Man San), a lovely 10-year-old servant girl and a contemporary of the daughter who died.
The camera watches Mui contemplatively as she learns her new duties and does her hard-working best to keep her masters happy.
Mui is someone who smiles knowingly at the sight of ants lifting heavy burdens, and who communes effortlessly with the natural forces all around her.
The film works hypnotically as it gazes upon the leaves, birds, frogs and insects that are welcome parts of Mui's world.


Holiday Today
The Columbus Day holiday is being observed today.
Here are holiday schedules.
NEW YORK  PARADE: The Columbus Day Parade begins at 10:15 A.M. at Fifth Avenue and 44th Street, going north to 86th Street and east to Third Avenue.
GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal, state and municipal closed.
POST OFFICE: Express Mail and special delivery only; main post office open at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue.
BANKS: Closed.
PARKING: Alternate-side rules suspended today.
SANITATION: No collections, street cleaning or recycling.
SCHOOLS: Closed.
FINANCIAL MARKETS: Open.
TRANSPORTATION: Subways, buses, Metro-North and Long Island Rail Road on regular schedules.
NEW JERSEY  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Federal and state offices closed; municipal option to close.
POST OFFICES: Closed.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Local option.
TRANSPORTATION N.J.
Transit trains on regular schedules, bus schedules vary, holiday or regular.
CONNECTICUT  GOVERNMENT OFFICES: Closed.
POST OFFICES: Closed.
BANKS: Closed.
SCHOOLS: Local discretion.
TRANSPORTATION: New Haven Line on regular schedule.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday None  Wednesday None  Thursday Weekly Jobless Claims  Producer Prices . . .
September  Retail Sales . . .
September  Friday Merchandise Trade . . .
August  Consumer Prices . . .
September  Industrial Production . . .
September  Business Inventories . . .
August


McDowell's Cy Young-Arm Producing Nothing but Sighs
The American League Championship Series will not last long enough for Jack McDowell to keep pitching against Juan Guzman and the Toronto Blue Jays until he gets it right.
McDowell, the league's leading winner with 22 victories and its only 20-game winner, tried for the second time in the pennant playoff today, and for the second time the Blue Jays' batters battered him on their and Guzman's behalf.
Guzman, who beat McDowell in the series opener, was even better this time, permitting three hits in seven innings in a 5-3 victory that sent the four-of-seven-game series back to Chicago with a three-games-to-two Toronto lead.


Amos 'n Andy in Nikes
In 1957, the historian E. Franklin Frazier asked who represented the "manners and morals" of black people, and replied that the "black bourgeosie" exercised considerable influence.
Today the question is at the heart of a vicious clash pitting certain entertainers -- especially the hard-core rappers with their foul mouths and disdain for black women -- against the rest of us.
It is a losing battle.
As blacks have been "integrated" in the entertainment industry, the bourgeoisie has seen its impact diminish.
Whites, who in the past ignored blacks (we weren't selling then), are in control of how blacks are portrayed.
Two recent images: the rapper L. L. Cool J singing about bringing a girl to his jeep to "give it" to her "real raw"; the performer Snoop Doggy Dogg being charged with murder in a drive-by shooting.


Cozy Links to a U.S Agency Prove Useful to a Rice Trader
On Nov. 7, 1988, a cable stamped confidential landed on the desks of officials of the Iraqi Grain Board, one of the largest buyers of imported rice.
It was from Peter Vegas, an executive of Comet Rice, a unit of the chronically unprofitable Erly Industries in Los Angeles.
Although the grain board had requested bids, this was not a bid, but an audacious promise -- "We are offering to beat the lowest offer that you receive."


Starks, Knicks Dynamo, Trying to Be Less Dynamic
People have said it, and John Starks believes it.
This season will go a long way toward determining whether Starks remains a good player, or whether he takes the next step and becomes a star.
Starks has at least two goals this season.
Obviously, he wants to help the Knicks win a championship.
He also wants to make the National Basketball Association's first team All-Defensive team.


Beatrice Garcia, Kip Simson
Beatrice Garcia, a daughter of Jose Garcia-Medrano of Cambridge, Mass., and Aracelia Vila of Berkley Heights, N.J., was married yesterday to Anton Kipling Simson Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Simson of San Diego.
The Rev.
Charles Little, a Methodist minister, officiated at Bretton Woods, a catering establishment in Morris Plains, N.J.
The bride, a graduate of Monmouth College, is a flight attendant for United Airlines, based in Los Angeles, where next month she is to become a commercial pilot trainee with the airline.
Her father is a vice president of Scudder, Stevens &amp; Clark, investment advisers, in Boston.
Her mother is the vice president of international public affairs for Schering-Plough Corporation, a pharmaceuticals company in Madison, N.J.
Mr.
Simson, known as Kip, is a composite-metal specialist in San Diego with the Martin Marietta Corporation, the aerospace manufacturer.
He graduated from Palomar College.
His father is the president of EESTI Engineering, an engineering firm in San Diego.


Freud Might Frown At Psychiatrists' Role In the World of Films
Rich, vulnerable, neurotic and insecure, the movie crowd has been infatuated with psychiatry since the 1920's.
Even more significant, psychiatrists have not only cheerfully ministered to the needs of the Hollywood community, but have become part of the fabric of the town, attending parties with patients, gossiping with and about them, dating them, marrying them.
They've offered impromptu advice to patients on scripts, and have even written screenplays with them.
"It's really a subject that's been untapped," said Stephen Farber, a co-author with Marc Green of a new book, "Hollywood on the Couch: A Candid Look at the Overheated Love Affair Between Psychiatrists and Movie Makers." The book, to be published in November by Morrow, is the first to explore in detail the sometimes serious and frequently bizarre relationships between Hollywood psychiatrists and their patients.


Anita Mosner, Jonathan Baker
Anita Madeline Mosner, an associate at the Washington law firm of Galland, Kharasch, Morse &amp; Garfinkle, was married yesterday to Jonathan Scot Baker, a lawyer with the Environmental Protection Agency in Washington.
Rabbi Kenneth Block officiated at the Park Hyatt Hotel in Washington.
The bride graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University and she and her husband received law degrees from Boston University.
She is a daughter of Florence Mosner of Forest Hills, Queens, and the late Eli P. Mosner.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Dinkins and Giuliani Split on Public Safety Issues
Rudolph W. Giuliani believes crime is as dire today in New York City as it was in 1989 when the crack epidemic was peaking.
Mayor David N. Dinkins says the city is less on edge and the crime rate is down since he took office.
In their conflicting views on that important question for voters -- is the city safer today than it was four years ago -- the two candidates for mayor lay the groundwork for their sharply different proposals for combatting crime.


Amy B. Chodroff, Jack M. Fink
Amy Beth Chodroff, a news anchor and reporter for the WNOG radio stations in Naples, Fla., was married yesterday to Jack Michael Fink, a reporter for WINK-TV, the CBS affiliate in Fort Myers, Fla.
Rabbi Samuel Chiel officiated at Temple Emmanuel in Newton Center, Mass.
Mrs.
Fink, 23, and her husband, 25, graduated from Syracuse University, he cum laude.
She is a daughter of Dr.
Robert Chodroff and Arleen Chodroff of Canton, Mass.
Her father is a dentist there.
Her mother is a dental hygienist in his office.


'Flying Toaster' Case Ruling
Opus, the shotgun-toting cartoon penguin, is restrained from shooting at winged bread-charring appliances.
A Federal judge in San Francisco issued a preliminary injunction on Friday barring Delrina Inc. of Toronto from selling its Opus 'N Bill screen saver software that has the images of flying toasters.


R. J. Reynolds Moves Its Media Services
The R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company is eliminating its in-house media services department, which has for many years handled the planning and buying of print advertisements for its cigarette brands like Winston, Camel and Doral.
The media services will be transferred, beginning with ads to run during 1994, to one of the Reynolds roster agencies, Long Haymes Carr Lintas in Winston-Salem, N.C., which handles the creative responsibilities for the lower-priced brands like Doral, as well as Reynolds's sports marketing programs.


5-Letter 'Yankee' Word Meaning Florida State
Before he answered the morning-after question, Bobby Bowden needed a translation.
The question seemed simple: Is there any correlation between the amount of heart a team possesses and the outcome of a football game's final minutes?
"What was that first word?" the coach of the Florida State Seminoles said.
"That's a Yankee word."


Ozone Hole, Biosphere and the Air Around Us; Like Life in a Sub
To the Editor:
Re two items in your Sept. 29 issue, the letter by David Stewart of Kenmore, Australia, on the ozone hole, and the "Biospherics" editorial.
First, Mr.
Stewart asserts that Mount Erebus in the Antarctic regularly "spews thousands of tons of chlorine vapor" into the stratosphere.
Any chlorine in a volcano has already combined with something: iron, copper, zinc, silica, any of the chemicals that are in the molten center of the earth, whence volcanic eruptions come.
Such chlorine is fixed as chlorides, not free chlorine gas.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CANAL PLUS S.A., Paris, and Time Warner Inc.'s Home Box Office unit will start a joint pay-television venture in Turkey early next year.
McDERMOTT INC., New Orleans, said it had been awarded a $46 million contract with Enserch Exploration Partners Ltd. for work on an offshore oil and gas platform in the Gulf of Mexico.


U.S. and U.N. Tell Haiti Military Must Cooperate
Acting on a request by the United States, the Security Council warned Haitian military leaders today that Haiti could face renewed economic sanctions for failing to allow a ship carrying United States and Canadian troops to dock.
Secretary of State Warren Christopher also said that the landing of the 200 troops, part of an international contingent to oversee the return of the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, would be delayed until the Haitian military could guarantee the troops' safety.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in The Home Section on Thursday about "Staying at Home," a free booklet published by the American Association of Retired Persons to help find housing, meals and medical care for elderly people who are frail, misstated the address where the pamphlet may be obtained.
The address is: Staying at Home; A.A.R.P., Fulfillment; 601 E Street, NW; Washington, D.C. 20049.


Trial Is Set on Colorado Law Against Gay Rights
A challenge to the constitutionality of a Colorado measure forbidding legal protection for homosexuals begins on Tuesday in a state district court here.
The measure, which put this state at the center of a national debate over gay rights laws, has never been put into effect.
The judge who issued an injunction in January preventing the law's enforcement, Jeffrey Bayless of district court here, will preside over the trial, which is expected to last nine days.


Review/Fashion; From Calm to Crazed in Paris
It's possible to find calm, familiar clothes as the spring-summer collections unfold here, but it isn't easy.
Emanuel Ungaro has, perhaps, the most extensive display.
His mood has relaxed completely.
His mummy-wrapped dresses are a thing of the past.
Like almost every designer, he does plenty of sand-colored flowing clothes for a trip through the desert -- any desert -- but he doesn't completely forget about tailoring.
Loose dresses and sheer pants are accompanied by coats and jackets.
There's plenty of strong color in both prints and solids to keep clothes cheerful.


Washington at Work; Respected but Sometimes Unpopular, Nunn Relishes Pivotal Advisory Role
It is a quintessential Sam Nunn moment: a difficult question on the use of American force, a restive Congress, a President struggling for consensus.
The senior Senator from Georgia, chairman of the Armed Services Committee, is careful; others on Capitol Hill are calling for deadlines and a rapid withdrawal from Somalia, but not Mr.
Nunn, much to the relief of the Administration.
Still, he is raising questions about American strategy and troop deployment, not only in Somalia but also in Haiti and, potentially, Bosnia.


Metro Commerce Bank N.A. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Soderstrom Master Class
The soprano Elisabeth Soderstrom is to give a master class in voice on Oct. 24 at 2 P.M. at Alice Tully Hall.
She is to work with a group of young singers, giving critiques of their performances and offering instruction in technique, diction and interpretation.
Tickets, at $20, are available at the box office or through Center Charge, (212) 721-6500.
The class is part of the Art of the Song series presented by Lincoln Center.


Fireplace Weather
It came last week, the chilly night when thousands of New Yorkers crumpled the paper, stacked the logs, reached for the matches and lit the first fire of the season.
Walking down a street of little houses was like walking through a New England town.
Stop, sniff and there it was -- wood smoke.
In New York, however, fireplaces are not unique to little houses.
They're in grand old apartment houses too, and some that are not so grand, and often they make up for rumbling pipes and drip ping faucets, patched ceilings and peeling walls.
Be cause anyone who has a fireplace has a friend.


Pet Valu Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 11


Helen Adam, 83, Poet And Writer of Ballads
Helen Adam, a poet and composer of Scottish ballads, died on Sept. 19 at a nursing home in Fort Greene, Brooklyn.
She was 83.
A master of ballads and classical English poetry, she was nevertheless closely associated with the Beat authors and the San Francisco school of poets.
She read her work alongside friends like Allen Ginsburg and Robert Duncan.


What Golda Meir Said About Palestinians
To the Editor:
Discussions of the Israeli-Palestine Liberation Organization accords have mentioned Golda Meir's statements denying there is a Palestinian people.
To counter equation of her comments with Arab calls for the annihilation of Israel, her remarks ought to be put into context.


Media General Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Scars in a Proud Police Force; Troopers Come to Terms With Evidence-Tampering Scandal
More than a year after the first headlines, the pain and disbelief still show on Thomas A. Constantine's face as he talks about the worst scandal in the history of the New York State Police.
"The idea that a sworn police officer in any agency, but in this agency, would be framing people with fabricated evidence -- it's just unbelievable," said Mr.
Constantine, a 31-year veteran of the force and its superintendent since 1987.


Charlotte C. Campbell, 78, Dies; Was Leading Specialist on Fungi
Charlotte Catherine Campbell, a retired professor who advanced the knowledge and treatment of infections caused by fungi, died on Friday at Brigham &amp; Women's Hospital in Boston.
A Boston resident, she was 78.
She had had a brief illness, said a spokesman for J. S. Waterman &amp; Sons funeral homes in Boston.
A specialist in medical mycology, the study of fungi, Professor Campbell wrote or was the co-author of more than 100 treatises, particularly on the causes and cures of histoplasmosis, lung diseases caused by fungus.
For her work, she received the highest award of the International Society for Human and Animal Mycology in 1979.
Although she never finished her doctorate, this was one of many honors she received.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14 HAITIANS BAR U.S. PEACEKEEPERS
A mob of civilians in open collaboration with police prevented American peacekeepers from landing in Haiti, in what diplomats called a major violation of the U.N. settlement to restore the exiled President.
A1 Haitian leaders were warned that sanctions could be reimposed.
A12 SENATE CHALLENGE ON SOMALIA
Many senators are lining up behind a challenge to President Clinton's Somalia policy after hearing from constituents that they think the United States should end its mission there before March.
A1


Calnetics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Altron Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Sox Lose the Spotlight As Well as Home Games
If for no other reason, it's nice that the White Sox could win a couple of games in Toronto and remain alive long enough to return home and reclaim the American League playoffs from Michael Jordan.
Few might have noticed, but the White Sox played their first post-season games in a decade at Comiskey Park last week.
They lost both games, but worse, they lost the spotlight they deserved because Jordan chose those two days to disclose his retirement.
Jordan had a right to make that announcement any time he chose, but he played basketball for the same owner who pays Frank Thomas's and Bo Jackson's salaries.
Jordan and Jerry Reinsdorf, the owner, might have given the White Sox a little more thought and consideration.


Bridge
Many octogenarians play bridge with great skill, though whether this is because bridge keeps the mind sharp is not susceptible to proof.
An example is 85-year-old Pauline Reiner of Manhattan, who recently held the diagramed South cards in a duplicate game.
After an opening bid of one club on her right, she made a textbook overcall of three spades and was raised to game.
After the lead of the club jack, she was faced with four possible losers.
The opening bid made it probable that the crucial red kings were on her right, and she proceeded on that assumption.
East took two top clubs and led a third round, which was ruffed high.


A New Space For Theater, Art and Pie
Within sight of the Holland Tunnel and earshot of Canal Street, a new multi-arts center is taking shape -- the newest in Off Off Broadway theater.
The venture, called HERE, is the work of two companies of young theatrical entrepreneurs.
Beginning in late October, they promise, HERE will deliver original productions with a $12 ceiling on ticket prices, access to a constantly changing art gallery and a cafe serving what they claim is the best coffee and apple pie in town.


Oleg Pomerantzeff; Biomedical Engineer, 83
Oleg Pomerantzeff, a biomedical engineer and physicist at the Schepens Eye Research Institute in Boston who developed several innovative optical instruments and devices, died last Thursday in Toulouse, France.
He was 83 and lived in Brookline, Mass.
His family said the cause was heart failure.


Senators Seek Early Pullout Of U.S. Troops From Somalia
After hearing strong protests from constituents over the holiday weekend, a number of the Senate's most influential members are mounting a challenge to President Clinton's Somalia policy and are pressing for a vote this week to bring the troops home by the end of the year.
They are lining up behind Senator Robert C. Byrd, Democrat of West Virginia and one of the policy's strongest opponents.
He plans to introduce a measure that would cut off funds for the mission, perhaps as soon as Jan. 1.


Caldwell Partners reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


New Test to Measure Liver Scarring
SCIENTISTS in Britain say they have found a simple way to detect and monitor scarring and damage in the liver, a method that could reduce the need for risky liver biopsies.
The researchers say they have shown that by combining the results of two blood serum tests, they can measure physical changes caused by alcoholic liver disease.


Bassett Furniture (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY ASBESTOS CRISIS LINGERS IN SCHOOLS Three weeks into the fall term in New York City schools, after a delayed start because of the asbestos crisis, classes are still disrupted for more than 50,000 students.
While administrators say that teachers have coped creatively, it is not yet clear how the students' educations will be affected.
A1.


With Expectations Low, Yeltsin Arrives in Japan
After twice canceling trips to Japan, President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia arrived here Monday night, as Japanese officials did everything they could to damp expectations of any progress on the territorial dispute that has soured relations between the two countries for nearly half a century.
Mr.
Yeltsin held a ceremonial meeting this morning with Emperor Akihito.
He will also hold talks with the new Prime Minister, Morihiro Hosokawa, and is seeking more financial aid and investment from Japan, which has already supplied nearly $5 billion under a strategy that calls for a "balanced equilibrium" in the improvement of relations.


Review/Film Festival; Life at a New Tempo, In Kieslowski's 'Blue'
Krzysztof Kieslowski's "Blue," the Polish director's latest French film, is about Julie (Juliette Binoche), a grieving widow and mother whose husband, "one of the most important composers of our time," and young daughter are killed in the car accident she survives.
The film, which will be shown at the New York Film Festival tonight at 6:15, is the first in Mr.
Kieslowski's trilogy "Three Colors: Blue, White, Red," in which he examines the meaning of liberty ("Blue"), equality ("White") and fraternity ("Red"), not as political or social concepts, which, he says, have already been achieved in France, but in terms of the individual.
This is a deep-dish endeavor.


BanPonce Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Israel Selling China Military Technology, C.I.A. Chief Asserts
Israel has sold advanced military technology to China for more than a decade and is moving to expand its cooperation with Beijing, says R. James Woolsey, the Director of Central Intelligence.
The C.I.A. assessment was provided in written responses to questions by the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee.
The committee made the assessment public last week as part of a report on recent hearings it conducted on "proliferation threats of the 1990's," a committee aide said tonight.


In Two Counties, a Struggle to Influence Turnout
In the largely Democratic counties of Essex and Hudson, a familiar election year tug-of-war is going on: Democrats want a big voter turnout and Republicans are looking for ways to keep the turnout low.
In the past strong Democratic organizations were able to field armies of workers, their enthusiasm buoyed by thousands of dollars in "street money" to get voters to the polls.
Republicans countered with tactics such as posting poll watchers, many of them armed off-duty police officers, outside voting places, a tactic they have promised a Federal judge not to repeat.


Despite Merger, Hospitals Get a Grim Prognosis
Even as arbitragers were betting up the stocks of hospital companies last week after two giant chains, the Columbia Healthcare Corporation and HCA-Hospital Corporation of America, agreed to merge, industry executives and health economists were predicting a grim long-range outlook for both investor-owned and nonprofit hospitals.
"There will be a significant amount of hospital failures over the next 10 years," said Richard L. Scott, Columbia Healthcare's chairman.
"Society is saying it wants to limit the amount of G.N.P. that we are going to spend on health care."


U.S. Prepares to Unveil Blueprint for Reducing Heat-Trapping Gases
THE Clinton Administration is about to announce its plan for reducing the United States' emissions of heat-trapping gases like carbon dioxide, in accordance with the treaty it signed at last year's Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro.
And though the plan is still being discussed and officials are closely guarding the details, it appears likely to rely more on carrots than on sticks in seeking to get industry to comply.
If Government officials, environmentalists and industry representatives who have been involved in creating the plan over the last six months are right, it will contain no new energy taxes, will hold regulation to a minimum and will emphasize and encourage voluntary efforts to use energy more efficiently.
The goal is to reduce emissions of so-called greenhouse gases to 1990 levels by the year 2000 in an effort to avert a possible global warming.
The announcement of the plan is expected within the next two weeks.


Pact's New Hurdle: Hispanic Officials
As President Clinton tries to sell the North American Free Trade Agreement as a marriage between the United States and its Latin American neighbors, Hispanic lawmakers have become an unexpected obstacle.
The 17 Hispanic members of the House of Representatives have proven resistant to the Administration's argument that they should be natural allies, convinced that the trade accord with Mexico and Canada would create a huge common market helping Hispanic people on both sides of the border.


Bank of Granite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SouthTrust Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Get Ready For Playoff Deprivation
Are you watching the baseball playoffs?
Have you caught games from both league championship series?
Remember this video privilege.
It is the last time you purists out there will get the chance.
CBS's Sean McDonough laid out the scenario Sunday night during Game 4 of the Braves-Phillies series, spoken without the derision that major league baseball's new TV plan with ABC and NBC merits.
"The plan next year is to go to simultaneous games," said McDonough, "so it's the last time for a while that you'll be able to see every pitch of every playoff game."


Not Such a Bad Boy
BOB SWEENEY, a Buffalo forward who was ejected from a game at Montreal Saturday night for his part in a third-period brawl, got a break from the National Hockey League.
Sweeney, who originally faced an automatic 10-game suspension under a rule governing players who leave the bench to join a fracas, had his suspension trimmed to three games after N.H.L. officials reviewed the game tape.


Campbell Revises Executives' Rules
The Campbell Soup Company, which has positioned itself as one of the few American corporations to embrace shareholder activism, announced a new executive pay plan yesterday that ties executive compensation to the company's performance and requires top officials to have a larger part of their net worth in Campbell stock.
Under the plan, between 60 and 75 percent of executive compensation would be determined by Campbell's financial performance.
And, up to 60 top executives would be required to own up to three times their base salaries in Campbell's stock, not including stock options or restricted stock.


Columbia Twosome Selected as the Best
A Columbia University fencer who dominated domestic competition and a teammate who was the top American in international meets have been named the male and female athletes of the year by the United States Fencing Association.


Cadbury Picks Foote, Cone
Cadbury Beverages Inc. in Stamford, Conn., said yesterday that it had selected Foote, Cone &amp; Belding in Chicago to handle its Schweppes and Crush brands accounts, previously at Ammirati &amp; Puris in New York for almost a decade.
Though annual billings were not disclosed, industry executives who insisted on anonymity estimated them at $6 million to $8 million.
Foote, Cone already handles advertising for Cadbury Beverages brands like Canada Dry, Sunkist, Sundrop and Oasis.
It was awarded the Schweppes and Crush brands after a review that began in June when Ammirati resigned the account, citing a decline in advertising spending and changes in management at Cadbury Beverages.
Ammirati said at the time that spending had dwindled to about $2.5 million from a peak of about $6.5 million.


Aftershocks of Asbestos Mess Linger at New York's Schools
The children from Public School 4 in the Bronx spent two weeks at the New York Botanical Garden learning biology and botany; now they sit two to a desk in a church basement, trying to make up their other subjects.
The students at P.S. 196 in Queens spent half-days at a neighboring school; now they are getting twice the usual homework.
And pupils at P.S. 156 in Brooklyn are in their second school of the month and soon will be headed to a third; their own school is closed indefinitely.
Three weeks into the fall term in New York City schools, after a delayed start because of the asbestos crisis, classes are still disrupted for more than 50,000 students.
Twenty-eight elementary and junior high schools remain closed because of exposed asbestos, and another 300 schools have at least one room closed for abatement.


Pinnacle Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bestop Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


In a Quiet Session, Dow Rises 8.67 Points
The stock market was generally listless yesterday in a quiet Columbus Day session.
Few significant trends were apparent, analysts said, with banks and some bond markets closed and other markets ending trading early.


Classical Music in Review
The Grieg Festival Quartet  Weill Recital Hall
Friday night's concert by the Grieg Festival Quartet was, on the face of it, a Norwegian ensemble celebrating the 150th anniversary of its namesake's birth.
In fact, it demonstrated how cultural imperialism inhibits the freshest of talents.
The program, including the Schumann "Marchenbilder" and Brahms's C-minor Piano Quartet, began with two of Grieg's duo works: the C-minor Violin Sonata and the A-minor Cello Sonata, both with piano.


Classical Music in Review
'Il Tabarro'  Dicapo Opera Theater 184 East 76th Street Manhattan
The pleasure of "Il Tabarro" -- what could be called the essential pleasure of verismo opera itself -- lies in its opulent elaboration of low and raw events.
On Thursday night, the Dicapo Opera diminished that pleasure by replacing Puccini's late-Romantic orchestra with a meager ensemble of piano, electronic keyboard and percussion.
But the company otherwise made a decent stab at this brilliantly lurid one-acter.


Centura Banks Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Conveying a Message About Cleaner Streets
KENNY and Moose are no longer invisible on the streets of Hoboken, which is not to say they have become celebrities.
But it wasn't so long ago that residents stared right through them.
Those days are gone.
Now, like slides on a microscope, they have come into sharp focus.
From a distance, it's their bright orange jumpsuits.
Up close, it's the message printed across their backs:


Keene Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Music; Exploring the Terrain Between Two Worlds
Over the last 30 years, many of the attempts to merge jazz's improvisational process with European classical music have been painful failures.
Serious in all the wrong ways, the music often turned its back on jazz's functional past.
At Weill Recital Hall last Tuesday night, the composers Marty Ehrlich and Don Byron brought their chamber groups in for a concert, and for the most part the pieces avoided the drab pretension of most music working in the gray area between the two forms.
At their best they embraced humor, rhythm and lyricism, and spoke of the possibilities in literate chamber music that wasn't afraid of the richness of American popular-music tradition.
Mr.
Ehrlich's group, the Emergency Peace Ensemble, which includes Vincent Chancey on French horn, Eric Friedlander on cello and Lindsey Horner on bass, showed Mr.
Ehrlich to be one of the premier melodicists of his generation.
Even his more brittle pieces were filled with melodies that blossomed slowly, or exploded.
On "Underground Overground," he unwrapped an idea redolent with the blues that seemed to suck the air out of the room with its power.
Mr.
Ehrlich's gift for arranging kept his pieces constantly changing.
He swapped instrumental combinations, let musicians move from written sections to improvisation and back, and shifted melodies from the foreground to the background.


An Independent Attack Against Florio
Client: Hands Across New Jersey Creator: Larry Weitzner, Jamestown Associates, South Orange Visual: Jim Florio, smiling and looking confident, is seen in a television film clip waving to a friendly group of onlookers.
The scene quickly shifts to a padlocked factory gate over the heading "325,000 Lost Jobs." The next graphic reads "71,000 Lost Homes" accompanied by a picture of what appears to be a homeless person sitting on the ground beneath a tree.
A framed picture of the Governor remains on the screen as headlines from The Trentonian pop up alongside: "America's Worst Governor," "Think Tanks Give Florio an F," "2.8 Billion Tax Increase" and "Florio to Taxpayers: 'Drop Dead'." The television clip of Mr.
Florio seen at the beginning is repeated followed by the anti-tax group's phone number "Call 1-800-VETO JIM."


ERLY Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Gullikson Is '94 Cup Captain
The United States Tennis Association is expected to announce today that it has appointed 42-year-old Tom Gullikson to the vacant post of Davis Cup captain for 1994.
Gullikson, a member of the U.S.T.A. coaching staff since 1988 and former coach of Jennifer Capriati, never played Davis Cup but nonetheless was selected ahead of two candidates with cup experience, Stan Smith, the U.S.T.A.'s director of coaching, and Brad Gilbert, a five-year cup veteran now ranked 34th in the world.
The most controversial candidate for the post, John McEnroe, removed himself from contention last week, citing "personal considerations," but he indicated that he might be available for doubles duty next year.
McEnroe's withdrawal further simplified the selection process for the U.S.T.A. president, J. Howard (Bumpy) Frazer, who learned last month that the eight-year captain, Tom Gorman, after guiding the team to championships in 1990 and 1992, did not wish to be reappointed in 1994.


Italian Socialist Holds Talks With Investigator in Scandal
Bettino Craxi, a former Socialist Prime Minister facing corruption charges, reversed his previous position and met on Saturday with the Milan magistrate investigating the national scandal.
In an interview last week with the newsweekly Espresso, Enzo Lo Giudice, Mr.
Craxi's lawyer, said Mr.
Craxi wanted to discuss Communist Party financing and the role of major corporations in getting Government favors for illegal payments.


Reviews/Television; Diagnosing the Clank Inside G.M.'s Engine
Mr.
Smith's management does not pass the inspection of tonight's 90-minute documentary, which opens a new season of "Frontline." But the deeper sources of the auto maker's distress are located in the supercharged 1950's, when even lemons could make money.
A dimwitted cocksureness seems to have been the style of executives blindsided by the advent of small foreign cars.
Their crash effort to catch up produced the Corvair, made famous by Ralph Nader in "Unsafe at Any Speed." As Ross Perot, who had his own brief collision with General Motors, observes, "Success breeds arrogance and complacency," and he should know.


Classical Music in Review
Ensemble 21  Merkin Concert Hall
Just when it seemed certain that the younger generation of composers had abandoned Serialism and atonality in favor of an omnivorous neo-Romanticism, along comes Ensemble 21 with arguments to the contrary.


Delrina Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Organizing the Desktop and Having Some Fun
MOST people don't buy a key application, like a word-processing or database program, or a significant piece of hardware, like a hard-disk drive or color printer, without giving the matter some thought.
But there are things that entice them in the shop or in advertisements.
You probably won't see an ad for Mouse Tamer, made by American Business Concepts, of Dallas; an ad would cost too much for an absurdly simple device with a suggested retail price of $4.95.
It is a flexible metal post, attached to a plastic base, that holds the mouse-to-computer cord above the desktop battlefield.
This desk, like many others, is covered with computers, disk files, a modem, mice and their pads, scraps and sheets of paper, books, a coffee mug and even an ashtray.
All of these objects invite a mouse cord to twist into weird configurations.
Now they don't.
The Mouse Tamer is really better than a cordless mouse, which needs a clear path between mouse and receiver, and batteries.


Calnetics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Parents of the Same Sex, A Child in the Same Family
Will Jurgenson has just entered McKinley High as a freshman.
He's bright, affable and a top candidate for the varsity basketball team.
Everything is going his way, until the community discovers that his loving and supportive parents are lesbians.
This afternoon at 4, "Other Mothers," a new CBS Schoolbreak Special, painstakingly and admirably tackles a subject that is increasingly being aired in headlines and court cases.
Care has obviously been taken.
A CBS press release notes that Amy Dunkleberger's script was scrutinized by several prominent psychologists.
It also notes that according to the Gay and Lesbian Parents Coalition, between six million and eight million children are being raised in gay or lesbian households.
The American family is greatly changing.
The message of this television drama: Bigots among us will have to do some adjusting.


Mubarak Promising Democracy, and Law and Order
President Hosni Mubarak said today that his Government had Islamic militants on the run and that it was moving toward democracy.
The President's opponents have charged that the Government had stymied political reform.
"Most of them are criminals," Mr.
Mubarak said of the Islamic militants.
"They are being directed from outside the country. Most of them have committed about 15 crimes and given 5, 10 or 15 years in jail, but escaped. Now we are collecting them. That is why everything has gone down."


Giants Elevate Tillman To a Prominent Role
In running back Lewis Tillman, the Giants have not just found a comfort zone should starting back Rodney Hampton get hurt again, but they have also found a way not to run Hampton into the ground.
Coach Dan Reeves said today that Tillman played so well against the Washington Redskins on Sunday that when Hampton fully recovers from his arthroscopic surgery and returns to the starting lineup in three weeks, Tillman might be given more carries and Hampton more rest.


Bassett Furniture (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Allied Bankshares Inc. (Ga.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Phillies Ride Their Roller Coaster to a 3-2 Lead
Only time will tell if destiny is in the air for the Philadelphia Phillies.
There is surely a sense of deja vu, however.
For the second time in a topsy-turvy four-of-seven-game National League Championship Series against Atlanta, the Phillies sunk to the depths when Mitch Williams blew a ninth-inning lead.
Thanks in part to his wild way of trying to save games.
Thanks in part to an error by defensive replacement Kim Batiste.


Barbara Feitel, 64, Clinical Psychologist
Dr.
Barbara Feitel, a clinical psychologist and research scientist associated with the Nathan Kline Research Institute, Phoenix House and Covenant House, died on Saturday at White Plains Memorial Hospital.
She was 64 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


Dismissal Sought for Operator Of Subway Train That Crashed
The Transit Authority has decided to seek the dismissal of the train operator whose subway train crashed into the rear of another last Thursday, injuring dozens of people, an agency spokesman said yesterday.
The authority will formally file its administrative charges against the man, Walter Grant, tomorrow when he is scheduled to come to the authority's headquarters for a physical examination, said the spokesman, Jared Lebow.
No criminal charges are expected against Mr.
Grant, who tested negative for drugs and alcohol in tests taken within two hours of the accident.


Time's Chief Sees Need For Magazines to Evolve
There is definitely a place for magazines in the new world of interactive computer technology, but "anybody who thinks they can relax and wait is indulging in a self-defeating illusion," Gerald M. Levin, the chairman and chief executive of Time Warner Inc., told hundreds of magazine executives today.
"The boat is pulling out," Mr.
Levin said at the annual conference of Magazine Publishers of America here.
"And those who aren't aboard will be a long time in catching up."


Agriculture Companies Still Get Federal Business Despite Abuses
Defying a Presidential order and requests by its own investigators, the Agriculture Department continues to give billions of dollars of business to politically powerful agricultural companies that have been caught rigging bids, fixing prices and defrauding Government programs.
Repeatedly in the last decade, the Agriculture Department's Inspector General, the internal watchdog official responsible for investigating corruption and abuse within the department, has urged top department officials to bar these businesses from participating in Government programs or, at the very least, to impose stiff fines on them, according to interviews and thousands of pages of internal documents obtained under the Freedom of Information Act.


MOTOROLA INC. (N)
Motorola Inc. said yesterday that expanding sales, especially in Asia, and higher profit margins helped double quarterly earnings from a year earlier.
Sales rose nearly 30 percent.
The earnings, which were nearly 20 percent higher than the mean projection by Wall Street analysts, were announced after the close of trading today on the New York Stock Exchange.


No Headline
"You'd think that in our time the pilgrimage would have faded away. But pilgrimages are definitely growing. They seem to fulfill a need of the soul. " -- THE REV.
MICHEL DE ROTON, rector of the sanctuary at Lourdes.  [ A1:3. ]


Indian Heritage vs. Adoptive Parents
Four years ago, Leland and Karla Swenson adopted a day-old baby boy and brought him to their dairy farm in Idaho to rear him in the rural life they had known.
They named him Casey, and he is their only child.
The boy's natural mother is white, and she gave up parental rights in the adoption proceeding.
His natural father, a full-blood Oglala Sioux Indian, has never seen the boy or sought custody.
But his tribe, acting on a 1978 law intended to protect Indian families, wants the boy adopted by his Indian relatives and reared on the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota.


Altron Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Erich Leinsdorf Tribute
A memorial tribute to the conductor Erich Leinsdorf is to be held on Thursday at 5 P.M. at the Society for Ethical Culture, 2 West 64th Street, Manhattan.
The pianist Emanuel Ax and members of the Boston Symphony Chamber Players and the New York Philharmonic are to play works by Mozart, Gluck, Brahms and Schubert.
Mr.
Leinsdorf died on Sept. 11 at the age of 81.


What Golda Meir Said About Palestinians; Two Handshakes
To the Editor:
To comment on the handshakes between Shimon Peres and Yasir Arafat, and between Yitzhak Rabin and Mr.
Arafat, here are the words about a handshake of Martha Graham, published in 1991 in her autobiographical volume, "Blood Memory":


Media General Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Northrim Bank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Northrim Bank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; 'I'm a Very Mental Player'
WHEN he crashed his red Mercedes-Benz into a tree at high speed, he was out of the Phillies' lineup for nine weeks with broken ribs, a broken cheekbone and a broken collarbone.
He was investigated by the commissioner's office for high-stakes poker games.
He calls everybody "dude," and when he's playing baseball, he splatters tobacco juice wherever he goes.
He's Lenny Dykstra, a throwback but not a thinker. Or so most people think.


The Prodigal Returns in Greece
Few politicians have had more lives than Andreas Papandreou, the once and future Prime Minister of Greece.
Europeans remember his previous term from 1981 to 1989, when his free spending dismayed central bankers and brought Greece close to insolvency.
Americans remember him as a former U.S. citizen and an academic economist who later baited Washington.
Yet confounding odds, age, ill health and charges of corruption, Mr.
Papandreou trounced his conservative rival, Constantine Mitsotakis, in Sunday's election.
His comeback owed much to his opponent's austerity measures and to a split in the ruling New Democracy Party.
Even so, Mr.
Papandreou's victory is a remarkable personal feat -- especially since eight million voters were aware that their huge national debt was the legacy of his profligate brand of Socialism.


Big Agriculture Provides a Study In Raw Power
Why are giant agricultural corporations treated so gently by their Federal regulators?
Some critics blame the close ties between senior Federal officials and the corporations they regulate, and the "revolving door" by which former Government appointees take up lucrative corporate positions.


Corrections
An article in The Metro Section yesterday about the Segalla Country Club in Amenia, N.Y., which was built by a local businessman after he was rejected by a private club, misstated the greens fee at Segalla.
It is $18 a person on weekdays and $24 on weekends, plus a $22 fee for a golf cart for two.


Computer Data Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Simon Show Is Postponed
The Paul Simon concert scheduled for tonight at the Paramount, 33d Street at Seventh Avenue, has been postponed until Tuesday, Nov. 2, at 8 P.M.
Mr.
Simon, who was to perform with the South African a cappella group Ladysmith Black Mambazo and his former partner, Art Garfunkel, is ill, according to Onna Harter, a spokeswoman for Madison Square Garden.
Tickets for tonight's performance will be honored on Nov. 2, or may be returned before Oct. 24 where they were purchased.


Andrew Caffrey, 73, Federal District Judge
Andrew A. Caffrey, a former chief judge of Federal District Court in Boston, died Wednesday in West Palm Beach, Fla., where he was attending a judicial conference.
Judge Caffrey, who lived in Andover, Mass., was 73.
The cause was a heart attack, a spokesman for the family said.


Ozone Hole, Biosphere and the Air Around Us; Ecosystem Lessons
To the Editor:
"Biospherics" (editorial, Sept. 29) states that the world is "far more interested in the human drama than in anything learned" in Biosphere 2.
That does not have the ring of scientific conclusion, but the sense of a self-fulfilling belief.


Accounts
*
Sherwin-Williams Co., Cleveland, to Partners &amp; Shevack, New York, to handle its Dutch Boy Paints brand, previously at Griswold Inc., Cleveland.
Billings were estimated at $8 million.


Executive Changes
BLACK &amp; DECKER CORP., Towson, Md., named Gary T. DiCamillo president for power tools and accessories.
He is also a group vice president of the corporation.
CYTOGEN CORP., Princeton, N.J., a biopharmaceuticals company, appointed T. Jerome Madison vice president for finance and chief financial officer.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic  Avery Fisher Hall
"Postcards From the East" Stagebill calls the current program of the New York Philharmonic aptly enough, although two of the four works amount to full-blown epistles.
In any case, there is no mistaking the intended centerpiece: the Tchaikovsky Violin Concerto, with the 12-year-old Sarah Chang as soloist.


Delrina Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


I.B.M. Puts More Power in PS/1's
THE I.B.M.
PC Company has once again redesigned its PS/1 family of personal computers for home and small-business users.
Although they are intended to be used in the living room or in the den, these new machines, introduced last week, have all the power and most of the features of mainstream business computers.
The new PS/1's are now set to go head to head with the Compaq Computer Corporation's new Pressario computers, which are also aimed at the home market.
But I.B.M. has gone so far in boosting the power of its PS/ 1's that many customers may be confused as to how they differ from higher-end models, including I.B.M.'s PS/ 2 and Value Point machines.


Kohl Faces Rising Storm on Choice for Presidency
Chancellor Helmut Kohl is facing the prospect of a major political defeat as criticism of his hand-picked candidate for President spreads.
The candidate, Steffen Heitmann, Minister of Justice in the eastern state of Saxony, was almost unknown when Mr.
Kohl nominated him in August.
Since then, he has made a series of remarks that have been criticized as insensitive to women, Jews, and foreigners living in Germany.


Clock Debacle Will Be Reviewed
The National Football League will review the series of events at the end of the Jets-Raiders game on Sunday, in which the game clock froze with 32 seconds to play as Los Angeles moved to the Jets' 1-yard line to set up its game-winning touchdown with 4 seconds left.
But there isn't any action the league can take that will reverse the outcome of the 24-20 loss by the Jets.
Greg Aiello, N.F.L. director of communications, said the league was talking with the game officials and the stadium clock operator, who is not a part of the officiating crew, to determine what happened.
Aiello said Jerry Seeman, the director of officiating, would determine in the next two days whether the officials erred in any way.
Seeman was in Buffalo yesterday and wouldn't be able to see film of the events until Tuesday.


Keene Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Washington Opera Cancels 2 Productions
The Washington Opera has canceled the first two productions of its season, Donizetti's "Anna Bolena" and Eugen d'Albert's "Tiefland," because of a wage dispute with the musicians of the Kennedy Center Opera House Orchestra.
Martin Feinstein, the company's general director, said yesterday that the company's decision could not be reversed because cast members for "Anna Bolena," which was to open on Nov. 6, were no longer available, and because the company, unsure that there would be a contract by the start of the season, had not built sets for "Tiefland," which was to open on Nov. 13.


Jackson Plan To Stem Tide Of Violence
Warning that a "rage of violence" was overwhelming inner-city schools in New York and other cities across the country, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson yesterday proposed mobilizing the parents of students in a new, church-based program to stop it.
"We're losing our children in school systems all around the country," Mr.
Jackson said at a news conference at the Canaan Baptist Church at 132 West 116th Street in Harlem.


Tough Talk by Candidates As the Parade Passes By
Rudolph W. Giuliani and Mayor David N. Dinkins moved the New York City mayoral campaign into its final three weeks yesterday with oratory as sharp and blustery as the winds whistling around them on Fifth Avenue in the Columbus Day parade that traditionally marks the electoral homestretch.
Keeping up his offensive, Mr.
Giuliani accused the Mayor of putative offenses past and present, starting with Mr.
Dinkins's visit in the 1989 campaign to a group of inmates on Rikers Island instead of a police officer's funeral.
He assailed the administration's announcement -- which City Hall later called a misunderstanding -- that a car-towing program in Washington Heights would be suspended after a police officer's slaying, and he denounced the city's processing of Louis H. Farrakhan's application to use Yankee Stadium for a rally three days before the election.


Greek Victor Now Facing Tough Task
With Andreas Papandreou back in power in Greece, borne by a remarkable political resurrection, the question is whether the Socialist leader, onetime firebrand and perennial master of surprise will go back to his old quixotic ways.
Mr.
Papandreou's Pan-Hellenic Socialist Movement has emerged with a solid majority of 170 seats in the 300-member Parliament after Sunday's national election.


Review/Rap; Tales of Pot Smoke and Gun Smoke
The Los Angeles rap group Cypress Hill proudly unveiled a prop during its set on Wednesday night at Roseland.
A pair of fingers, thick as tree trunks, held a glowing, smoking, four-foot joint; hanging above, on a wall, was an enlarged marijuana leaf.
With songs like "I Wanna Get High" (including the line, "Tell Bill Clinton to go inhale") and "Hits From the Bong," Cypress Hill has made itself a virtual spokesgroup for the pleasures of marijuana.
Before the rappers performed, a representative of the National Organization for the Reform of Marijuana Laws addressed the audience.
Those who thought marijuana promoted introspection and whimsy could find those qualities in Cypress Hill's music, with its rotund midtempo bass lines, lightly abrasive sound effects and the nasal, singsong vocals of its main rapper, B-Real (Louis Freese).
But the lyrics tell another story; when Cypress Hill isn't toking up, it's talking about gunplay, with blithe choruses like "Cock the hammer, it's time for action."


CHRONICLE
GENE SHALIT does not count himself among the world's great billiards players, but he is lending his name to a tournament this evening for a good cause: to help find a cure for multiple sclerosis.
The occasion, "The First Annual Gene Shalit Pro-Celebrity Billiards Classic for MS," at the Ramada Hotel on Seventh Avenue, will be the curtain raiser for the United States Open Pocket Billiards Championship this week.


Fedders Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


By Design; Jewels on the Dark Side
In a season when black is the color of fashion and jewelry is being underplayed, the most appropriate jewels to wear are black.
Black jet beads add a subtle glow to velvet, chiffon or lace for dress-up evenings.
There are Victorian-style chokers to wear with romantic blouses, long flapper-style beads to go with sexy minidresses, and stick pins and brooches for dandy jackets.
"As far as jet necklaces go, the most popular are very short or very long," said Carolee Friedlander, who designs under the Carolee label.
At Saks Fifth Avenue, 60-inch strand is $80; a six-strand choker, $125.


Into the Volcano
Dante, the robot volcano explorer thwarted at the edge of success earlier this year, will try to tackle another mountain of fire next summer, say its builders at Carnegie-Mellon University in Pittsburgh.
The team of robotics experts, led by Dr.
William L. Whittaker, is redesigning the eight-legged, spidery-walking robot to descend into volatile Mount Spurr in Alaska next June and explore the gaseous, rock-strewn crater floor.


Columbus Day Markets Quiet
Banks were closed yesterday for Columbus Day, as was the market for Treasury securities.
The regular weekly Treasury auction of three- and six-month bills, normally held on Mondays, will be held today.
The stock market remained open yesterday, with the New York and American stock exchanges observing their regular hours.
The futures and options markets were also open, although some trading ended early on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, the Chicago Board of Trade and the Chicago Board Options Exchange.


New Armstrong Pact
Chicago Bulls point guard B. J. ARMSTRONG, who is earning $620,000 in the final season of his contract, is on the verge of signing a new five-year pact worth an estimated $13 million.
Bulls General Manager JERRY KRAUSE said that the two sides were "very, very close" to a deal that would be a substantial increase in pay, The Chicago Tribune reported yesterday.


Alcoa
Alcoa, like other aluminum companies, has suffered from a severe slump recently because of oversupply, lower shipments and depressed prices.
On Friday, Alcoa reported lower-than-expected third-quarter earnings.
Yesterday, Merrill Lynch cut its investment rating, and Alcoa shares fell.


American Pacific Bank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hoechst Bid Lifts Stocks Of Generics
Generic drug stocks jumped yesterday as traders scrambled to pick the next takeover possibility after the Hoechst Celanese Corporation's surprising $546 million bid for a 51 percent stake in Copley Pharmaceutical Inc., a small generic drug maker.
Stock prices of the generics have been rising all year, and they had been higher than now when Clinton Administration planners said that low-priced generic drugs would be favored as a Medicare drug benefit in the President's health care proposals.


Bestop Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Deal Fits Phone Company's Big Plan
Bell Atlantic's planned $1 billion entry into the Mexican wireless telephone market complements the company's technology strategy and could be the forerunner of a North American and perhaps even a pan-American wireless telephone network led by the regional Bell holding company, analysts said yesterday.
Bell Atlantic said that the Mexican venture was part of an increasingly ambitious wireless and advanced-technology program that includes the personal communications services recently authorized in the United States.
But the company said also that it was actively pursuing methods for using cable television networks for two-way communications and standard telephone lines for carrying video programming.


Plant to Close, Leaving Workers Seeking Jobs
From guitar strings to jumbo jets to smart buildings, Hudson International Conductors helped wire the 20th century.
For almost 90 years, the factory on the banks of the Hudson River here has churned out wire for successive waves of technology.
Now Hudson is keeping up with a new trend: the decline of manufacturing in the Northeast.


An Old Idea About Genius Wins New Scientific Support
AS long as there have been poets to pierce the darkness with their diamond songs, and painters to capture rays of sun shattering on cool cathedral stone, and artists of all persuasions to consort with the gods and articulate the union, there have been social critics to notice that an awful lot of these creative people are mentally unsound.
"Why is it," Aristotle asked in the fourth century B.C., "that all men who are outstanding in philosophy, poetry or the arts are melancholic?" Three hundred years ago, the English poet John Dryden wrote,
Great wits are sure to madness near allied;


Devils Send 3 to Minors
The Devils reduced their roster to 24 players yesterday by assigning SCOTT PELLERIN, BEN HANKINSON and BRIAN ROLSTON to their top minor league affiliate, Albany of the American Hockey League.
None of the three played in any the first three games, all victories, for the Devils, who will be hosts to the Winnipeg Jets tonight with 22 healthy players.
PETER SIDORKIEWICZ and TOMMY ALBELIN are nursing injuries.


Bankers Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bell Atlantic Is Taking A Big Step Into Mexico
The Bell Atlantic Corporation announced today that it would spend as much as $1.04 billion for a minority stake in Mexico's second-largest cellular telephone company, Grupo Iusacell.
The deal, in which Bell Atlantic will initially buy a 23 percent share of the privately owned company for $520 million, would put Iusacell in a position to expand aggressively in what has been a booming Mexican market in cellular telephone services.


SouthTrust Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Zeroing In on Distance To Solar System's Edge
REFINED analysis of spacecraft data has led scientists to change their estimate of the distance to the edge of the solar system, a boundary known as the heliopause.
In a report in the current issue of the journal Science, scientists at the University of Iowa and the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif., estimated that the heliopause is somewhere from 116 to 177 times farther away from the Sun than is Earth.
The previous calculations, announced in May, gave a lower estimate of 82 to 130 times.


Allied Bankshares Inc. (Ga.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Simms and Reeves Forged First Links While on the Links
The first time Giants Coach Dan Reeves met quarterback Phil Simms was in Hawaii in January 1992.
Reeves was there coaching the American Football Conference in the Pro Bowl.
Simms was there enjoying the sun.
The two love to play golf and Simms, after declining two earlier offers from Reeves to hit the links, finally gave in.
For his hospitality, Reeves was rewarded by Simms beating the pants off him by six strokes.
You should watch who you invite to golf games if you want to win.
But the point is the chance meeting would prove beneficial to both men.
It began the realignment of Simms's career -- putting it back on what is a potential Hall of Fame course -- and it would give Reeves some insight into Simms that would help years later when he left the Denver Broncos and entered smack in the middle of a quarterback controversy when he became coach of the Giants.


Dhaniya Journal; Who Dreads Peace? These Gazans Have Reasons
In this remote Arab hamlet in the southeastern corner of the Gaza Strip, children played the other day with an Israeli flag, not Palestinian banners.
A Star of David was painted on a wall, not the Palestinian colors.
And news of a planned Israeli withdrawal brought only dread, not celebration.
"We're in danger," said one man, his face hidden by sunglasses as he stepped out of a sleek car with Israeli license plates.
He refused to give his name.


American Pacific Bank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sky Beauty Facing the Gender Trap
Is the Horse of the Year a filly?
It's happened four times in the half-century they've been anointing a Horse of the Year, most recently in 1986 when Lady's Secret won 10 races and even outran and outpolled the males.
If it happens this year, her name will be Sky Beauty, who won the Rare Perfume Stakes on Sunday and who has run second only once in 11 starts in her career.


To boutique: the act of large agencies establishing smaller subsidiaries in hopes of attracting clients.
BOUTIQUE is a noun, not a verb, but Madison Avenue, which prides itself on setting trends, is hoping to change that.
Some of the nation's largest advertising agencies are seeking to rewrite the dictionary by "boutiquing" themselves, establishing spinoffs and subsidiaries to compete against small agencies that are independently owned.
As agencies within agencies, the boutiques are meant to offer more personal service to clients who prefer that top-ranking executives handle their accounts.


Corporate Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 4


Sports of The Times; The Knicks Had Better Hurry Up and Win
AT this very moment, Michael Jeffrey Jordan, the Man without a Team, may be driving around Chicago in one of his dozen or so sleek cars, basketball beside him, scoping the schoolyards for a pickup game.
Maybe, less than a week into retirement, he's already itchy.
All pickup-game players can identify with this plausible lust: a desire for competition, an unbent hoop, a smooth playing surface, a place protected from the wind to keep shots from blowing off course.
And nets.
For a park player, a hoop with a net is like Paradise.


Fedders Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


CF Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bank of Granite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Americans Rush to Funds That Invest Abroad
It was partly the sight of construction on a four-lane highway in the lush paradise of Bali several years ago that aroused Arie Kurtzig's interest in investing his money overseas.
"They're basically doing the same things we did 20, 30, 40 years ago -- building apartments, roads, sewers, oil refineries and telephone systems," Mr.
Kurtzig said, comparing the economy of the Indonesian island, after a fashion, to that of the United States.
"That's what's going to be behind their massive economic growth over the next 20 years."


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about elections in Pakistan, discussing prominent figures who have defaulted on large loans, included an incorrect conversion of Pakistani rupees into dollars.
One million rupees is now worth about $33,600, not $250,000.


Paramount's Board Agrees To Talks With QVC on Bid
It was a $2.2 billion gap that refused to go away, and in the end, even the board of Paramount Communications Inc. could no longer ignore it.
After a remarkably brief 20-minute meeting, Paramount's board said yesterday that it would begin exploratory discussions with QVC Network Inc., the home shopping company that has presented it with an unwelcome $9.5 billion buyout offer.
That offer easily beats a competing friendly merger agreement with Viacom Inc., currently valued at $7.3 billion.


FCA International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


JWP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
ANNETTE SLOANE, who taught third grade at the Fork Lane School in Hicksville, L.I., more than three decades ago, always suspected that her favorite pupil, BILLY JOEL, would make good someday.
On Saturday evening, Mrs.
Sloane went to hear Mr.
Joel perform at Madison Square Garden and went backstage to see the singer, 44, who dedicated a song to her in the concert.


Critic's Notebook; France's German Renaissance
Better late than never, Paris has discovered German music.
This season, the city's musical life is dominated by the stuff, more particularly by the works of Richard Wagner and Richard Strauss.
A century after France fought fiercely against an onslaught of German musical culture, it is celebrating two of the most self-consciously German of all composers.
One has to wonder if a similar slide into historical irrelevance awaits the current battle against American film, the contemporary art now perceived as the greatest threat to French cultural identity.


JWP's Bankruptcy Plan Will Put the Creditors in Control
After a year of negotiating a financial restructuring with its creditors, JWP Inc. said yesterday that it planned to file a prepackaged plan for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
Under a prepackaged bankruptcy, lenders agree in advance to the terms of debt restructuring and capitalization plans, allowing the company to complete the proceeding sooner than would otherwise be possible.
JWP said it would file the bankruptcy proceeding around the end of the year.
New Debt and Equity
Under the terms of JWP's prepackaged plan, creditors will gain control of the company; current holders of JWP's subordinated debt, common and preferred stock and warrants will not receive any equity or debt interest in the revamped company.


U.S. Official in Plea to Pension Funds
At a time when institutional investors have pressured American corporations to lay off thousands of workers, Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich is seeking to persuade these powerful investors to soften their stance.
Mr.
Reich, who brought his campaign to a New York gathering last week of managers of the nation's biggest pension funds, believes that investors should begin to look beyond numbers and add nonfinancial criteria to decide which stocks to buy.


Showdown: The Populist Vs. the Fed
The champions of two very different American schools of thought will do battle this week when Henry B. Gonzalez, a torchbearer of Texas populism, enters the ring against Alan Greenspan, guardian of central bank independence.
After months of planning, Mr.
Gonzalez, the 77-year-old chairman of the House Banking Committee, has begun his most vigorous offensive ever to inject more democracy and accountability into the Federal Reserve, which has been insulated from political pressures for six decades.
Rare Hearing
He has planned a series of hearings to make the central bankers feel maximum heat: Not only has he called Mr.
Greenspan, the Fed chairman, to testify on Wednesday, but he has called all 12 members of the Fed's main policy-making committee to a rare mass hearing on Oct. 19.


Plasti-Line Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Client-Server Software From Digital
To capitalize on the booming market for client-server computing networks, the Digital Equipment Corporation plans to introduce on Tuesday 150 new products and services and a new pricing strategy.
Client-server refers to networks of personal computers linked together by powerful computers known as servers, which store and distribute the data around the network.


No Comeback Required In Bills' Rout of Oilers
The Buffalo Bills may have a bruised psyche over losing three straight Super Bowls, but you wonder if it is worse for the Houston Oilers.
The Oilers are in a rather fragile state of mind and are playing like this season could be a total collapse for a team quite sure it was Super Bowl-bound.
With two weeks to prepare for this game because of a bye and with an approach in practices that Houston Coach Jack Pardee said was like preparing for a Super Bowl, the Oilers fell absolutely flat tonight.
Buffalo romped, 35-7, in Rich Stadium.


Business Digest
Companies
Bell Atlantic will spend up to $1.04 billion for a minority stake in Mexico's second-largest cellular telephone company.
It plans to turn Iusacell into a broad telecommunications company that challenges Telefonos de Mexico.  [ Page D1. ]  Bell Atlantic's Mexican venture could be the forerunner of a continent-wide network.  [ D5. ]


Southern National reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mitchell Listens to Wife And Earns Starting Job
Scott Mitchell spent Saturday night in Cleveland Clinic with viral conjunctivitis, an infection of his left eye.
He telephoned his wife, Kim, and said he did not think he could play the next day.
"She told me I had to play," Mitchell said.
"She said somehow I would get my first chance, and I had to be ready when it came."


Surprise Discovery About 'Split Genes' Wins Nobel Prize
FOR 15 years, Dr.
Phillip A. Sharp's secretary kept a bottle of champagne refrigerated and ready for the day her boss at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology won a Nobel Prize.
Yesterday, Dr.
Sharp and his secretary, Margarita Siafaca, popped the cork and drank the bottle of Moet &amp; Chandon after he and Dr.
Richard J. Roberts of New England Biolabs of Beverly, Mass., were awarded the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine by the Karolinska Institute in Stockholm.


Bush Industries Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 2


In the Temporal Lobes, Seizures and Creativity
APART from mood disorders, other disturbances of the brain have been associated with artistic creation, in particular temporal lobe epilepsy.
In this disease, the temporal lobes on the sides of the brain, where memory and feelings reside, are intermittently seized by chaotic storms of electrical hyperactivity.
Although the seizures may be undetectable to observers, they can prompt symptoms like hallucinations, powerful religious sensations, fury, fear, joy and -- a blessing for those in the arts -- an unquenchable desire to write or draw, a desire that persists even after the seizure is over.
Seizures are different physiological events from episodes of mania or depression, but they can exert on a artists a similar sense of grandeur and mastery.
Thom Jones, whose recent collection of extraordinarily original and incantatory short stories, "The Pugilist at Rest" (Little, Brown, 1993), is a finalist for the National Book Award, said his temporal lobe epilepsy, which he traces to a brain injury suffered while boxing, profoundly defines his personality and his work.


BOY, 15, ARRESTED IN FAMILY SLAYING
A 15-year-old boy was arrested on Sunday and charged with the fatal shootings on Saturday of his father, mother and 11-year-old sister in this peaceful community of 4,000 people.
The teen-ager, whose name was not made public because he is a minor, will be arraigned on Tuesday in Wareham Fourth District Court.
A hearing will be held later to determine whether the boy will be tried as an adult.
The boy, who left the local high school last year, has been attending a private school for trouble youths.


Woman Is Attacked On Street in Harlem
A 35-year-old woman suffered broken ribs and kidney damage yesterday after she was beaten by a group of teen-age girls on a street in upper Manhattan in what the police said was a possible bias incident.
The assault took place in front of 2160 Fifth Avenue near 132d Street in Harlem at 6 P.M. when the woman, who is white, was confronted by three or four black teen-age girls, who began pummeling her, said a police spokeswoman, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann.


Publisher of 'The Satanic Verses' in Norway Is Shot


Cabrera's Heroics Have a Catch
The legend of Frankie Cabrera did not grow today.
It nearly did.
This time, when Cabrera did his job, Fulton County Stadium was filled with noise again.
But soon after his moment, unlike the night of his professional life last October, there was no noise.
There was no champagne-splattered celebration in the clubhouse of the Atlanta Braves.
Cabrera and his teammates were suddenly left with disappearing hopes for a third consecutive National League pennant, one loss from the end of their season.


Cuomo Move Could Block An Execution
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo insisted today that Oklahoma must return a death-row inmate to New York to serve a 20-year-to-life sentence for murder before the inmate, who prefers death to life in prison, can be executed for another murder in Oklahoma.
The inmate, Thomas Grasso, who pleaded guilty to robbing and strangling two elderly people -- a woman in north Tulsa and a man on Staten Island -- had been scheduled to die by lethal injection in Oklahoma in eight days, on Oct. 19.


Piemonte Foods Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Juror Is Replaced in Riot Beating Case
After days of evident bickering on the jury, a judge today removed and replaced one of the jurors in the trial of two black men accused of beating a white truck driver and ordered that deliberations start over again.
Responding to an emotional note from the jury forewoman saying the juror "cannot comprehend anything that we've been trying to accomplish," the judge, John Ouderkirk of Superior Court, dismissed the juror for "failing to deliberate as the law defines it."


Stewart's Time of Year Is Right Here and Now
Dave Stewart and his renowned glare will be back Tuesday night, trying to usher the Blue Jays to the World Series.
With his Toronto baseball cap tugged down to his brow, sometimes hitters cannot avoid Stewart's intimidating glare.
It seems almost as instrumental as his forkball.
There was no glare and no Stewart today as the Blue Jays practiced at Comiskey Park in preparation for Game 6 of the American League Championship Series against the White Sox.
Instead, there was care in Stewart's eyes while he remained in Toronto to honor a commitment he made six weeks ago to assist in feeding hundreds of homeless people on Canada's Thanksgiving Day.


Hotel Sale May Signal End of Japan's Patience
At the peak of Japan's property-buying binge a few years ago, the little-known Azabu Building Company paid outrageous prices for real estate around the globe.
Now, in a potent symbol of the severity of the financial hangover afflicting Japan's property and banking industries, Azabu's main lender has said it will auction one of the company's plum properties on Hawaii and accept what will likely be a huge loss.
The Mitsui Trust and Banking Company, which poured billions of dollars into ill-conceived property loans during the 1980's, said it had filed legal papers in preparation for the auction of the Waikiki Hyatt Regency.
The bank seized the hotel after Azabu was unable to maintain its payments on a crushing debt burden said to total about $7.15 billion, a third of which is reportedly owed to Mitsui Trust.


INSIDE
Nobel Prize for 'Split Genes'
The Nobel Prize was awarded to two researchers who showed that genes could be composed of separate segments.
Science Times, page C3.
Accord's Unexpected Hurdle
Hispanic officials debating the trade pact are torn between the President and unions and between Mexican- and Cuban-Americans.
Page A18.
Quintessential Sam Nunn
The debate over the role of American troops has given the senior Senator from Georgia his kind of moment.
Washington at Work, page A19.
Riot Jury Must Start All Over
A Los Angeles judge replaced a juror on the panel deliberating the fate of two black men charged in the beating of a white trucker.
Page A16.
Phillies Get Playoff Edge
After losing a late lead, Philadelphia beat Atlanta on Lenny Dykstra's 10th-inning homer to move within a victory of a pennant.
Page B11.


Samuel Freilich, 91, Rabbi Who Helped Jews Escape Nazis
Rabbi Samuel Freilich, who helped organize an escape of Jewish men from the Nazis during a forced march to Auschwitz in 1945 and later established a network of schools for Jewish orphans in Hungary, died Thursday in Riverdale, the Bronx.
He was 91.
He had had a long illness, his family said.


American City Business Journals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Photo Control Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Relatives of Suspect Call Him a Hard-Working Family Man
Pedro Gil's family and friends say he is no murderer.
He is, they insist, just another hard-working member of a Dominican family that until recently ran a restaurant at the corner of 175th Street and Amsterdam Avenue, on the ground floor of the building where several of them live.
If Mr.
Gil threw the heavy bucket of spackling compound off the building's roof on Friday night, striking a police officer on the head and killing him, Mr.
Gil's sister-in-law said, it was not intended to seriously hurt anyone.


Corel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


First Charter reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Observer; Stuck on Ourselves
It looks as if Columbus may survive after all.
Last year his detractors seemed to have blackened his reputation so successfully that Columbus Day would ever after be celebrated only by moral vermin who revel in shame.
This year the day has come again, yet raises scarcely a peep of protest against honoring the Genoese navigator with parades and school holidays.
Such is the swiftness with which our modern crusades end up moldering on the shelf.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Canadiens Tie Bruins Gilbert Dionne hit a slap shot between goalie Jon Casey's pads at 5 minutes 53 seconds of the third period yesterday to lift Montreal to a 1-1 tie with the Bruins in Boston. (AP)


Miami Subs Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Ozone Hole, Biosphere and the Air Around Us
To the Editor:
"Just Whose Ozone Hole Is It, Anyway?" (letter, Sept. 29) questions the belief that chlorofluorocarbons are the cause of ozone depletion above Australia.
Indeed, for many people it will be hard to imagine that there is a causal relationship between the facts that 80 percent of CFC's are emitted in the Northern Hemisphere and that the ozone hole occurs in the Southern Hemisphere.
This relationship has, however, been proved.
For a conceptual understanding, it is sufficient to go through the following:


Review/Dance; Moving Into the Future Without Losing the Past
The Martha Graham Dance Company's second and final week at City Center started off with still another startling premiere in a repertory than can no longer add new works by its founder, who died in 1991.
The most radical experiment was to invite a choreographer from outside the fold like Twyla Tharp, whose "Demeter and Persephone" finally snapped into place on Sunday afternoon.
Ms.
Tharp, accelerating Graham movement in a collage with other idioms, has brought out a new virtuosity and range in the dancers.
They, in turn, bring the kind of dramatic projection that Ms.
Tharp does not find elsewhere, and this has possibly moved her to strike out in a new direction.
The underlying logic of her highly schematic retelling of the myth of Persephone has surfaced with gusto and clarity.
In the end, the collaborative venture has been a mutual success.


Miami Subs Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


The Waco Whitewash
Last spring, in explaining her fateful decision to allow an assault on the Branch Davidian compound near Waco, Tex., Attorney General Janet Reno gave several reasons.
Two were poignant and persuasive but, it is now clear, utterly without basis.
Ms.
Reno said then that children in the compound were being molested and that the F.B.I. team had become exhausted.
Now the Justice Department's long-awaited report reveals that Ms.
Reno misunderstood the molestation matter.
The report is silent and gives no support whatever to the agents' supposed exhaustion.


Park National Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Builders Square Conducts Review
Builders Square, the home improvement warehouse retail chain owned by the Kmart Corporation, said yesterday that it was conducting a review on its account, which has been at Ross Roy Communications in Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
Though billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated them at $15 million to $20 million.
Jeanne Janes, a Builders Square spokeswoman in San Antonio, confirmed Adweek's report of the review, but declined to discuss details beyond saying that Ross Roy would be a participant.
Adweek reported that other contenders might include J. Walter Thompson Detroit and Temerlain McClain in Dallas.


Comdial Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pinnacle Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article in Your Money on Oct. 2 about the quarterly performance of mutual funds misstated the average return on taxable bond funds in the second quarter of this year.
It was 2.6 percent (2.1 percent was the average return posted in the third quarter).


Computer Data Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Advance Made In Seeking Heavy Elements
A TEAM of Russian and American physicists has created two new forms of an exotic man-made element, and their achievement has revived a longstanding scientific dream -- the possibility of founding a family of bizarre "superheavy" elements, far heavier than any seen in nature or made in a laboratory.
Although this arcane field of research is a direct descendant of the Manhattan Project, which created plutonium fuel for atomic bombs, it probably no longer has any practical applications, say the physicists involved.
The object is purely scientific: to explore the ultimate limits of elemental matter, beyond anything seen until now.


Kevorkian Is Facing 2d Trial
Dr.
Jack Kevorkian was ordered today for the second time to stand trial on a charge of violating Michigan's law against assisting in a suicide.
The case was unlike earlier ones, in which the retired pathologist has readily admitted assisting in suicides.
This time he refused to comment, and his principal lawyer, Geoffrey N. Fieger, argued, therefore, that the prosecution had no case against him.


Haitians Block Landing of U.S. Forces
United States troops and Canadian on a United Nations mission were blocked from landing here today by armed demonstrators apparently directed by Haitian security forces who oppose the return of the ousted President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Today's actions amounted to a direct challenge to the United Nations, which negotiated an agreement in July with Haiti's military leaders.
In return for ending an oil embargo against Haiti, the settlement called for the return of Father Aristide on Oct. 30 and the creation of a 1,300-member international force to separate the military from the police and to retrain them.


Barkley Ordered to Go Slow
Charles Barkley, the Phoenix Suns' All-Star forward who collapsed during a training camp wind sprint Saturday night, returned to the team today with strings attached.
He cannot overexert himself in any of the team's drills or scrimmages and will be monitored daily.
A battery of tests Sunday and early today exposed what the team physician, Dr.
Richard Emerson, called a "thickening of soft tissue and ligaments around the nerve canal" of Barkley's L-5 vertabrae.
Wear and tear had much to do with it.
Surgery has been ruled out for the time being, and the doctor has a recommendation for Barkley: lighten up.


SCIENTIST AT WORK: John H. Conway; At Home in the Elusive World of Mathematics
DR.
JOHN H. CONWAY sits down at his computer and gets ready to log on.
But before the computer allows him to begin work, it quickly spews out 10 randomly selected dates from the past and the future, dates like 3/15/ 2005 or 4/29/1803.
Dr.
Conway has to mentally calculate what day of the week each would be before his computer lets him open a file and get to work.
It is a game he has rigged up to play with himself.
"I think I'm the fastest person in the world at this," he says.
His record is 15.92 seconds to calculate all 10 days.
But, he modestly says, it is not that hard.
"It's the kind of thing autistic kids do."


Bush Industries Inc. reports earnings for 13wks to Oct 2


Senna Switches Teams
AYRTON SENNA got the deal he wanted yesterday, signing with the Williams-Renault Formula One team.
The Williams officials the Brazilian would team up with DAMON HILL next year.
The move was expected after ALAIN PROST retired shortly after winning his fourth world title this year.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
2.88
2.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.97
2.97
2.81
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.06
3.06
2.95
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.81
4.81
6.08
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.92
5.92
7.52
TELEPHONE BONDS
6.94
6.87
8.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.41
5.41
6.42
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Bankers Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Southern National reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Intel's Stock Drops Despite Surge in Profits
Shares in the Intel Corporation fell nearly 7 percent today despite the company's reporting that third-quarter earnings more than doubled.
Intel shares lost $4.75, closing at $65.50 in Nasdaq trading.
Although Intel's earnings essentially matched the consensus estimate of Wall Street analysts, investors have grown accustomed to seeing the company exceed estimates.
And in the context of disappointing earnings news last week from other semiconductor manufacturers, including Advanced Micro Devices Inc. and the National Semiconductor Corporation, investors elected to sell on today's news, analysts said.
Price Cutting Is Cited
The selloff was also prompted by Intel's decision to slash prices on two models of its 486 chip, a move that analysts expect will squeeze profit margins for the next quarter or two.
Not coincidentally, the 486 is a chip being cloned by Advanced Micro Devices.


Rising Dairy Prices Helped Bolster New York Farm Profits in '92
New York farms reported profits of $622.3 million in 1992, up by 15 percent from the year before, the State Agricultural Statistics Service said today.
In 1992 New York dairy farmers rebounded from a bad year, producing 4 percent more milk than the year before, and getting a higher price for it: 29 cents a quart, up from 27 cents a quart in 1991.


Collective Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Plasti-Line Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


BanPonce Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


FCA International reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


JWP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


CHRONICLE
Is this the final word on last weekend's Friars Club roast?
JACK L. GREEN, the dean of the New York Friars Club, a private club, issued a statement yesterday following the uproar caused by racial remarks made by the actor TED DANSON during a roast of his companion, WHOOPI GOLDBERG, held at the New York Hilton on Friday.
Mr.
Danson was criticized for some of his jokes and language and for wearing blackface.
Ms.
Goldberg herself defended him over the weekend.
In yesterday's statement, Mr.
Green said: "Although we are saddened that some people felt that remarks directed at Whoopi Goldberg were done in a seemingly racist manner, we stand by our roast format, which is legendary and has been used throughout the 89-year history of the Friars Club," Mr.
Green said.


Review/Theater: Sophistry; The Old College Days, Circa '91
In "Sophistry," a new play by Jonathan Marc Sherman at the Playwrights Horizons Studio, a popular tenured professor stands accused of sexual harassment by a male student.
Did Whitey McCoy, a homosexual and an alcoholic, force young Jack Kahn into bed late one night on Thanksgiving break, or was Jack an accomplice in his own carnal fate?
Mr.
Sherman lets the teacher and the student re-enact the incident from each of their clashing points of view, in a pair of scenes that should have a long future in acting classes (and are deftly performed here, by Austin Pendleton as Whitey and Anthony Rapp as Jack).
But no sooner does "Sophistry" start to resemble David Mamet's "Oleanna" than the university sweeps the case under the rug and the playwright does, too.
The audience never learns what happened that fateful night in Whitey's bedroom and, a few plot twists notwithstanding, soon stops caring.
At which point another play, inchoate but arresting, edges into view.


Politics in Province Hold a Mirror to Moscow
Like many deputies in the regional legislature, Oleg F. Anishchik was outraged by President Boris N. Yeltsin's order on Sept. 21 to suspend the national Parliament.
The 49-year-old chairman of the regional legislature joined his fellow legislators in condemning the order as a violation of the Constitution.
But now, after Mr.
Yeltsin has smashed his parliamentary opposition in a hail of gunfire, it is Mr.
Anishchik who is under political siege.


Starks And Mason Declare Peace
Anthony Mason went to John Starks's hotel room recently with an idea.
Both Knicks have been known to lose their tempers.
Both are trying to keep their cool on the court.
Mason suggested that whenever he is about to go berserk this season, Starks should calm him.
Mason said he would do the same for Starks.


Centura Banks Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Border Patrol Abuses Need Cleaning Up
To the Editor:
You report Oct. 1 that a United States border blockade between El Paso and Ciudad Juarez, Mexico, has enraged Mexicans, particulary workers who no longer pass between the two cities daily.
You quote El Paso's Border Patrol chief, Silvestre Reyes, attempting to defend the blockade.
Astonishingly, Mr.
Reyes states that after a rash of accusations of human rights violations committed by Border Patrol agents against immigrants and others, he wanted to find a way to rebuild community support for the Border Patrol.


Patterns
The Year of the Germans
The German who is credited with saving modern Paris couture, Karl Lagerfeld, may soon have some compatriots to help him liven up the scene.
There has been another German invasion of sorts during the ready-to-wear shows this season.


Florio and Dinkins: Striking Contrasts in Campaigns
The two Democrats took office on opposite banks of the Hudson in January of 1990, facing long-simmering problems of comparable scope and scant fiscal resources to solve them, yet their responses ended up being as different as their personalities.
Gov.
Jim Florio, having promised not to raise taxes, forced a $2.8 billion tax increase through a reluctant Legislature to balance the budget and allocate education aid.


Peggy Dennis Dies; Former Communist And Writer Was 84
Peggy Dennis, a Communist organizer and author, died on Sept. 25 at the Jewish Home for the Aged in San Francisco.
She was 84.
The cause was complications from several strokes, said her son, Eugene Dennis Vrana.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League  CLEVELAND INDIANS -- Named Buddy Bell infield coach, Luis Isaac bullpen coach, Charlie Manuel hitting instructor and Phil Regan pitching coach.


CF Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An entry in the listing of debt offerings in Business Day yesterday, under the headline "Treasury Auction Confined to Bill Market This Week," misstated the timing of the Treasury's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
It was scheduled for today, not yesterday.


High Court Tapes Open a Window on History in the Making
To the Editor:
As editor, with Stephanie Guitton, of the "May It Please the Court" tapes of Supreme Court arguments, I am pleased that "The Sound of Nine Justices Flapping" (editorial, Sept. 17) supports the public's right to hear these historic recordings.


Delay on Health Care Reflects Task's Complexity
President Clinton's delay in translating the broad goals of his health care policy into a concrete legislative proposal underscores again the daunting complexity of the entire enterprise.
The delay may work to Mr.
Clinton's advantage, giving him time to build political support for his proposals before giving his critics an opportunity to attack the details.
But members of Congress are clamoring for those details now, saying that without them they cannot get on with what already promises to be a very long process in getting the legislation enacted.


On My Mind; Front-Line Dispatch
Mayor David Dinkins tells New Yorkers that crime is going down in New York City.
That's real big news because that can only be true if the street sale and use of cocaine, heroin and other drugs were legalized while nobody was looking.
The war against drugs is not fashionable.
I know that.
Still I thought this little dispatch might interest the exhausted relatives of addicts, anybody who encounters a mugger-junkie on the street, or other members of the politically unfashionable.


Corporate Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 4


Park National Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Capitals A Perfect Cure for Rangers
Glenn Healy knew that falling asleep on the job would not be taken lightly by the man behind the Rangers' bench.
Still, it was tempting to snooze.
The game was less than 10 minutes old last night at Madison Square Garden, and the Rangers were already ahead by three goals.
The Washington Capitals, meanwhile, had one pitiful shot and had pretty much left Healy to twiddle his thumbs.


Pet Valu Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 11


Photo Control Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Piemonte Foods Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


For Jets, Day After Is Another Headache
Blue -- make that black-and-blue -- Monday struck the Jets today.
It was difficult to diagnose which was worse: Their physical state or their psychic makeup in the wake of a second straight Sunday in which they squandered a big lead.


Q&amp;A
Street Trees
Q. How do street trees survive with only foot-square holes in the pavement?


Deal for Paper In Connecticut
The Journal Register Company said yesterday that it had agreed to buy The Register Citizen, a Torrington, Conn., newspaper with a circulation of more than 16,600, from the Eagle Publishing Group.
Terms of the sale were not disclosed.
The acquisition of The Register Citizen will bring the number of daily newspapers owned by Journal Register to 15, with a combined daily circulation of close to 550,000.
Journal Register is based in Trenton.


Books of The Times; Beyond Generic in Junk-Food Land
The Brothers  By Frederick Barthelme 262 pages. Viking. $21.
It's easy to describe a typical novel or short story by Frederick Barthelme: the hero is a middle-aged fellow, in the middle of a middle-age crisis; the setting is Florida or Texas or some other place along the Gulf, one of those outposts of the New South where people eat junk food, watch a lot of television and take long drives for fun; the subject is boredom or spiritual malaise, the meaninglessness of contemporary life.
Invariably, the dialogue in Mr.
Barthelme's books snaps and crackles and pops; invariably, his characters compare their lives to the lives they've seen on television.


First Charter reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Comdial Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Will Russian Church Bury Lenin?
While the Government deals with the aftermath of last week's crisis, the Russian Orthodox Church is wrestling with the doctrinal headache of how to bury Lenin, according to the Interfax news agency.
Lenin's remains have lain in Red Square for 69 years.
Last week, President Boris N. Yeltsin ordered that the guard post at the tomb be closed.


Collective Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


ERLY Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Mr. Farrakhan's Stadium Rally
Louis Farrakhan will never win a prize for subtlety.
With his unerring instinct for promoting disruption, division -- and himself -- the leader of the Nation of Islam decided to hold a rally in Yankee Stadium three days before New York City's mayoral election.
New York does not need his racism and anti-Semitism at any time, much less on the eve of the already racially tense contest between Mayor David Dinkins and Rudolph Giuliani.
But to deny him the right to rent the stadium, as Mr.
Giuliani proposes, would be to deny him his First Amendment rights to free speech.
It's unlikely that a former United States Attorney really understands so little about the United States Constitution he was sworn to uphold.
More probably, Mr.
Giuliani understands the First Amendment only too well and has chosen to make political points by pretending otherwise.


Caldwell Partners reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


In Riverside Park, a Monument to a First Lady


Metro Commerce Bank N.A. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American City Business Journals Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pilgrims Crowding Europe's Catholic Shrines
At night, the approaches to the shrine sparkle in the light of a sea of candles, and "Hail Mary" rings out in nine different languages.
To see the processions here, some 20,000 people on an average day, chanting, praying, carrying the sick and infirm with them, is to see a Europe that defies the assumptions and evidence of fading religious belief.


SUSPECT ARRESTED IN BUCKET SLAYING OF POLICE OFFICER
A 22-year-old man who returned voluntarily from the Dominican Republic at the behest of his family and the police was arrested last night in the slaying of a housing police officer in Washington Heights last week after a confrontation between residents and authorities over the towing of illegally parked cars.
The arrest in the highly charged case came as community leaders and elected officials, including the mayoral candidates, debated the weekly towing operation that preceded the killing and has long inflamed tensions between authorities and residents of the largely Hispanic area.


Market Place; Icahn balks as junk bond investors demand a premium.
CARL C. ICAHN does not want to pay the kinds of interest rates that the junk bond market now demands from him.
As a result, he is going to have less money to invest than he had anticipated.
Mr.
Icahn, the former chairman of Trans World Airlines who has made millions through well-timed investments in junk bonds, said yesterday that his main corporate vehicle, ACF Industries, was withdrawing plans to sell $800 million in new bonds.


Image Maker For Absolut Loses Brand
Michel Roux, who was instrumental in transforming Absolut vodka from an obscure, expensive import into one of the most phenomenal successes in American consumer product marketing, lost the rights to the brand yesterday when its Swedish distiller switched distributors.
Vin &amp; Sprit A. B., the Swedish Wine and Spirits Corporation, said it would move Absolut from Carillon Importers Ltd. of Teaneck, N.J., where Mr.
Roux is the president and chief executive, to the Seagram Spirits and Wine Group of the Seagram Company in New York.


CPC International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Barnett Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In the Calm of the Clubhouse, Sox Savor a Season
Ozzie Guillen smoked a cigar and spoke proudly about what the White Sox had accomplished.
Frank Thomas smiled when he discussed the future.
Four other White Sox sat near a bucket of beer bottles, reminiscing on the last seven months.
Their season was over, but they managed to smile occasionally.
Although the White Sox lost, 6-3, to the Blue Jays in Game 6 and lost their chance to claim the American League Championship Series, they refused to criticize themselves or groan about the outcome.
What a surprise.
There were no derogatory remarks about the manager or about the team playing one man short.
None of that on the final night of the season at Comiskey Park.


WD-40 Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


L.A. Gear
Shares of L.A.
Gear Inc. rose sharply in active trading yesterday, one day after the sneaker maker reported a third-quarter profit of 23 cents a share.
It was the company's first profit after 11 quarters of losses, and it surprised analysts.
The company attributed the profit in part to the success of its L.A.
Lights brand of children's shoes.


3 Brokerage Firms Report Profit Gains
Interest rates are low, stock prices are high, individuals have more money to invest and corporations are issuing record amounts of new securities.
It all adds up to higher earnings for Merrill Lynch &amp; Company, which said yesterday that it earned a record $360 million in the third quarter, up 57 percent from the comparable period a year earlier.


A Ruling Allows Damages for Fear of High-Voltage Power Lines
Landowners whose property is seized for construction of high-voltage power lines can collect damages if the value of the rest of their property falls because of public fears about safety, New York State's highest court ruled unanimously yesterday.
The State Court of Appeals said owners seeking compensation did not need to present scientific proof that power lines pose a health risk.
But the judges said that "claimants must still establish some prevalent perception" that power lines were the reason their land was worth less.


Consolidated Papers Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Plans for Abortion Pill Stalled in U.S.
Six months after the French company that makes the abortion pill RU-486 agreed to license the drug to an American contraceptive-research group, the plans to bring RU-486 to market in the United States remain stalled.
Dr.
David A. Kessler, Commissioner of the Food and Drug Administration, announced in April that Roussel-Uclaf, the company that holds the patent to RU-486, would allow the Population Council, a nonprofit research group based in New York, to find an American manufacturer for the drug, conduct clinical tests and win Government approval to sell the drug in the United States.


Trion Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  U.S.
SEEKS NEW HAITI SANCTIONS  The United States acknowledged that an agreement to return Haiti's democratically elected president to power is seriously theatened and recommended that United Nations sanctions be reimposed.
A1  SOMALIA'S ECHO IN HAITI  News analysis: The events in Haiti after Washington limited its role in Somalia is an example of the global village of modern communications and the land mines it can create for an American President.
A1


Value-Free Examination Of the Long Goodbye
VERY few people ever see suicide notes.
Sometimes even next of kin do not want to see them and the police routinely withhold them from the press in deference to feelings of privacy, decency or perhaps deep unnamed and atavistic taboos.
But each year more than 30,000 Americans kill themselves, which is about 10,000 more than kill other people.
About 20 percent of these leave notes.
At the PPOW gallery at 532 Broadway in SoHo, Tracy Tynan and Erika Rothenberg, two artists, spent Wednesday hanging 17 messages left by suicides for their monthlong show.
They selected these from more than 100 that were made available by a source in the Los Angeles Police Department.
The artists will not say whether their acquisition was legal, but they have changed the names and rewritten the notes while trying to keep handwriting and stationery similar to the original.


Corrections
An entry in the listing of equity offerings in Business Day on Monday, under the headline "Equity Issues This Week," misstated the underwriter for a stock offering by Danka Business Systems P.L.C.
The underwriter is Robert W. Baird &amp; Company, not Prudential Securities.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday, about the possible American production of cars by the Honda Motor Company's Acura division, misstated the division's plans.
The Acura division is considering assembling cars at existing Honda plants in the United States; it is not now considering building a new American assembly plant.


Death-Penalty Feud: 2 Governors, the Law and Their Beliefs
The Governor of Oklahoma today escalated his feud with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo over the fate of a death-row inmate, Thomas Grasso, charging that the New York Governor has placed his personal opposition to the death penalty above the law.
In a telephone conference call that he initiated with New York reporters, Gov.
David L. Walters said Mr.
Cuomo's refusal to allow Oklahoma to execute Mr.
Grasso as planned on Oct. 19 was "a bizarre demonstration that bureaucratic mumbo jumbo is more important than protecting our public."


Charge in Crash Delayed
The New York City Transit Authority said yesterday that it would put off formally charging the operator of a subway train involved in a crash last week because of a delay in testing the brakes on the train.
The authority plans to re-create the circumstances leading up to the accident last Thursday on the L line by running a train past a red signal to see if the emergency brakes are automatically engaged.


Wellfleet Communications Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SynOptics Communications Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Europeans Plan Early Pullout From Somalia
Despite appeals from American and United Nations officials, some key Western countries contributing troops to the peacekeeping force in Somalia are planning to withdraw them by early next year.
France, Belgium and Sweden are planning to withdraw by mid-January, Western diplomats said.


Medicis Pharmaceutical Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Ball State Loses Coach and Player
Ball State Coach DICK HUNSAKER resigned, and his star forward, STEVE PAYNE, was declared ineligible yesterday after the school said it had discovered National Collegiate Athletic Association rules violations.
Ball State officials did not blame Hunsaker, saying both sides decided it was best that he leave.
Ball State finished 26-8 last season and was co-champion of the Mid-American Conference.


At Least Jets Can't Waste Any Leads This (Bye) Week
Even before the Jets blew a big lead for the second straight week, Coach Bruce Coslet wondered the same thing that was on every fan's mind: Is the team coasting with a big lead?
That doubt cropped up in Coslet's mind in the wake of the loss to the Eagles 10 days ago, a game in which the Jets blew a 21-0 edge.
Then, last Sunday a 17-0 lead over the Raiders ended in a 24-20 loss.
The Raiders led the game for a total of only four seconds, but it was the final four.
And this is the Jets' team that brought in those seasoned Pro Bowl veterans -- especially on defense -- to teach it how to win.


Gibson (C.R.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Marion Capital Holdings Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Anne Thompson MacDonald, 96, Founder of Recording for the Blind
Anne Thompson MacDonald, the founder of Recording for the Blind, a nonprofit organization that has put more than 80,000 books on tapes for blind and learning-disabled students since 1948, died on Saturday at a nursing home in Huntington, L.I.
She was 96 and had lived in Manhattan.
She died in her sleep, said her daughter, Anne Thomas.


Roosevelt Financial Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


F. B. Withington, School Headmaster And Principal, 71
Frederic B. Withington, who retired in 1988 after 22 years as headmaster of the Quaker-affiliated Friends Academy in Locust Valley, L.I., died on Sept. 29 at his home in Brunswick, Me.
He was 71.
The cause of death was a malignant melanoma, the school said.


American Bancorp of Nevada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Widespread Police Cynicism Contributes Much to Corruption
To the Editor:
During a preview of the Mollen Commission hearings on police corruption, former New York City Police Lieut.
David Durk said that the devastating effects of cynicism have to be addressed by the Police Department (Metro Matters, Sept. 27).
Mr.
Durk said that unless this critical problem is analyzed, the department will be neglecting the most important root cause of both corruption and poor performance by cops.
He implied that a variety of political considerations and agendas have contaminated every aspect of police work.


Bahr, on Wings of Eagles, To Aim at Giants Uprights
The Sunday before last, Matt Bahr had a funny feeling.
The Philadelphia Eagles were playing the Jets, and for Bahr, the Giants' kicker for three years until they waived him in preseason, this was his first return to Giants Stadium.
"When I ran out under the tunnel before the game," he said, "a fan yelled 'Traitor.' I don't know what that had to do with anything, except that the rivalry between the Eagles and the Giants is so intense and the guy probably didn't like the Eagles. I enjoyed playing for the Giants, but I'm enjoying the Eagles, too. I'm just trying to make a living."


Whitman Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Virginia Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Policing a Global Village
A clearer demonstration of the global village that modern communications have created, and the land-mines that await American Presidents as a result, would be difficult to imagine.
After more than a dozen American soldiers were killed in street-fighting in Somalia 10 days ago, President Clinton argued that it would be dangerous for the United States to pull out its troops at once, because doing so would only encourage "aggressors, thugs and terrorists" all over the world.


First Financial Corp. (Wisconsin) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Empire State Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


El Paso Natural Gas Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Caere Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Opposites in California Join to Fight Trade Pact
The opposition President Clinton faces in selling the North American Free Trade Agreement has a thousand voices, and many of them could be heard at a lunch-hour rally here a few days ago.
From the bandstand, Eddie Starr, a steelworker from Granite City, Ill., led the crowd of 300 in a ballad of the moment:


Clinton Pledges Open Fund-Raisers
The White House announced today that major Democratic Party fund-raising events attended by President Clinton would from now on be open to the press.
The move came after reporters were barred from a fund-raising dinner held last week by the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee and attended by Mr.
Clinton.
A flurry of press criticism ensued, suggesting that the White House was trying to avoid public images of Mr.
Clinton mingling with major financial contributors, given his populist and reformist appeals in the 1992 campaign.


Personal Health
AMERICANS love gimmicks, especially dietary gimmicks promising that they can achieve good health without the real or imagined sacrifices involved in substantially changing their eating habits.
For decades, this tendency to bypass reality has lined the pockets of entrepreneurs who have devised weight loss schemes that attract millions looking for slenderizing miracles.
Now, with cholesterol a prominent health concern, Americans are again eagerly adopting quick fixes that suggest they can lower their cholesterol and reduce their risk of premature cardiac death without giving up their Haagen-Dazs and Big Macs.


Liberty Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cherokee reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


International Jensen Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Review/Fashion; Clues for Spring: Fragile, Soft
Karl Lagerfeld covered a lot of ground in his collection for Chloe -- from classic Greece to punk territory.
At the end, it seemed that fashion was not just in a transition period.
He had pushed it over the top.
Almost all the clothes were fragile, wispy, ephemeral.
Ribbons of yarn were threaded through the models' hair, and the backdrops were painted to look like ancient stone to show where the story begins.
The classic Greek chiton appeared in cloudlike thin prints.


Business Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BELL ATLANTIC DEAL FOR 2 CABLE GIANTS PUT AT $33 BILLION
In what is shaping up as the largest corporate merger in history, the Bell Atlantic Corporation has agreed to buy both Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's largest cable operator, and its cable programming company, the Liberty Media Corporation, in an all-stock deal valued at more than $23 billion, three executives close to the negotiations said last night.
With the assumption of $10 billion in debt, the total value of the deal would be $33 billion.


Theater in Review
Gulliver  La Mama E.T.C  74A East Fourth Street East Village Through Sunday By Lonnie Carter; directed by George Ferencz; set by Mr.
Ferencz and Bryan Johnson; costumes by Sally J. Lesser; lighting by Howard Thies; sound by Genji Ito; stage manager, Tom Spontelli.
Presented by La Mama E.T.C. and Swift Productions.
WITH: Adrian Bailey, Lia Chang, Andre De Shields, Peter Flynn, Rinne Groff, Erik Passoja, Fleur Phillips and Regan Vann.


American Bancorp of Nevada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RUSSIANS TO ELECT ENTIRE PARLIAMENT
Moving to insure a clean sweep of Moscow politics, President Boris N. Yeltsin has decreed that the upper house of the new Parliament will be elected on Dec. 12, the same day that elections have been set for the lower house.
Mr.
Yeltsin signed the decree on Monday before leaving for Tokyo.
The action appeared to be intended to further weaken the power of existing regional authorities, many of whom publicly resisted Mr.
Yeltsin's suspension of the old Parliament, which led to the showdown that ended in Russian Army tanks firing on the Parliament building to put down an armed rebellion.


Hispanic-Oriented High School in Manhattan Is Put Off Amid a Bias Inquiry
The New York City Board of Education has quietly postponed the opening of a new high school intended to emphasize Hispanic culture and bilingual learning after the United States Department of Education began investigating a legal challenge that contended the school would be racially or ethnically segregated.
A Board of Education spokesman said yesterday that the opening of the school, known as the Leadership Secondary School, had been delayed until September 1994 because officials were unable to find a site as planned on the Lower East Side of Manhattan and because one of the school's main planners resigned during the summer, throwing plans into disarray.


From Top to Bottom, Oilers Are Club Chaos
The Houston Oilers returned to the scene of the crime Monday night at Rich Stadium and repeated a much worse offense.
Ridiculed and embarrassed in a playoff loss to Buffalo last season in which their lead was the biggest ever squandered in a National Football League game, the Oilers made it much simpler this time.
They simply blew the rematch all the way around.


Judge Voids Verdicts And Drops 2d Juror In Riot Assault Trial
The judge in the trial of two black men accused of beating a white truck driver during last year's riot removed a second juror, set aside two verdicts and ordered the newly constituted jury to "disregard all past deliberations and begin deliberating anew."
Judge John Ouderkirk of Superior Court said that the jury, in just a half day of deliberations this morning, had reached verdicts on two of the 12 counts it was considering but that the removal of the juror later in the day nullified the verdicts.


QMC Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lawsuit Aimed at Coleman
The family of Amanda Santos, the 2-year-old girl whose parents say was injured by an explosive thrown by outfielder Vince Coleman, will file a lawsuit Wednesday or Thursday in Los Angeles Superior Court.
The family's attorney, Darrell J. York, said today that the complaint would name both Coleman and outfielder Eric Davis, but likely would not include their respective teams at the time, the Mets and Dodgers.
The Mets have said Coleman will never again play for the team, and the Dodgers, in August, traded Davis to Detroit.


15-Year-Old Is Arraigned in Deaths of His Parents


So Far, the Phillies Defy Both Logic and the Braves
It's a good thing the Atlanta Braves and the Philadelphia Phillies got a breather from their National League Championship Series yesterday.
They needed it, if only to try to figure out the total upheaval of the norm that has occurred through the first five zany games of the series.
What the two teams know for sure is this: The Phillies, fresh off two victories in three games down South, returned from Atlanta to Veterans Stadium with a 3-2 lead.
They can win the pennant with a victory in Game 6 today (Atlanta's Greg Maddux goes against Tommy Greene) or Game 7 tomorrow night (Tom Glavine against Philadelphia's Terry Mulholland).


Mark Twain Bancshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rowan Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Empire State Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Senator Finds Strong Support On Health Care
Returning to the issue he brought to national prominence in 1991, Senator Harris Wofford today found strong and unexpected support among small-business men for the idea of requiring employers to pay health insurance premiums for their workers.
What the Senator heard as he flew across Pennsylvania today will surely encourage Clinton Administration health planners, who have faced sharp opposition from small business groups over the President's proposal for such a requirement.


ISRAEL SELLS ARMS TO CHINA, U.S. SAYS
Israel has sold advanced military technology to China for more than a decade and is moving to expand its cooperation with Beijing, says R. James Woolsey, the Director of Central Intelligence.
The C.I.A. assessment was provided in written responses to questions by the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee.
The committee made the assessment public last week as part of a report on recent hearings it conducted on "proliferation threats of the 1990's," a committee aide said on Monday.


Doctors Can't Override Dying Patients' Wishes; A Still-Valid Oath
To the Editor:
Dr.
Timothy E. Quill rightly criticizes Dr.
Jack Kevorkian for his role in sending 16 people suffering from depression and in some cases despair to their death.
A truly moral society should not condone or allow such actions.
Dr.
Quill then berates our legal system for contributing to the inadequate care of dying patients.


Nationwide Health Prop.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Spacelabs Medical (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


American List Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Business Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pentair Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Staff Builders (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Alcan Aluminium Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In Defense of Pipe Smokers
To The Living Section:  Although Neil Lewis's article on Marvin Shanken ("To Some Minds, a Cigar Is Never Just a Cigar," Sept. 8) provided a thoroughly delightful account of a "day in the life" of the cigar master, the writer's maligning of pipe smokers as "oddballs" certainly wounds deeply.


Perle Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


WESTINGHOUSE ELECTRIC CORP. (N)
The Westinghouse Electric Corporation said yesterday that weakness in its operating businesses led to a decline in revenues in the third quarter, but it said it was making progress in selling the assets of its failed finance subsidiary and paying off debt.
Debt was cut $500 million in the period and was at $5.9 billion at the end of the quarter, compared with $8.4 billion at the beginning of the year.
The company said asset sales had allowed it to pay back $765 million of revolving credit borrowings.


U.S. Transportation Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Culbro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Linear Technology Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Argonaut Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Digital Sound Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hong Kong Journal; Barbed Wire, Watchtowers and the Ruined Years
Without a map, it is not easy to find the detention camp where Nguyen Thanh Nhan, 21, has grown from a teen-ager into stateless adulthood.
In the shadow of Horse Saddle mountain, a narrow concrete road cuts through the scrub to the front gate of Whitehead Detention Center here.


Boddie-Noell Restaurant Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vicor Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Federal National Mortgage Association reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Now, P.S.A.T. Means Pressure: Call It Pre-Preliminary Test Anxiety
Norman Gross thinks his daughter, Katherine, a junior at Stuyvesant High in Manhattan, is not nervous about the P.S.A.T.'s Saturday.
"My daughter's very blase," the insurance executive said.
"She tends to test well."
The P.S.A.T., created as a warm-up for the S.A.T. in the spring, is not supposed to be a nervous test.
So what if the College Board has revised these tests for the first time in 20 years?
And so what, if beginning in the 1970's, the P.S.A.T. score determined whether you'd qualify for a National Merit Scholarship?
Certainly Katherine is not going to panic just because most her friends, looking for an edge, already took the P.S.A.T. in 10th grade, as a warm-up for this warm-up.
And what if they did spend last weekend taking Princeton Review's new P.S.A.T. prep course and ordered the brand new pay-per-view P.S.A.T.-S.A.T. course on cable television?
Nervous?
Please.
"Yes, I am nervous!" Katherine said.
"I don't have my Dad's faith in me."


White Rose Crafts reports earnings for Year to July 31


Liberty Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Whitman Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Virginia Banks reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


G.I.'s Besieged in Somalia
The sprawling, sandy compound that houses thousands of American troops in Mogadishu is still a base besieged.
Page A10.


Widespread Police Cynicism Contributes Much to Corruption; Require Residency
To the Editor:
As part of the Police Department's and New York City's response to the Mollen Commission's work, it is time to insist that future police officers be drawn from residents of the city and that they agree to continue living in the city during their departmental tenures ("Kelly Calls for Tighter Entry Criteria for Police Officers," news article, Oct. 4).


Camp Riley's Regimen More Like Boot Camp
Players leave the gym after morning practice -- tired and sometimes sore.
They are still required to lift weights each day.
Then after lunch and a nap, a night practice session awaits.
And don't forget, players must also learn their playbooks.
This is life at "Camp Riley," a nickname for Knicks Coach Pat Riley's grueling eight-day training camp, which began last Friday at the College of Charleston.
Riley was so eager to get started, he put the team on the floor to start practice last Friday at 12:01 A.M.
So much for easing into camp gradually.


El Paso Natural Gas Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bell Atlantic's Chairman Remakes It for New Age
For Raymond W. Smith, the 55-year-old chairman of the Bell Atlantic Corporation, this week has been not only the culmination of his drive to reinvent Bell Atlantic, but one worthy of the most audacious of riverboat gamblers.
On Monday, Bell Atlantic announced a $1 billion deal to invest in and enlarge the biggest cellular telephone operation in Mexico.
And this morning he is announcing a deal to buy Tele-Communications Inc. and Liberty Media for $33 billion in stock and assumption of debt, making Bell Atlantic the pre-eminent player in the information age.


Seneca Foods Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


A Festive End to a Dinner Party And an Easy End to the Day
DINNER parties need dessert.
But sometimes, just thinking of making one is too much work.
Dessert can be bought, of course, but a homemade finish to the meal usually makes it more special.
This is a selection of desserts that can be made after work; yet, they're so pretty and appealing that they add a festive touch to dinner.
In some cases, they seem to be very time-consuming, but much of the time is spent effortlessly, in baking or freezing, tasks that can be done while guests eat dinner, lessening the time required before the party begins.


V.M.I.'s Alternative Is Slyly Feminist; A Unisex Olympics?
To the Editor:
Your thesis in "V.M.I.'s Unacceptable Remedy" (editorial, Oct. 1) is that separate but equal as inherently unequal should apply as much in gender-based cases of discrimination as it does in those that are race-based.
What are we to make, then, of such things as the Olympic Games which, with the exception of some ice-skating events, exist as completely segregated based only on gender?
Are the two separate competitions inherently unequal?
If so, who is to blame?
Is the solution a unisex Olympics?


A Decade Later, It's Torvill and Dean Again
It is early yet, but the 1990's have not been kind to comebacks.
Bjorn Borg hauled his wood racquet out of the closet and got whacked.
Mark Spitz hauled out his skimpy bathers and got lapped.
Magic Johnson gathered up his courage and caught flak.
Which brings us to Jayne Torvill and Christopher Dean, onetime darlings of the British Isles and the international skating world.


Columbia's Rohan Receives Award
JACK ROHAN has always thought of himself as a teacher first and then a coach.
Tonight, he will be honored that way.
Rohan, the winningest basketball coach in Columbia University history with 187 victories, is one of two recipients of this year's Great Teacher Award, given annually by the Society of Columbia Graduates.
Also being honored is Prof.
RENE CHEVRAY of the School of Engineering and Applied Science.


Out-of-Shape Benjamin Says He'll Help the Nets
In theory, and even on paper, the Nets received a comparable player when they traded Sam Bowie to the Los Angeles Lakers and acquired Benoit Benjamin in return.
Both centers had similar career numbers in scoring, rebounds and blocked shots.
In practice so far, it has been another story.
Benjamin, the Nets' new center, has been out of shape.


Asian Republic Still Caught in Web of Communism
When the Soviet Union was disintegrating, one of the first statues of Lenin to be pulled down in Central Asia was in this sleepy capital.
It was replaced by a statue of Abul Qasim Firdawsi, a 10th-century poet.
Yet today, poets and writers are in jail or exile, and on tree-lined boulevards, neon hammer-and-sickle emblems hang from the lampposts.


Marion Capital Holdings Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Seneca Foods Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Roosevelt Financial Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
FRITZ STERN, who left Germany in 1938 at the age of 12, narrowly avoiding the Nazi secret police, returned this month to serve for three months as senior adviser to the United States Embassy in Bonn.
The renowned historian, who is on leave from Columbia University until the middle of January, is serving in a special position established at the request of the new American Ambassador there, Richard C. Holbrooke.


President Defends His Policies as Adding to Personal Security
Offering a broad defense of his Administration's domestic and international priorities, President Clinton said tonight that the United States "cannot withdraw from the world we have done so much to make."
Speaking to more than 40,000 students, alumni and staff members celebrating the University of North Carolina's bicentennial, Mr.
Clinton tried to link his initiatives on expanded trade, crime control and health care.


Culbro Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Review/Film Festival; Two Directing Brothers Tell Another Italian Tale
In "Fiorile," Paolo and Vittorio Taviani's sweeping and sensuous fable of how several generations of a Tuscan clan have lived out a family curse, the ghosts of the past are always threatening to jump out at its characters from the shadows of their troubled family history.
The movie, which the New York Film Festival is showing tonight at 9:30 and Saturday at noon, doesn't exactly believe in ghosts.
It is an engaging yarn that suggests how a potent legend handed down from generation to generation can become a kind of determining karmic force field.
It also affords the Taviani brothers, whose films are steeped in a love of Italian history and an identification with peasant folklore, rich visual opportunities to evoke a mythical Italian spirit that the sterile trappings of modernity only partially conceal.


GENERAL ELECTRIC CO. (N)
The General Electric Company said yesterday that 11 of its remaining 12 business units had improved earnings for the third quarter, with 7 reporting double-digit increases.
Only the aircraft engines unit reported a decline in profit, which the company said was expected.
As a result, the company reported an earnings increase of 8.6 percent for the period, despite the sale last November of its aerospace business, which earned $114 million for the third quarter last year.
The business was sold to the Martin Marietta Corporation as part of a consolidation of defense-related operations.


SunTrust Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Medicis Pharmaceutical Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Trion Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SunTrust Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vincent Kleinfeld, Expert in U.S. Laws On Drugs, Dies at 87
Vincent A. Kleinfeld, a lawyer in Washington who specialized in food and drug law, died on Saturday at a nursing home in Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 87 and had lived in Palm Beach since he retired last year.
The cause was heart failure, said his daughter, Jane Fink.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a man who faces a prison sentence for a murder in New York and the death sentence for a murder in Oklahoma referred incorrectly to one of his victims; an article on Saturday about the case included the same error.
The New York victim was a man, not a woman.


Chalk Up One for Short, Whose Haymaker Connects
Unwarranted aggression on the chessboard is dangerous.
That was the lesson Nigel Short taught Gary Kasparov in Game 16 of their world championship match yesterday in London.
The Russian strained for attack, but succeeded only in weakening his position, and the Englishman meted out the punishment swiftly and mercilessly.
This was the first game Short had won in the series, but as cheering as it might be, it won't get him back in contention.
He trails Kasparov by 5 1/2 to 10 1/2, and the champion needs just two more points to win the 24-game contest.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.88
3.53
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
2.97
2.88
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.12
3.06
2.95
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.82
4.81
6.06
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.92
5.92
7.53
TELEPHONE BONDS
6.93
6.94
8.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.39
5.41
6.43
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Surge in Advocacy Within Parent Groups; P.T.A.'s Shift From Bastions of the Status Quo to Challengers of Authority
Until recently the parents at Public School 154 in Flushing, Queens, played little role in school life, split as they were into immigrant groups from 20 countries and harried by the demands of their jobs.
But last month, after school officials ordered P.S. 154 closed and the children bused elsewhere until the building was certified to be free of asbestos, parent leaders blanketed the neighborhood with pamphlets printed in Chinese, Spanish, Arabic and Farsi, rallying scores of parents to a school boycott.


American Bank of Connecticut reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wal-Mart Loses Suit On Pricing
Wal-Mart Stores, which grew into the nation's largest retailer by dominating small markets and undercutting local merchants' prices, was found by an Arkansas judge yesterday to have illegally sold some merchandise below cost in an attempt to drive local competitors out of business.
Chancery Judge David Reynolds said Wal-Mart had engaged in "predatory pricing" and he ordered it to pay more than $298,000 in damages to three Conway, Ark., pharmacies, which had sued under the Arkansas Unfair Practices Act.


Sihanouk Calls His Cancer Unthreatening
King Norodom Sihanouk of Cambodia said today that a tumor removed near his prostate gland in China last week was cancerous but that the cancer had not spread and was not life-threatening.
In a statement released from Beijing, the 70-year-old King said that his Chinese doctors had ordered him to remain in China for an unspecified period for medical treatment.


G.I.'s Pinned Down in Somalia, Not Able, for Most Part, to Patrol
The sprawling, sandy compound that houses thousands of United States forces is still a base besieged, with all but a few troops forbidden to leave the shelter of sandbags and coiled concertina wire to patrol Somali streets.
For nearly a week, the opposition forces loyal to the faction leader Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid have withheld attacks against American troops.
But snipers opened fire overnight Monday on two strongpoints held by Pakistani peacekeeping troops.
The United States and United Nations military officials point to those attacks as an indication that the capital remains anything but secure.
A Helicopter for Reporters
This afternoon, two Black Hawk helicopters carrying reporters arriving in Mogadishu as part of a Pentagon-organized pool skimmed low over the ground and then high into the air as it flew a circuitous route from the international airport to the compound, just a few miles away by road.


CPC International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


S. I. Secession Could Avoid Big Tax Rise
Staten Island could become independent from New York City without imposing huge tax increases on its residents, a state panel studying the issue said yesterday.
In its last report before Staten Island's 379,000 residents vote in November on a proposal to secede from New York, the State Charter Commission for Staten Island said yesterday that the island as its own city could provide comparable services to its residents without the sharp increases in taxes some experts have predicted would be necessary.


Wellfleet Communications Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Anchor Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


German Court Rejects Appeal To Halt European Union Pact
Germany's constitutional court removed the last obstacle to Bonn's ratification of the treaty on European union today, ruling that the pact could never impose a federal-style government or a common currency on individual members against their will.
Germany is the only member that has not formally ratified the treaty, which was negotiated in the Dutch town of Maastricht at the end of 1991 and has been a rallying point for fears that closer unity would submerge separate European national identities.


Boddie-Noell Restaurant Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Homer and More for Newson
Bo Jackson predicted it.
Before the ninth inning, Jackson said he told Ellis Burks that Warren Newson would hit a home run because his wife and infant daughter were watching him for the first time this season.
Jackson was right.
Newson, the designated hitter, homered off Duane Ward.
It was a sweet moment for the Newson family because his wife, Tina, was unable to attend any games after being involved in a serious automobile accident in April.
Tina was a passenger in a vehicle driven by her mother in Mexico.
She was pregnant at the time, and labor had to be induced.
Although Tina still undergoes therapy for her injuries, Newson said his wife and daughter, Quadri, are doing fine.


Perle Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Executive Changes
FREMONT FINANCIAL CORP., Santa Monica, Calif., a subsidiary of the Fremont General Corp., appointed Richard Pugh senior vice president and general counsel.
ITT CORP., New York, said Jon F. Danski, a vice presient of RJR Nabisco, had been named senior vice president and controller of ITT, replacing Raymond H. Alleman, who retired.


U.S. Transportation Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Chrysler and Subaru Shift Accounts to New Agencies
Chrysler and Subaru said yesterday that they would change advertising agencies in a surprising one-two punch that underlined the tumultuous nature of the American car market.
The two accounts that are being moved have estimated annual billings totaling $250 million to $280 million, making this the largest aggregate shift ever in auto advertising billings in a single day.


Linear Technology Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Review/Theater; Warring Couple's Barbed Romance
Whatever its title may promise, "Mixed Emotions," the mild-mannered comedy by Richard Baer that opened at the John Golden Theater last night, is a single-note play.
Like the sitcoms it often resembles, it seems by its very predictability designed to soothe: its outcome is never to be doubted, nor do its characters, who are largely the sum of their one-liners, ever surprise us.
The story of the bumpy courtship of a Manhattan widow and widower, "Mixed Emotions" establishes its basic comic rhythm, which has the hypnotic quality of a Ping-Pong match, early on.
Within the first quarter of the performance a feeling descends that one could leave the theater and return at any time, assured that the jousting couple would be having the same barb-swapping argument, ringing minimal variations on jokes they have already told.
Indeed, the play often gives off a bizarre sense of existing in the ever-genial, repetitive eternity of television syndication.


Autumn Leaves Weren't All That Fell Yesterday


Staff Builders (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Alcan Aluminium Ltd. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Don't Blame Spouse for Fat
To The Living Section:  "Diet Sabotage: The New Battle of the Sexes" (Sept. 29) has taken the blame-it-on-the-male-species syndrome to a new level of ridiculousness.


Digital Sound Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Teaching Self-Image Stirs Furor
The most frequently challenged curriculums in public schools across the country no longer involve sex-education programs or classic novels like "Lady Chatterly's Lover," according to a national anti-censorship organization.
The new battlegrounds are elementary school self-esteem programs whose imaginary central characters include a blue dragon named Pumsy and a dolphin named Duso.
Local groups, relying in many cases on information distributed by conservative religious organizations, have challenged "Pumsy in Pursuit of Excellence" in at least 35 school districts around the country, said Matt Freeman, a spokesman for People for the American Way.


Doctors Can't Override Dying Patients' Wishes
To the Editor:
Those who follow the development of bioethical issues in New York State know Dr.
Timothy E. Quill as a thoughtful, sensitive physician who has in his own practice courageously come forward to help establish the rights of dying patients to humane treatment.
With respect, we wish to differ with the legal conclusions he states as facts in "On Trial -- How We Die" (Op-Ed, Sept. 27).


Mexican Border Utility Deal Fizzles
An American utility company's plans to invest in and operate a huge $1.8 billion power plant in Mexico have collapsed after complaints that the plant might pollute a national park in Texas and amid differences with the Mexican Government over the terms of the deal.
Mexican energy officials and SCEcorp, the big utility built around Southern California Edison, which had planned to buy 49 percent of the coal-fired generating plant, ended their negotiations on Monday.
The talks broke down nearly a year after the sides had initially agreed on terms for the plant's sale.


Xerox Names President For U.S. Customer Unit
The Xerox Corporation announced yesterday that Richard S. Barton had been named president of United States customer operations, the group responsible for marketing and servicing Xerox products domestically.
The appointment of Mr.
Barton was one of several announced by the company yesterday.
They are the first significant management changes at Xerox since the company was reorganized in early 1992.


American List Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Vicor Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Germany to Move Capital Back to Berlin by 2000
The Government ended two years of foot-dragging today and decided to complete the move of the German capital from Bonn to Berlin by the end of the year 2000.
The decision, made at a special Cabinet session, came one day after the first ceremonial spade of earth was turned at Potsdamer Platz, which is soon to become the largest construction site in Europe.


AT LUNCH WITH: Joyce Randolph and Audrey Meadows; Trixie and Alice, on Their Own
SOMETIMES an actress becomes so identified with one role in her career that the character clings to her as stubbornly as puppy hair to a navy blazer, impossible to brush off.
"For years after that role, directors would say: 'No, we can't use her. She's too well known as Trixie,' " said Joyce Randolph, who was immortalized as the wife of Ed Norton, the rubber-limbed sewer worker in the 1950's television sitcom "The Honeymooners."


Mark Twain Bancshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rowan Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Financial Corp. (Wisconsin) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bid to Restore Haiti's Leader Is Derailed
The two-year-old effort to restore the elected President of Haiti to power was close to collapse today as the United States pulled a troop ship away from Haitian shores and called on the United Nations to renew economic sanctions against the military Government.
Faced with the refusal by authorities in Port-au-Prince, the capital, to allow a ship carrying American and Canadian military engineers and instructors to dock, and with violent demonstrations by Haitians on shore, Administration officials ordered the ship back to sea and said a second troop ship scheduled to leave for Haiti Wednesday would not depart.


QMC Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Metropolitan Diary
JANET MANSBRIDGE of Weston, Conn., lent her apartment to some young friends just before she was to go on vacation.
Before she left, she realized she had forgotten a book she wanted to take and had this conversation with one of her guests:
Mrs. M.: "I'm looking for 'The Age of Innocence.' Have you seen it?"


Giuliani, on Stump, Hits Hard At Crime and How to Fight It
On street corners, in catering halls, in Brooklyn, Queens, Manhattan, Staten Island and the Bronx, the New York City that Rudolph W. Giuliani traverses on his pilgrimage to the polls is a place where children and police officers are "slaughtered," the "streets are overwhelmed by drug dealers" and criminals "roam unhindered by arrest."
In a marked shift since his soft-focus speeches of last spring, Mr.
Giuliani in recent weeks has taken a tough new stump speech to the people of New York, presenting the city as a troubled place where standards of civility have been steadily eroded.


Review/Film Festival; A Walter Mitty Dreams of Fame on Football Field
Some people dream of being rock stars, others Nobel Prize-winning authors.
The dream of Daniel E. (Rudy) Ruettiger (Sean Astin), the central character of David Anspaugh's film "Rudy," is only a little more down-to-earth, given the odds against him.
Physically small and a mediocre student, he lives to play football for Notre Dame.
Set in the 1960's and based on a true story, "Rudy" is a reasonably convincing study of a young man's obsessive quest for the nearly impossible.
Directed by Mr.
Anspaugh with the same rah-rah fervor he brought to "Hoosiers," the film also offers a knowing glimpse of working-class life in Joliet, Ill., the steel-mill town where Rudy grows up.


Paramount's Suitors Make Other Deals
As much as the battle for Paramount Communications is a full-time spectator sport for many media addicts, some of the participants still have time to pursue other interests.
The BellSouth Corporation, the telephone company that has been considering making an investment in QVC Network Inc. that would bolster the home shopping company's bid for Paramount, agreed yesterday to invest $250 million in a Las Vegas, Nev., cable system with 185,000 subscribers, owned by Prime Cable.


Gibson (C.R.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Looking for Money and Over Shoulders of Chinese
Convinced that the world's most progressive training complex will produce the world's most impressive athletes, the United States Olympic Committee unveiled its new $12.8 million gymnasium and aquatics center last weekend with exhibitions that united past and future Olympians.
The U.S.O.C. then hinted that its $23.8 million capital drive to complete the privately funded project is very much in need of donations.
So is the U.S.O.C.'s new outdoor sports center near San Diego, which, although open for business, is more than $2 million short of completion.


Cherokee reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Shaking Up the Merger List
RJR Nabisco, move over.
By one measure, the biggest takeover in Wall Street history, chronicled in the television movie and best-selling book "Barbarians at the Gate," was dumped into second place yesterday by Bell Atlantic's mind-boggling deal to acquire Tele-Communications Inc. and the Liberty Media Corporation.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  National League
ATLANTA BRAVES -- Named Matt West manager and Rick Albert and Bill Slack coaches of Durham of the Carolina League and Leon Roberts manager and Glenn Hubbard coach of Macon of the South Atlantic League.


Charter FSB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
As if she didn't already have enough to fill her time, Dame BARBARA CARTLAND, 92, who writes a book every two weeks, has started what she calls a Romance Club, an effort to revive old-fashioned romantic love.
For monthly dues of $:10.95 ($29.95 in the United States), members will receive two of her books and one on tape each month.
There's little chance she'll run out of inventory for subscribers.
As Dame Barbara pointed out in an interview this week from her home in Hatfield, 18 miles north of London, she has written 590 books or "one a fortnight since I was 70," she said.


North Korea Assails Atomic Unit, Asks U.S. Talks
In its continuing campaign to avoid international inspections of suspected nuclear weapons, North Korea issued a blistering attack today against the International Atomic Energy Agency and said only direct talks with the United States could resolve the crisis.
The broadside, issued in the name of North Korea's Minister of Atomic Energy and carried by the official news agency, described a bizarre plot that it said was intended to discredit the country.
The plot involved a letter North Koreans said was a forgery by the International Atomic Energy Agency that suggested North Korea was developing nuclear bombs.


Cypress Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Train Delays Likely After Fire in Grand Central
Grand Central Terminal was closed last night after a fire that started on an unused train track spewed thick smoke throughout the lower level of the station, delaying more than 10,000 commuters who had to scramble for alternative routes home, said a spokesman for the Metro-North commuter railroad.
With the railroad's signal and communications system knocked out by the fire, all Metro-North trains in and out of Grand Central Terminal were suspended after 8 P.M.
Early today, Metro-North officials said the signal system was largely restored on all three of the railroad's lines late last night, but they added that some gaps remained.
As a result, they warned that delays were still likely during the morning rush hour.


International Paper Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Destron/IDI reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


A Talent for Rewriting History
Two iconoclasts who practically reinvented the field of economic history, Robert W. Fogel of the University of Chicago and Douglass C. North of Washington University in St.
Louis, won the 1993 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science yesterday, the first time the prize was awarded for work in economic history.
"Bob and Doug are clearly the leaders of the new economic history, the most visible, the ones with the most impact," said Peter Temin, an economic historian at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.


German Tells Why He Stabbed Seles
GUNTER PARCHE, an unemployed lathe operator, testified yesterday at his trial in Hamburg, Germany, that the losses of STEFFI GRAF left him so devastated him that he sometimes lost the will to live.
During a match changeover on April 30, Parche stabbed MONICA SELES, who had replaced Graf at No. 1 in the ranking.
He is charged with causing grievous bodily harm and could face five years in prison.


Applied Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


In the Fall, Blue Jays Migrate Back to World Series
With the help of the bat and body of Pat Borders, his catcher, Dave Stewart extended his remarkable run of playoff success tonight and in the process propelled the Toronto Blue Jays and the country of Canada into the World Series for the second successive season.
Despite some erratic touches in his pitching repertory, the battle-hardened Stewart allowed only four hits in seven and one-third innings as the Blue Jays defeated the Chicago White Sox, 6-3, and won the American League Championship Series, four games to two.


Theater in Review
Some People  Performance Space 122 150 First Avenue (at Ninth Street) East Village  Written and performed by Danny Hoch; lighting design, David Castaneda; technical director, Sarah Sidman.
Presented by Performance Space 122.


Oakhurst Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Andover Togs (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Dean Witter To Sell More For Allstate
Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Company and the Allstate Corporation, both formerly part of Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company, said yesterday that they had a new agreement to sell more of Allstate's insurance products through Dean Witter's network of securities brokers.
In the new alliance, the two companies will remain independent but will split the profits from Allstate products sold through Dean Witter.
Dean Witter will invest an undisclosed sum in Allstate to help finance development of new products, and Dean Witter brokers will continue to collect normal commissions from their sales of Allstate annuities or life insurance.


Oakhurst Capital reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


No Headline
"Previously we've talked about deficiencies on a national level -- in terms of not enough research on women's health. Now we are saying it's also a problem on a very basic clinical level -- that patients are not getting what they need." -- DR.
NICOLE LURIE, author of a study on women's care in The New England Journal of Medicine.  [ A1:5. ]


PEPSICO INC. (N)
Pepsico Inc., which reported an 8.5 percent rise in its third-quarter net income, said it had strong earnings growth in all its operations except the KFC Corporation, where profits declined because of start-up costs forrotisserie chicken.
D.
Wayne Calloway, Pepsico's chairman, said Pizza Hut Worldwide had sold 20 million outsized Bigfoot pizzas since they were introduced in May, adding $200 million to sales.


U.S., Praising China, Is Still Wary on Rights
The State Department's top human rights official emerged from two days of talks with Chinese officials today praising the resumption of dialogue between Washington and Beijing after a two-year hiatus, but reporting no progress on improving China's overall record.
At a news conference, the official, John Shattuck, gave a positive account of China's "attentiveness" in the talks, which he called "intensive" and which he said have set the stage for more blunt discussion when President Clinton meets the Communist Party chief, Jiang Zemin, next month in Seattle.


Manhattan Minstrel Show
The rhetoric of race is treacherous.
Its history is a thorny one.
And racially freighted language takes nearly all its meaning from the context in which it's spoken.
The word "nigger" is a stark example.
Spoken by someone black, it can pass as a simple greeting or even a term of endearment.
Spoken by someone white, the word is almost universally heard as an insult.
Like it or not, blacks have carved out a historical exemption allowing raw talk about race -- though primarily among themselves.
Whites who infringe inevitably take some heat.


Republic Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Progroup Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Bulgur: Going Beyond Tabbouleh
BULGUR, or cracked wheat, is best known to Americans in the form of tabbouleh, a cold dish of bulgur with tomatoes, parsley, mint, olive oil and lemon juice.
But bulgur is used in dozens of Middle Eastern dishes and makes an especially nutritious alternative to recipes that ordinarily call for rice or pasta.
It has an additional advantage: it cooks very quickly.


Chipcom Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Review/Music; Dissection of the German Lied
It is interesting to note how susceptible society can be to a simple calendar hanging on the wall.
As the 19th century rushed to a close, cultural life rushed in pursuit.
Music, in particular, seemed anxious to wind up 80 years of feverish activity and rebuild from the ruins of Romanticism.
The year 1993 may be a bit early to look past our current chaos in musical life, but perhaps by 1997 the prospect of a two followed by three zeroes will mesmerize us equally.
A Sunday afternoon of talk and music at the Kathryn Bache Miller Theater scrutinized a microcosm of history's proneness to punctuality, its tendency to change according to the numbers.
Lectures by Michael P. Steinberg, Mark Anderson and Walter Frisch, and then a recital by the mezzo-soprano-and-pianist duo of Milagro Vargas and Gilbert Kalish were grouped under the title "Words Into Song: The German Lied at the Fin de Siecle."


A Director Asks for Odd and Gets It
Two years ago, the film director Peter Weir bought a plane ticket to travel from his home in Sydney, Australia, to Los Angeles because the scripts he had been receiving from Hollywood studios were so appalling.
"I couldn't understand the poor quality of the screenplays and I wanted to tell the studio heads that if these are the best you have, then send me things that you consider in raw shape, give me the broken ones, the sad cases, the ones in the too-hard file," Mr.
Weir, the highly successful director of films like "Witness," "Dead Poets Society" and "Green Card," explained last week in an interview.


Republic Bancorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2 Indicted in Swastika Case At High School Track on L.I.
Two 18-year-old men were arraigned today on charges that they painted swastikas and anti-Semitic messages of hate on a Commack, L.I., high school track just hours before they and their classmates were to attend graduation ceremonies there.
The defendants, Robert Rolston and Philip Argiros, both of Commack and both now in college, pleaded not guilty to charges of criminal mischief and making graffiti.
The criminal mischief charge, a felony, carries a prison term of up to seven years.
Judge Arthur G. Pitts of Suffolk County Court ordered the two men released on $2,500 bail for a court appearance on Nov. 18.


Lapse in Sounding Alarm Is Linked to Derailment
A towboat pilot was lost in a predawn fog without a compass or nautical charts when his vessel rammed a railroad bridge, but he could have still averted the worst wreck in Amtrak's history if he had promptly notified the authorities, Coast Guard and Amtrak officials told Congress today.
A high Amtrak official said that had anyone on the towboat Mauvilla reported the accident immediately, the freight railroad that owned the bridge and tracks would have had enough time to send a signal to stop the train, or make radio contact with it in time for the engineer to halt it.


Arafat Names Loyalists to Carry Out Accord
Yasir Arafat, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, has taken firm command of the peace talks with Israel, placing loyalists in charge of key committees and eliminating opponents in a purge that has shaken the P.L.O.
Several officials known to oppose the accord signed with Israel on Sept. 13 were barred from Tunisia, where the P.L.O. has its headquarters, before a two-day meeting of the group's central committee.
The meeting ended early this morning with a resounding endorsement for Mr.
Arafat.


Connecticut Congresswoman Turns Down Race for Governor
United States Representative Nancy L. Johnson, who had been considered a front-runner among Connecticut Republicans in the early jockeying for next year's governor's race, today removed her name from consideration.
Mrs.
Johnson, 58, a six-term moderate from New Britain and the senior Republican in Connecticut's Congressional delegation, said the demands of a campaign would divert her at a critical time from her work in Washington on health-care reform and international trade.


Barnett Banks Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Keenan Calls the Shots, Any Questions?
Eddie Olczyk didn't go to the Rangers' training camp out of shape or tired or with plans to relax.
He was ready for another 30-goal season.
He was ready to work hard and contribute.
He just happened to be at the wrong place at the wrong time.


Anchor Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Charter FSB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


FEAR OF NEW DELAY IN APARTHEID'S END
While the outside world celebrates South Africa's democratic reformation with the lifting of an economic quarantine and rumors of a Nobel Peace Prize, fear is rising here that the process is faltering.
Under pressure from a new alliance of holdouts -- white separatists, Zulu nationalists and black homeland leaders -- President F.W. de Klerk suggested on Monday that before holding elections South Africa should conduct a referendum on the country's future.


Hovnanian Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Hawkeye Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Low Fat and Lots of It From Prudhomme
PAUL PRUDHOMME was tooling around Tavern on the Green in Central Park on his motorized scooter earlier this month.
He was 40 to 70 pounds over his ideal weight, he said.
He uses the scooter to save wear and tear on his knees from the 390 pounds he is currently carrying on his 5-foot-9 frame.
The larger-than-life impresario of Cajun cooking became a household name in the 1980's when he persuaded Americans to gobble up his spicy food that was bubbling in butter and sizzling in lard.
He was in town to say that he had turned in his fat grams.


INSIDE
Prison for Detroit Officers
Two ex-policemen convicted of beating a black Detroit motorist to death were sentenced to prison.
Page A20.
Changing Times for P.T.A.'s
Parent-teacher groups have changed from bastions of the status quo to challengers of authority.
Page B1.
Wal-Mart Faulted on Prices
A judge ruled that Wal-Mart had illegally sold some merchandise below cost in an attempt to drive local competitors out of business.
Page D5.
U.S.
Economists Win Nobel
Two iconoclastic American economic historians were awarded the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Science for 1993.
Page D1.
The Price of Independence
Staten Island could secede from New York City without imposing huge tax increases on residents, a state panel studying the issue said.
Page B1.


Judges Hear 2 Bias Laws Assailed In Trenton
The New Jersey Supreme Court heard attacks today on two of the state's anti-bias laws and indicated that recent rulings by the United States Supreme Court could make survival of the statutes in their present form a close call.
The laws are a 1981 statute that makes the placing of a symbol, like a swastika or a burning cross, on another's property a crime if it exposes the victim "to threats of violence or hatred" based on race, color or creed, and a statute enacted in 1990 that allows sentencing judges to increase penalties for crimes like assault if they were committed because of the victim's race, color, religion, sexual orientation or ethnicity.


Is Women's Health Harmed By Medical Specialization?
Medical care for most men is one-stop shopping: a trip to a general doctor for a physical examination that includes full preventive care.
But that approach works poorly for a woman, new studies have shown, with tests like Pap smears often overlooked, particularly if the doctor is a man.
In practice, many women insure complete care by making the medical rounds: they visit a generalist, a gynecologist for Pap tests and maybe even a breast cancer specialist for breast examinations and mammograms.
Now many public health experts are saying that there must be a better way.


Suspect in Officer's Slaying: Strange Twist to Life of Toil
Pedro Jose Gil was taught the value of hard work and discipline as a teen-ager, scrubbing dishes and running errands at his family's restaurant in Washington Heights, a neat, neighborly haunt a few steps from where a housing officer was killed last week.
In a neighborhood where many young people are pulled by the lure of easy money and drugs, Mr.
Gil, 22, was considered lucky to have ambitious parents whose modest success since arriving from the Dominican Republic served as a model for their children, friends and neighbors said.


International Jensen Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Doctors Can't Override Dying Patients' Wishes; Kevorkian's Appeal
To the Editor:
What kind of care does Dr.
Timothy E. Quill imagine would make it bearable to be unable to swallow or to defecate?
What philosophy would enable a person willingly to choose between constant pain or narcotic stupor?
What "palliatives" would comfort a person who could no longer so much as turn her head and who knew that nothing lay ahead except pain and death?


International Paper Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Destron/IDI reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Blunt Detail On Victims In Explosion
Monica Smith's shoulder was stamped with the patterned imprint of the sweater she was wearing on Feb. 26.
Wilfredo Mercado's eye sockets and jaws were fractured.
Stephen Knapp's body bore wounds comparable to a person who had jumped from a 10- or 20-story building.
The injuries that snuffed out the lives of the six people killed in the World Trade Center explosion were described in excruciating detail in Manhattan Federal Court yesterday as the Government hammered home to the jury what defense lawyers have long been willing to concede, that the victims died in an explosion.


Boston Acoustics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Consolidated Papers Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


National Convenience Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Christine O'Reilly, 25, Tennis-Playing Triplet
Christine O'Reilly, one of the tennis-playing triplets from Ridgewood, N.J., died on Sunday at the University of California hospital at Irvine.
She never regained consciousness after suffering a severe head injury in an automobile accident in Irvine early Saturday morning.
She was 25.
John Korff, a tennis promoter from Mahwah, N.J., said that Miss O'Reilly had been in California scouting sites for a balloon festival next year.
He said she was the lone passenger in a car driven by Steven Allan Evans, 29, the pilot who had flown her over prospective sites.
Mr.
Evans was killed instantly when the car struck a utility pole.


E-Z-EM Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Hubco reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


John W. Lane; Real-Estate Broker and Appraiser, 87
John W. Lane, a retired Westchester real-estate broker and appraiser, died on Saturday at Northern Westchester Hospital Center in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 87 and lived at Heritage Hills in Somers, N.Y.
The cause was congestive heart failure, his family said.


Schwab (Charles ) Corp. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


V.M.I.'s Alternative Is Slyly Feminist
To the Editor:
"V.M.I.'s Unacceptable Remedy" (editorial, Oct. 1) blames the Virginia Military Institute, Gov.
Douglas Wilder and the State of Virginia for promoting a leadership training program at Mary Baldwin College as an alternative to coeducation at V.M.I.
Your message seems clear: "V.M.I. should simply admit women."


Ex-Detroit Officers Ordered To Prison for Beating Death
Two white former police officers convicted of beating a black motorist to death outside a crack house were sentenced to prison today by a judge who told the courtroom, "I know nobody in the community will be completely satisfied with what has transpired here today."
Judge George W. Crockett 3d sentenced one former officer, Larry Nevers, 53, to 12 to 25 years in prison.
The other, Walter Budzyn, 47, received a sentence of 8 to 18 years for the beating death of Malice Green last Nov. 5.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 8
Oct. 1
Oct. 9
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.3
7.4
7.1
Gasoline stocks
210.4
208.4
208.9
Distillate stocks
128.4
127.4
132.4
Crude imports, daily
7.0
6.4
6.4
Product imports, daily
1.4
1.7
2.3
Crude stocks
330.9
328.9
324.9
Crude production, daily
6.8
6.7
7.1
Refinery utilization (%)
92.9
93.2
88.5
Source: American Petroleum Institute


COMPANY BRIEFS
LANIER WORLDWIDE INC., Atlanta, agreed to buy ML&amp;M Inc., a medical records transcription company in Atlanta.
Terms were not disclosed.
MEDI-MAIL INC., Las Vegas, Nev., is delaying plans to build a distribution site in Illinois after the state canceled an agreement for the company to provide mail-order prescription drugs to the state's 50,000 retired employees.


Campaign Finance Chicanery
When he agreed to participate in New York City's voluntary public campaign financing system, Mayor David Dinkins pledged to limit his general election spending to $4 million -- the same limit that covers his Republican-Liberal challenger, Rudolph Giuliani.
That's how the financing reform is supposed to work: to level the playing field so that races for City Hall don't turn on which candidate raises and spends more money.
Unfortunately, principle hasn't deterred the state Democratic Party chairman, Al Gordon, from spending $500,000 on a radio advertising and direct-mail campaign in support of Mr.
Dinkins's candidacy -- brazenly trashing the spirit if not the letter of the city's campaign finance rules.


Hovnanian Enterprises reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Wine Talk
JOSEPH PHELPS opened the doors to his handsome Napa Valley winery in 1973.
The next year, Walter Schug, his wine maker at the time, produced California's first blend of traditional Bordeaux grape varieties under a proprietary name.
The wine was called Insignia, and for almost two decades, it has been among the true elites of California red wines.
Last week, Mr.
Phelps came to New York to offer a 10-year retrospective of Insignia, which included every vintage from 1982 to 1991.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Bell Atlantic agreed to buy Tele-Communications, the nation's largest cable operator, and its spun-off programming company, Liberty Media, in a $33 billion deal, which would include the assumption of $10 billion in debt.  [ Page A1. ]  The deal's value would surpass RJR Nabisco's takeover by Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts in 1989 as the largest ever.  [ D2. ]  For Bell Atlantic's chairman, the merger would culminate his drive to reinvent the company.  [ D2. ]
Two participants in the Paramount takeover battle, BellSouth and Viacom, made unrelated transactions.  [ D2. ]


Universal Seismic Associates Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Medchem Products Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Weis Markets Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Synovus Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Southwest Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fragile, simple ans soft reign in Paris: C8


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Penguins in Miami?
The Florida Panthers' debut at Miami Arena included everything except an upset.
Martin Straka and Joe Mullen scored to help the Pittsburgh Penguins beat expansion Florida, 2-1, last night.
Before a sellout crowd of 14,372, the Panthers' Scott Mellanby scored the final goal of the game at 11 minutes 32 seconds of the third period.
Straka, who came into the game tied for the National Hockey League lead with five goals, scored on a rebound to break a scoreless tie at 17:40 of the second period.
Mullen scored a short-handed, unassisted goal at 3:51 of the third period. (AP) Flyers 5, Sabres 3: Eric Lindros's goal with 5:17 remaining in the third period broke a 3-3 tie and lifted host Philadelphia to the victory over Buffalo, which had led by 3-1.
Philadelphia Coach Terry Simpson united last season's line of Eric Lindros, Mark Recchi and Brent Fedyk late in the second period.
The threesome responded with three of the team's four third-period goals. (AP)


Bol Takes His Blocks and Goes to Miami
MANUTE BOL, the 7-foot-7-inch center who spent the last three seasons with the Philadelphia 76ers, signed with the Miami Heat as a free agent yesterday.


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Rutgers
Wanted: some linebackers of the outside kind.
When Alcides Catanho went out in the Boston College game with an injured elbow, he became the third left outside linebacker removed from the Scarlet depth chart.


National Convenience Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Labor Secretary to Urge Clinton To Propose Minimum Wage Rise
Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich said today that he would urge the President to propose increasing the minimum wage, now $4.25 an hour, most likely by 25 cents.
But Mr.
Reich said that the pay increase would be coupled with an increase in benefits, like insurance as provided under the President's health care plan, that could bring the value of the total increase to 50 cents an hour.


Food Notes
A Store Gets a Make-Over
Petak's, the Upper East Side food store, which opened 10 years ago at 1244 Madison Avenue (near 89th Street), reopened last week after being closed for three months.
It now has a new look and a very different personality.
Instead of being a mini-Balducci's, with prepared and packaged foods, baked goods and cheeses, it is now a catering shop and cafe.
The color scheme has gone from industrial white to soft apricot and green.
Cafe tables and an espresso bar have been added.
The prepared foods, smoked fish, charcuterie and cheeses have been moved to a display case that stretches along one whole side of the store.
A small salad bar divides the seating area from the bakery case and cash registers.


Schwab (Charles ) Corp. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Westco Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Andover Togs (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Argonaut Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


WD-40 Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Boston Acoustics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


A Festive End to a Dinner Party And an Easy End to the Day
DINNER parties need dessert.
But sometimes, just thinking of making one is too much work.
Dessert can be bought, of course, but a homemade finish to the meal usually makes it more special.
This is a selection of desserts that can be made after work; yet, they're so pretty and appealing that they add a festive touch to dinner.
In some cases, they seem to be very time-consuming, but much of the time is spent effortlessly, in baking or freezing, tasks that can be done while guests eat dinner, lessening the time required before the party begins.


Generosity Of Officer Is Recalled At Funeral
Officer John Williamson was buried yesterday on a raw, rain-chilled day, as his friends, relatives, and those who knew him only from afar tried to make sense of his death.
With his heartbroken mother and father, a younger brother and sister and his fiancee looking on, the officer, killed in the line of duty last week, was eulogized as a young man who routinely threw himself in harm's way, whose selfless demeanor led him to answer a call for help from a colleague last Friday night.


Caere Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


White Rose Crafts reports earnings for Year to July 31


Sports of The Times; Stew's Home Wherever He Pitches
DAVE STEWART has an explanation why he has never lost a league championship game.
He says he is a hard worker because his parents were hard workers.
"My father was a longshoreman, and he worked hard and he died," Stewart said last night.
"Then my mother took over and she had eight kids and she kept bread in our mouths and shoes on our feet."


New Jersey Reservoir at Drought Level
Northern New Jersey's biggest reservoir, the Wanaque, has been drawn down to its lowest level since the drought of the mid-1960's, and the agency that operates it wants the state to order a stop to heavy demands on it.
In the water-supply world's version of a run on the bank, the city of Newark and the Hackensack Water Company, which own two of the biggest shares of the reservoir, regularly drew out their legal share of the Wanaque's water during the hot, dry summer.


McAfee Associates (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Westco Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Medchem Products Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Toronto Returns to the World Series


SPS Transaction Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 3


Universal Seismic Associates Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Easing the Release of Information
With fanfare, Attorney General Janet Reno has proclaimed a new, liberalized set of rules for the release of information under the Freedom of Information Act.
Backed up by President Clinton, she declares that the Justice Department won't routinely defend in court agencies that try to use the law's technicalities to sit on secrets.
The fanfare is appropriate, even if Ms.
Reno's proclamations have yet to be tested in the trenches of government.
Her new rules completely reverse a 1981 Reagan Administration directive to stonewall Information Act requests whenever there was "a substantial legal basis" for invoking one of the law's exemptions from disclosure, even when the release wouldn't hurt anyone.


More Phone Competition
The MFS Communications Company, intent on becoming a stronger competitor to the regional telephone company Nynex, said yesterday that New York State regulators had agreed to give MFS a more favorable regulatory status that would enable it to function more like a traditional telephone company.
The regulatory decision means that Nynex's New York Telephone unit must work out a plan with MFS to strengthen MFS's ability to compete in New York Telephone's market.


Stock Are Mixed, With the Dow Off 0.28
Stocks were mixed yesterday, with strength in brokerage issues, high-techs and some health care and pharmaceutical issues, but weakness in cyclical companies sensitive to the economy's direction.
The Dow Jones industrial average, which in early trading had raced above the 3,600 level, closed down 0.28 point, to 3,593.13.
But, while the Nasdaq composite, heavily influenced by high-technology issues, and American Stock Exchange both closed at record highs.


COMPANY NEWS: Creative Accounting at McDonnell; Billing the Government For Tailhook Expenses
The McDonnell Douglas Corporation initially billed the Federal Government about $30,000 for its participation in the infamous 1991 Tailhook Association convention, during which scores of women were sexually assaulted by military personnel, an investigation by a Congressional committee has found.
But when sexual misconduct at the naval aviators' meeting was uncovered in late 1991, McDonnell Douglas decided to pay its own tab, which included Lear jets to the convention, $360 hotel rooms, adult movies, a hospitality suite, and $600 golfing fees, Congressional investigators said.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  BACKGROUND OF A SUSPECT
Pedro Jose Gil, charged with killing a police officer by hurling a bucket, was taught the value of hard work and discipline as a teen-ager, scrubbing dishes and running errands at his family's restaurant in Washington Heights.
A1.
GIULIANI TOUGHENS HIS STUMP SPEECH
In a marked shift since his soft-focus speeches of last spring, Rudolph W. Giuliani in recent weeks has taken a tough new stump speech to the people of New York, presenting the city as a troubled place where standards of civility have been steadily eroded.
A1.
Excerpts from Giuliani's speech. B2.


Federal National Mortgage Association reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brenco Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


People Skills Win Post for Gullikson
Calling it a decision that kept him up nights worrying, J. Howard (Bumpy) Frazer, president of the United States Tennis Association, confirmed yesterday that Tom Gullikson had been named the 1994 Davis Cup captain.
The appointment of the 42-year-old Gullikson to the post held by Tom Gorman for the past eight years ended months of speculation about the U.S.T.A.'s intentions for the captaincy.


Choke Haiti's Thugs
The television footage out of Haiti is like a scene from a recurring nightmare: the brandished weapons, the ugly insults, the violent attacks on bystanders.
The Haitian military and its "attaches," descendants of the Duvalier regime's infamous Tontons Macoutes, love to beat up the weak, the downtrodden, the unarmed -- anyone who threatens to come between them and their booty.
The latest object of their ire is the amphibious ship Harlan County, which was supposed to unload an "observer" contingent of some 200 American and Canadian troops.
Yesterday, the Pentagon ordered the ship to leave Haitian waters.


Haiti Army Celebrates U.S. Withdrawal
To the accompaniment of 15 minutes of jubilant dancing, cheering and gunfire, a United States troop ship pulled out of Haitian waters this afternoon after two days anchored under the baking sun a mile from port.
A demonstration organized by security forces opposed to the return of Haiti's deposed President prevented the 560-foot Harlan County, carrying more than 200 soldiers, from docking on Monday.
Today it headed to the United States naval base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.


Hardee's Pares List of Finalists
Hardee's Food Systems of Rocky Mount, N.C., has narrowed the review on the creative portion of its estimated $75 million account, which has been at Ogilvy &amp; Mather New York since 1985, to 3 agencies from between 8 and 10.


Jess Thomas, 66, American Tenor Who Specialized in Wagner, Dies
Jess Thomas, an operatic tenor best known for his interpretation of Wagnerian roles, died on Monday in San Francisco.
He was 66.
The cause was a heart attack, said his wife, Violetta.


Train Service Snarled
Following a fire last night that halted Metro-North commuter train service to Grand Central Terminal, railroad officials warned early today that delays were likely for this morning's rush hour because of damage to signals.
Article, page B1.


Chipcom Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


McAfee Associates (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In America; Tainting Tragedy
Last Friday night was warm and muggy, so there were more people than usual hanging out on West 175th Street in Washington Heights.
The atmosphere was benign.
People were laughing, relaxing, listening to music.
A couple of gypsy cab drivers, their radio cars double-parked, were watching the baseball playoffs on a small television in the Polanco Grocery Market at 175th and Audubon Avenue.


Theater in Review
Frank Maya Paying for the Pool  Atlantic Theater 336 West 20th Street Chelsea Through Sunday Directed by John Masterson; stage manager, Chris De Camillis.
Presented by the Atlantic Theater Company guest artists series.
WITH: Frank Maya


Review/Film Festival; Another Making of a President, Starring the New Spin Doctors    SUB FOR PAGE C15
Is there any stone left unturned in a modern Presidential campaign?
When every last whistle-stop and handshake is thoroughly documented in print and on television, can there be anything more for a film maker to find?
When D. A. Pennebaker and Chris Hegedus set out to chronicle the Clinton campaign, they were treading on familiar territory, taking on a seemingly redundant task.
And yet "The War Room," their glimpse of behind-the-scenes maneuvers among Clinton strategists, finds new facets of the story and manages to coax cliffhanging suspense out of a fait accompli.
However much "The War Room" reveals about how Mr.
Clinton won the election, its real subject is why he won.
The true focus of this watchful, frankly admiring film is the Clinton campaign staff, with James Carville and George Stephanopoulos receiving star billing.
The film presents these two as tireless new-breed strategists whose fast, aggressive tactics helped to reshape their party's political thinking, and who themselves played a high-profile role in the election.
Theirs was an attitude that promised something different in Presidential politics, and this film examines that attitude in riveting detail.


SynOptics Communications Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Shoreline Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rembert Is Waived After Being Charged
The Cincinnati Bengals waived wide receiver REGGIE REMBERT yesterday after he was arrested and charged with driving under the influence.
Rembert, who spent part of last season in an alcohol-rehabilitation program mandated by the National Football League, was convicted of drunken driving in 1991 and 1992.


Hawkeye Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


E-Z-EM Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Spacelabs Medical (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


A New Look in Housing for the Homeless


BMR Financial Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BMR Financial Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Progroup Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 28


Pentair Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SPS Transaction Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 3


Cypress Semiconductor reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 27


Supreme Court Roundup; Justices to Rule on Challenges by Career Criminals
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether Federal defendants who face sentencing as career criminals can challenge the validity of the earlier state court convictions that subject them to stiff Federal minimum sentences.
Under the Armed Career Criminal Act, a person with three previous convictions for violent felonies or serious drug offenses must receive a sentence of at least 15 years, with a maximum of life in prison, if subsequently convicted of owning or transporting a gun.


Joseph Moller, 93, a Decorated World War II Pilot
Joseph A. Moller, a decorated American aviator, oil industry executive and Arizona cattle rancher, died on Saturday at his home in Paradise Valley, near Scottsdale.
He was 93.
He suffered a brief illness, said his son, Allan S. Moller.


From Downcast to Upbeat at Lotus
It was two years ago this month that a group of angry Lotus Development engineers held a meeting so gloomy it amounted to a funeral.
The deceased: Lotus's spreadsheet program 1-2-3 for Windows, which had been shipped a month earlier amid dismal reviews.
The band of programmers said that upper management, desperate for a product that would work with the increasingly popular Windows standard, had forced them to rush to market with software that simply was not ready.
Many customers, apparently sharing that belief, bolted for Excel, the Windows spreadsheet from Microsoft.


No Headline
New Material Girl
Remember Madonna?
The entrepreneur, book subject, actress and singer recently seemed to be slipping out of her dominant position in the pop world; not too many public spats, financial or physical disclosures or new records, books or movies.
But if anybody was wondering if the Material Girl still had any drawing power, her three shows this week at Madison Square Garden, boasting a top ticket price of $75, sold out in less than an hour, and that's with only some radio promotion and a Madison Square Garden advertisement in The New York Times.
Given that her last record, "Erotica," was a commercial disappointment, that's not bad.
Even if her celebrity is based more on the creation of a self-image than on musical virtuosity, her reputation as a ferocious live performer clearly precedes her.


Shoreline Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Southwest Bancshares Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Synovus Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; Big Board protects speculators from a worthless stock.
SHARES in JWP Inc. are worthless. And, for a change, you can't easily trade them.
The New York Stock Exchange halted trading in the company, the former Jamaica Water Properties, as soon as the company announced that a prepackaged bankruptcy plan would result in the cancellation of the shares.


Weis Markets Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


American Bank of Connecticut reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nothing Diabolical About 4-0 Devils
There is no comparison between the John MacLean of this season and last.
The most proficient clutch player in Devils history is miles ahead from where he was at this time last season upon his return from reconstructive knee surgery that threatened his career.
A quick glance at the way MacLean skates and shoots and executes hockey's intricate other little skills now erases any doubts that, as some of his friends and teammates put it, "Mac is back."


60-Minute Gourmet
SEA scallops are plentiful and sweet at this time of year, especially those from the chilly waters of the North Atlantic.
And for the first time in nearly a decade, the harvest of bay scallops has been sizable off Long Island's East End and in other East Coast breeding grounds.
A disastrous brown tide that first appeared in the mid-1980's all but wiped out bay scallops in the Northeast, and it has taken years for their seedbeds to regenerate.
Bay scallops are still quite expensive owing to their relative scarcity, however, so the recipe here is designed to work well with either type.


Book Notes
A New Thatcher Watch
Special to The New York Times  LONDON, Oct. 12 -- The memoirs of Margaret Thatcher, the former British Prime Minister, aren't scheduled to reach bookstores here until Monday.
But they have already caused a considerable fuss, because of a combination of clever marketing, London's vicious newspaper wars and Britain's continued obsession with a political leader who, even out of office, has managed to keep herself solidly in the public eye.


Nationwide Health Prop.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Applied Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Clinton Will Recommend More Spending Cuts
President Clinton plans to propose an additional $10 billion to $15 billion in spending cuts later this month to make good on promises he made to win votes for his budget package in August, Administration and Congressional officials said today.
The new package of cuts, which will be spread over the next five years, is bound to create a storm on Capitol Hill, several lawmakers said.
Some members of Congress think the anticipated package is too small, while others suggested that the proposed reductions would cause howls of protest from lawmakers whose favorite programs would come under attack.


How to Get Tough With Haiti
The thugs who prevented U.S. and Canadian troops from landing in Haiti on Monday do not represent the majority of the Haitian people.
The country's voters made their choice three years ago when they elected President Jean-Bertrand Aristide with a 65 percent majority.
The military elite, accustomed to unquestioned power, drove him into exile.
Now that elite, aided by its paramilitary "attaches," is invoking nationalist pride and characterizing the U.N. mission to restore President Aristide as a foreign invasion.
The attaches, who prevented a U.S. troopship from landing and threatened the U.S. charge d'affaires on Monday, kept at it yesterday by menacing a television crew with machine guns and preventing children from attending school.


Elias Is a New Breed of Celebrity for Princeton
Princeton is a different university than it was 25 years ago -- more egalitarian, less preppy.
Keith Elias, a rough, tough kid from the Jersey Shore, stands for a lot of what's different.
The football team is winning and Elias has had plenty to do with that.
Much of the football tradition here, at the sport's birthplace, had faded in the 1970's, with the most telling statistic being 14 straight losses to Yale, the foremost rival, between 1967 and 1980.


Redskins Sign Willis to Shore Up Line
Down to only three healthy players on the defensive line, the Washington Redskins signed 11-year veteran defensive end KEITH WILLIS yesterday.


MSG to Carry Match Live
In New York City, where the rivalry between the English and the Dutch is more than three centuries old, soccer fans won't have to wait until 11:45 tonight to watch the crucial World Cup qualifying match in Rotterdam between England and the Netherlands.
Time-Warner and Paragon cable subscribers and those with access to bars with the right connections will be able to see the match live over MSG channels beginning at 3 P.M.
The game will also be carried on tape delay on MSG at 11:45 P.M., as originally planned.


Moscow Police Wage War on Crime
Empowered by an eight-day-old state of emergency, the Moscow police are using their extra powers as part of a wider crackdown on crime to conduct raids aimed at non-Russian minority groups throughout the city.
According to complaints registered at local embassies of former Soviet republics and at the local office of Helsinki Watch, a human rights organization, police have staged nighttime sweeps of hotels, dormitories and apartments frequented by visitors from the Caucasus and Central Asia, and in cases when permits are not in order, forced them out of town, in some cases even paying their fare.


Bridge
One of the most difficult areas of slam bidding is to determine when agreement on a trump suit should end in disagreement.
If hearts have been bid and raised, for example, it is hard to adjust to the possibility that it could be right to play in spades, diamonds, clubs or no-trump.
Some players never make that adjustment.
One reason for such a shift is to reach a more productive trump suit, perhaps 4-4 rather than 5-3.
Another is to place the declaration in the hand that is protected against a damaging lead.
An example is the diagramed deal, which was played on Thursday in the Autumn Leaf Regional Championships in Kiamesha Lake, N.Y.


Brenco Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hubco reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Coltec Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Don't Blame TV for Getting Us Into Somalia
To the Editor:
Hindsight is a wonderful thing: always accurate, often gratifying to the ego.
Sometimes we dust off our diaries just to see how smart we were -- how smart we think we are.
The tendency is to flip past the pages where predictions didn't come true and focus on the foresight that turned out to be right: our hindsight wears blinders.


Microchip Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Superior Industries Intl.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


AT HOME WITH: Reno; When a Good Enemy Is Hard to Find
RENO doesn't blush, but her blaring voice drops to a conspiratorial whisper as she comes out of the musical closet and admits that her taste is strictly white bread.
It is a rare confession for the monologuist, whose hyperkinetic rejection of her suburban roots made her a comedic sensation in the late 80's, but it underlies the paradox of her current position.
In a meteoric rise from the downtown New York club scene, she became an antihero of the Reagan-Bush era by rejecting anything to do with fame and money and by unmercifully haranguing their pursuers: politicians, parents, yuppies, Wall Street wizards, women who dress for success -- "Like, I'm supposed to be intimidated by someone who looks like Bozo," she had said.


James A. Buchanan, A Rotarian Official And Benefactor, 74
James A. Buchanan 4th, a major benefactor of Rotary International, died on Sunday at the Baptist Medical Center in Jacksonville, Fla.
He was 74 and lived on a farm in Dickerson, Md.
He died after surgery for an aortal aneurysm, his family said.


Tellabs Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Maple Leafs Move to 4-0 Mark  Rob Pearson and Wendel Clark each scored twice as the undefeated Maple Leafs crushed the winless Washington Capitals last night in Toronto.
Peter Zezel, Dave Andreychuk and Nikolai Borschevsky scored Toronto's other goals.
Toronto (4-0) is off to its best start since 1944-45, when that season's lineup started 6-0 and went on to win the Stanley Cup.
Ted Kennedy was a member of that team and was on hand for a pre-game ceremony during which banners were raised bearing the jersey numbers of Kennedy and Syl Apps.
Keith Jones scored for the Capitals, who at 0-5 are off to their worst start in 10 years. (AP) Whalers 4, Canadiens 3: Geoff Sanderson had his second straight two-goal game and Pat Verbeek and Robert Kron also scored as the Whalers rallied for three goals in the third period and edged the Montreal Canadiens in Hartford.
Sanderson, who has five goals in four games, snapped a 2-2 tie with a short-handed goal at 6 minutes 50 seconds of the third period.
Just 2:30 earlier, Verbeek had drawn Hartford even with a quick wrister from the low slot.
Kron capped the third-period uprising with his first of the season at 8:21, a tap-in from the right post off a feed from Randy Cunneyworth.
Rookie Chris Pronger had two assists for Hartford. (AP)


Corrections
A report in the Religion Notes column on Sept. 25, about a Yom Kippur charity appeal, misstated the amount of a grant given to the Jewish community of Sarajevo by Mazon, a Jewish group working to relieve hunger.
It was $50,000, not $500,000.


The Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl; Riefenstahl, in a Long Close-Up
Ray Muller's "Wonderful, Horrible Life of Leni Riefenstahl" is a big, long (over three hours), sometimes clunky but consistently fascinating documentary portrait of the woman most easily identified as Hitler's favorite film maker, with good reason.
Ms.
Riefenstahl's two outstanding films, "Triumph of the Will" (1935) and "Olympia" (1938), for all of their esthetic glories, served the propaganda machine of National Socialism in ways that probably neither Hitler nor Ms.
Riefenstahl could have foreseen.
The films gave Hitler a credibility at home and around the world that nothing else produced by a German artist in the 1930's ever achieved.
It was Ms.
Riefenstahl's fate not only to survive the war, but also to live on and on and on.


ACL Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mellon Bank Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Philadelphia Wins National League Championship


Structural Dynamics Research Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fernandez May Be The Mets' 104th Loss
The difference in dollars is enormous.
The disagreement in principle is deep.
The conclusion is all but inescapable: Sid Fernandez will not pitch for the Mets in 1994.
Saying that "the days of lip service and flexibility are over," Fernandez's agent, Tom Selakovich, gave the Mets a contract figure more than 10 days ago.
The Mets, saying "no player is more important than the club," haven't responded.


Hanging Around for Halloween


Jets Win Argument, But Still Lose Game
The loss wasn't reversed, but the Jets gained a measure of satisfaction yesterday when the National Football League admitted there were errors by the clock operator and an official on the field at the end of Sunday's game against the Raiders in Los Angeles.
The problems developed after the Raiders, who trailed by 20-17 with no timeouts left, moved from their 7 to the Jets' 7 with 32 seconds left.
The first error was made by the clock operator, who did not start the clock on the next play, Vince Evans's 6-yard pass to Tim Brown at the Jets' 1. (The scoreboard clock is supposed to be synchronized with the official time kept by the line judge.)


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  GRUMBLES IN A QUIET NEIGHBORHOOD As residents of the quiet, shaded Soundview section of the Bronx prepare to vote for mayor, they grumble that the out-of-the way feeling that attracted them to the neighborhood in the first place may be its curse as New York City officials show little interest in their concerns, which range from uneven sidewalks and overgrown trees to the incursion of drugs and crime.
A1.
SCHOOL OFFICIALS REINSTATED In an effort to make peace with a troubled Bronx school district, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines reinstated 10 school administrators whom the previous chancellor removed from office in May amid charges that their hiring had been tainted by bribery and political dealing.
A1.


INSIDE
4 Share Nobel Prizes In Physics and Chemistry
An American and a Canadian won the chemistry prize for developing new techniques in genetics.
Two Americans won the physics prize for their investigation of gravitational forces exerted by dense stars.
Page A6.
Training the Dispossessed
The Administration proposed a $100 million program to retrain Americans left jobless by the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Page B8.
Israel Admits Sales to Beijing
Prime Minister Rabin acknowledged that Israel had sold arms to China, but insisted that the sales did not violate American laws.
Page A3.
Gun Control in Utah
In Utah, violence among youth gangs has caused residents to favor what was long considered unpatriotic: gun control.
Page A16.


Conners to Return to Yanks
The looting of the Yankee coaching staff is expected to begin today or tomorrow when the club announces that Billy Conners, the Chicago Cubs' pitching coach who held the same job with the Yankees, has been hired to replace Tony Cloninger, who was the pitching coach last season.
While General Manager Gene Michael refused to confirm what has been speculation for weeks, a Yankee official said the announcement could occur within 48 hours.
Another American League general manager said the Yankees had dismissed four coaches, likely meaning that first-base coach Frank Howard, bullpen coach Mark Connor and bench coach Ed Napoleon will join Cloninger in the unemployment line.
Since Manager Buck Showalter had already conceded that the Yankees would trim their staff from seven coaches to six, Jake Gibbs was already believed to be relieved of his coaching duties.


Profits at Weyerhaeuser Plummet 38% in Quarter
The Weyerhaeuser Company today reported a 38 percent decline in third-quarter earnings on a 5 percent decline in revenues, indicating that the market for paper and pulp products remained depressed.
The news sent the stock of Weyerhaeuser and other paper companies lower.
Weyerhaeuser fell $1.125, to $38.75; the Georgia-Pacific Corporation fell $1.125, to $60.50, and the Union Camp Corporation dropped 75 cents, to $40.125, all on the New York Stock Exchange.


Wolohan Lumber (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chancellor Restores 10 Principals Removed by Predecessor in Bronx
In an attempt to make peace with a rebellious, corruption-plagued Bronx school district, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines yesterday reinstated 10 school administrators who had been removed from office in May by his predecessor, Joseph A. Fernandez.
Mr.
Cortines said in an interview that his aim was to restore academic stability to a district characterized in a scathing report last spring as a patronage mill, in which school jobs were up for sale and relatives and friends were rewarded.
While no charges were filed against the 10 administrators -- nine principals and an assistant principal -- Mr.
Fernandez dismissed them because of accusations that the district's entire hiring process was corrupt.


Exabyte Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Tiny Gardens Lush With Memories
THROUGH her miniature gardens, Dieta von Matthiessen keeps her childhood memories alive: the faraway lands of bedtime stories, the family vacation to the Yucatan and the exploration of brooks, woods and a forbidden swamp at a 250-acre farm in Brewster, N.Y., that she and her two siblings called home.
Through a vivid imagination nurtured by nature, Ms. von Matthiessen transforms pine-cone chips into cottage shingles, moss into shrubbery and wire into hand-wrought iron for her interpretations of lush gardens, many of them designed by Russell Page or Fletcher Steele.
Unlike theirs, her gardens tend to be less than a foot in diameter; some even fit into a saucer or tea cup.
She once created a rose tree in an antique red glass salt dish for Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis.


Retirement Care Associates Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


'Art' Is No Luxury
New York City is a difficult place to find an apartment, a cheap hotel room, a seat on the subway or, all too often, a moment's peace.
But finding a theater, a museum, an art gallery, a dance group or a concert is a cinch.
The city is up to its ears in the arts.
Last week the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey released a report that tells just what that extraordinary cultural concentration means to the metropolitan economy.
It means jobs, lots of them, for New Yorkers -- and tax revenues for the city and state.


Western Digital Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Gannett Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Car Towing Conducted As Security Is Intensified
The towing operation that led to the death of a housing police officer last week in Washington Heights continued yesterday, as officers patrolled rooftops and a police helicopter hovered to provide increased security.
Five Department of Transportation tow trucks and their operators began sweeping through the neighborhood late yesterday afternoon and continued through the night, each accompanied by a police officer.
By nightfall, the police reported no incidents and 20 cars were towed.


4 North Americans Win Nobel Prizes for Science
For their landmark contributions to the science of genetics, an American and a Canadian yesterday shared the 1993 Nobel Prize in Chemistry.
Also yesterday, two Americans shared the Nobel physics prize for their investigation of gigantic gravitational forces exerted by ultradense stars.
The chemistry prize was bestowed jointly upon Dr.
Kary B. Mullis, the inventor of a technique for making many copies of a single gene fragment, and Dr.
Michael Smith, for a method used to splice foreign components into genetic molecules.


Maybelline Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Turkish Leader to Press U.S. on Iraq Embargo
Turkey's Prime Minister, Tansu Ciller, left here tonight for Washington, where she is expected to ask President Clinton a question that has come to preoccupy many political and economic leaders here and elsewhere: how long can the Western embargo of Iraq continue without visible political result?
The question is particularly pertinent to Turkey, which says it is losing about $3 billion a year in trade and income from Iraq's pipeline across Turkey, an artery that has been closed since the beginning of the Persian Gulf crisis in August 1990.


Assist From Brown
JIM BROWN was on hand yesterday at Mother A.M.E.
Zion Church in Harlem, beaming like a proud father at the sight of the 67 newest graduates of his Amer-I-Can Program.
"It's a step-by-step process," said the former Cleveland Browns star.
"These young men have gone through the class. Now, they will go back into the community and start working in a positive way."


National Book Awards Remove a Finalist
Judges for the 1993 National Book Awards have removed Juliet Wittman from the list of finalists for the nonfiction award because the author informed them that she was a British citizen and therefore ineligible for the award.
The judges have named a new finalist, Peter Svenson, the author of "Battlefield: Farming a Civil War Battleground" (Faber &amp; Faber).


Richter Gets Benched; Rangers Get the Point
Mike Richter was flat on his back, the puck behind him in the net, and Mike Keenan was pacing behind the bench.
Everybody knew this would happen sometime.
Keenan has only so much patience with his goaltenders.
Last night, he ran out.
A mere 5 minutes and 39 seconds into the Rangers-Nordiques game at Madison Square Garden, Quebec was ahead by two goals and Richter was banished to the bench.
Richter's on-ice failures and his tendency to struggle when behind certainly played into the decision.
But this was also a message, to Richter and his teammates.


Lukens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Valmont Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Somali Toll in Clash Was 300, U.S. Says
About 300 Somalis are believed to have been killed in the street fighting in Mogadishu on Oct. 3, and hundreds of those treated in hospitals were women and children, military and relief officials say.


Universal Health Realty Income Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SLOVENIA REPORTS A WEAPONS CACHE
Slovenian authorities have seized a large cache of infantry weapons that they said were destined for the Muslim-led armed forces of Bosnia and Herzegovina, in violation of an international arms embargo.
A United States official said today that the Administration had been informed that the cache consists of 11,000 assault rifles, 750,000 rounds of ammunition and 30 mortars.
It was discovered at an airport near Maribor, Slovenia, in July.


Clinton Resists Earlier Somalia Pullout
President Clinton and Senate leaders struggled today to beat back a proposal that would require United States troops to pull out of Somalia earlier than the timetable the President has set.
It was a day of lengthy closed-door meetings, deal-making, competing compromises and hints that the White House might speed up the removal of the forces from Somalia.


Lufkin Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; A New Age's Suppliers Sell Well
Some of the biggest winners from the Bell Atlantic Corporation's proposed acquisition of Tele-Communications Inc. could be the stockholders of companies that make construction and maintenance equipment for the data superhighway.
Such stocks, which have been hot lately, jumped yesterday on news of the biggest communications merger in history.
Among the shares bid up yesterday were the stocks of General Instrument, the supplier of cable-television boxes to Tele-Communications; Broadband Technologies, provider of fiber-optic equipment to Bell Atlantic, and DSC Communications, which makes digital switching and transmission equipment that is essential to Bell Atlantic's networks.


Critic's Notebook; This Jewish Mom Dominates TV, Too
Of the relatively few stereotypes that have slipped past political-correctness watchdogs in recent years, none has more stamina than the exaggerated Jewish mother, a stock character once again very much in vogue in prime-time entertainment.
The British music hall once had its bandylegged, boozy Irish Paddy.
Today's television seems curiously partial to neurotically overprotective, brash and often garish mothers of the unmistakably Jewish persuasion.
One reason may simply be Oedipal revenge.
From "Seinfeld" to "Mad About You," many of the writers and performers are Jewish.
Perhaps this is one way to get back at Mommy.
Viciously?
No.
Most of the characterizations are rooted in fondness, albeit backhanded and very wry.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN EXPRESS TRAVEL RELATED SERVICES INC., New York, appointed John Yates senior vice president of vendor management services.


Reviews/Dance; A Dutch Tribute to Ives's Life And Music
Beppie Blankert, a Dutch choreographer, is obviously smitten by the music of Charles Ives, the experimental American composer who lived from 1874 to 1954.
On Thursday night at St.
Mark's Church, she sent him a beautiful theatrical love letter.
Ives adored bold dissonances, but he also had a soft spot for hymns and ballads.
Both facets of his creative personality were on view in Ms.
Blankert's "Ives," which was performed by Dansers Studio, her Amsterdam-based group, and presented as a co-production between the Danspace Project at St.
Mark's and Dance Theater Workshop.


GFC Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Economic Scene; The health care plan could worsen injury-claim abuses.
BILL CLINTON'S health care plan makes a cautious stab at curbing malpractice suits, reducing the incentives to go to court and forcing those injured to try mediation first.
So there is at least a hope that the total cost of the accident liability system, which runs $130 billion a year in insurance premiums, will fall.
Right?
Don't spend the savings just yet.
Peter Huber, a legal scholar, points out that the medical malpractice slice represents no more than one-eighth of the total tort liability pie.
And there are good reasons to believe that the President's plan would inadvertently fatten the other seven-eighths.


Homes in Queens Hit in Series of Robberies
An armed gang of robbers has been at work in affluent neighborhoods in eastern Queens for about a month, often breaking into homes during the early hours of the morning, a police official said yesterday.
So far, no one has been injured.
Inspector Thomas V. Connelly, executive officer of Queens detectives, said that on six different dates, from Sept. 2 to Oct. 6, the gang invaded 15 homes in middle-income or high-income neighborhoods, including Bayside, Cambria Heights, Forest Hills, Fresh Meadows, Howard Beach, Queens Village, Rego Park, Rosedale and South Ozone Park.
On Oct. 6 alone, they struck six times, he said.


Columbia Poised for Start of Longest Shuttle Flight
The space shuttle Columbia was poised today to begin the longest flight of the shuttle program, a two-week mission dedicated to medical experiments involving seven astronauts and 48 rats.
Officials at the Kennedy Space Center here said no technical problems stood in the way of Thursday's launching of the Columbia, scheduled for 10:53 A.M.


Shelby Williams Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hal Riney Executive Returns to Burnett
Tony Houghton, who left the Leo Burnett Company 10 months ago to become president at Hal Riney &amp; Partners in San Francisco, unexpectedly said yesterday that he would rejoin Burnett in Chicago, effective Nov. 8.
Replacing him at Riney, as managing director, will be David Verklin, one of the industry's best-known agency media executives.
Mr.
Houghton, 55, will return to Burnett as president and managing director of Leo Burnett U.S.A., overseeing the agency's American operations.
He will assume managerial and administrative functions from James G. Oates, 50, who was recently named group president of the agency's Asia-Pacific region as part of a restructuring.
Mr.
Houghton will report to James Jenness, 47, who was named group president of North America as part of that restructuring.


Health Reform Must Include Abortion; Catholics in Exile
To the Editor:
During the recent visit of Pope John Paul II to the United States, discussions on disaffected Catholics failed to mention those who think of themselves as "Catholics in exile." These are families who responded to Pope Pius XII's call for "responsible parenthood" via "the observance of infertile times" and "the use of natural temporary sterility" and for whom this method failed repeatedly for biological reasons: unclear or recurring fertile signs within the monthly cycle.


Christine O'Reilly, 25, Tennis-Playing Triplet
Christine O'Reilly, one of the tennis-playing triplets from Ridgewood, N.J., died on Sunday at the University of California hospital at Irvine.
She never regained consciousness after suffering a severe head injury in an automobile accident in Irvine early Saturday morning.
She was 25.
John Korff, a tennis promoter from Mahwah, N.J., said that Miss O'Reilly had been in California scouting sites for a balloon festival next year.
He said she was the lone passenger in a car driven by Steven Allan Evans, 29, the pilot who had flown her over prospective sites.
Mr.
Evans was killed instantly when the car struck a utility pole.


Smith (A.O.) Corp. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Braves' Baffling Role: A Team Without Title
It is a club, with its pitching and defense and bold acquisitions, of perfect theoretical architecture.
It had produced the game's best record, and it had developed a kind of corporate cool, its players practiced in miracles and spectacularly deep in talent.
In the end, though, the Braves again turned out to be inadequate.
Their 104 triumphs, historic and heroic, were rendered an exasperating tease.
The spending and the strategizing couldn't buy or engineer a world championship.
It is now three years of almost, and the hurt and questions only grow.


Penn Proposes Elimination of 3 Departments
Citing the kinds of tight finances that are squeezing campuses nationwide, the University of Pennsylvania has moved to eliminate three departments -- religious studies, civilization and regional science -- and absorb their faculty in other departments.
The university would also fold its astronomy department into physics and would bring in outside administrators to overhaul the management of its Slavic languages department.


TSI Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Molex Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sonoco Products (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Nichols Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Mozart Makes the Brain Hum, a Study Finds
Can it be that the music of Mozart is not only exalting but can also improve intelligence?
An experiment on students at the University of California at Irvine suggests that listening to 10 minutes of Mozart's piano music significantly improves performance in intelligence tests taken immediately afterward.
The finding is being reported today in the British scientific journal Nature by researchers from the university.


World Acceptance (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Ranchers Tend New Stock: Elk
On Jack Bridgewater's sprawling ranch by the snow-capped Big Belt Mountains, aspen meadows echo this time of year with a sound and sight uncommon to livestock operations: the eerie moans of rutting elk.
Throughout the West, a new breed of ranchers like Mr.
Bridgewater are raising big-game animals like elk and deer.
They are doing it to satisfy the demands of restaurants that serve venison and Asian producers that buy antlers as aphrodisiacs.


TSI Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to June 27


Maybelline Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Israelis and the P.L.O. Meet: Peace Is in the Details
The agreement between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization officially went into effect today, and with it the two sides began crucial negotiations on transferring authority in the occupied territories from Israel to Palestinians.
Far from being mere technicalities, the specifics will determine the ultimate success or failure of the new relationship, and officials on both sides agree that they have not given themselves much time.


Agassi Out Until '94
ANDRE AGASSI has pulled out of next month's Paris Open because of a wrist injury and won't play for the rest of the season, organizers of the tournament said yesterday in Paris.


Phillies' Wild Things Are in the World Series
Five years after hitting such a nadir that not even the hungriest of free agents wanted to put on the uniform, one year after finishing a humbling last in the National League East, 25 Phillies finally got to say last night that all things considered, they'd rather be in Philadelphia.
Because Philadelphia is where the National League pennant now flies.
And where a World Series game will be played for the first time in 10 years, thanks to the Phillies' most improbable National League Championship Series victory, four games to two, over the Atlanta Braves.


Bloody Prints in Oslo
It could be a coincidence that a Norwegian publisher and friend of Salman Rushdie was shot from behind three times outside his home near Oslo, and that the tires of his car were also slashed by a would-be robber.
But the attempted murder of the publisher, William Nygaard, has the same marks of a contract hit as did the fatal stabbing in 1991 of Mr.
Rushdie's Japanese translator and the knife attack on the Italian translator of his novel "The Satanic Verses."
The long arm in these cases most likely belongs to the Islamic Republic of Iran, whose rulers hate both Mr.
Rushdie and the Israeli-P.L.O. accord that Norway helped nurture.


Western Digital Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


GFC Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


ACL Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Inspectors Are Accused Of Extortion
The commanding officer of the unit that enforces sanitation laws in midtown and lower Manhattan and 10 current and former inspectors were accused yesterday of extorting between $5,000 and $10,000 a year each from shopkeepers, restaurant owners and street food vendors.
"I used my summons book like a gun to get money," said the commander of the Sanitation Department unit, Lieut.
Rayman Rahim, after he was arrested yesterday, according to Peter Benjaminson, a spokesman for the Department of Investigation.


Gannett Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Showing Off Big Plans for Recycled Paper
PEOPLE who live in glass houses should throw no stones, according to an oft-repeated saying.
But what about those in paper ones?
They have no more to worry about than residents of frame houses, said Stanley Shetka, who creates bricks and other building materials from old newspapers, milk cartons, magazines, telephone books and soap boxes.
Mr.
Shetka's work will be part of the "Paper Futures" exhibition at the Minneapolis Institute of Art from Oct. 22 through Jan. 2.


Artisoft (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Linoleum Turns Into Vegetables
WHEN the kitchen floor in Kevin Gavin's Manhattan apartment needed a little sprucing up, he decided against replacing the linoleum.
He remembered the trompe l'oeil throw rug he had seen in a friend's kitchen and asked its designer, Laura Brandt, to paint his entire floor.
Ms.
Brandt, an oil painter who usually creates still lifes, thought Mr.
Gavin might like a design with instruments, since he is a composer and music producer.
Instead, he opted for a vegetable motif she had also designed.


Delays in Grand Central Fire Laid to Crippling of 3 Systems
The Metro-North Commuter Railroad was crippled Tuesday night and early yesterday morning because a fire in a shed at Grand Central Terminal knocked out or heavily damaged three systems that are supposed to back up each other: radio, telephone and signal-control equipment.
The fire occurred after years of work by Metro-North to improve the reliability of its signal and communications systems.
Communications cables run down each side of Metro-North's right-of-ways, eliminating the possibility that damage to one cable will cut off communications.
To further increase reliability, the railroad has been burying the cables.
But the cables all come together at the communications headquarters, a room built in 1988 at the terminal to allow automation of the railroad.


Wolohan Lumber (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dexter Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Southwestern Public Service Co.  reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Rivers Gets Ready For Rigors Of Season
According to Pat Riley, Doc Rivers was in the best shape of any Knick reporting to training camp.
Impressive, considering Rivers turned 32 years old today.
Yet the big question concerning Rivers is this: can he finish the season as healthy as he is now?
During last year's Eastern Conference finals, Rivers showed the wear and tear of a long season handling the majority of minutes at point guard.
He played with torn ligaments in his right thumb and cracked ribs during the playoff series against Chicago.
And Rivers admitted that the injuries kept him from performing the way he wanted.


Molex Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Delchamps Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


U.S. Is Reported to Be Seeking An Informal Truce With Somali
The White House's special representative in Somalia said today that the United States was seeking an informal truce in its undeclared war with Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid that would make it possible to begin withdrawing American troops by early next year.
Speaking to reporters, the White House envoy, Robert B. Oakley, also said he would not rule out a meeting with General Aidid.
Nor, he indicated, would the United States try to prevent the general from becoming president of his country in the future.


32,000 New Yorkers Vote on Puerto Rico
Nearly 32,000 New Yorkers of Puerto Rican background turned out last week for a symbolic vote on whether Puerto Rico should remain a commonwealth of the United States or seek statehood or independence, it was announced yesterday.
The vote, held over three days ending last Saturday, drew only a fraction of the estimated 300,000 Puerto Ricans who are registered to vote in New York City.
But its organizers said the turnout of 31,746 people exceeded their expectations given the logistical problems of the unprecedented vote.


Giants' Thornton Has Mild Stroke
Giants defensive lineman George Thornton apparently suffered a minor stroke early this morning as a result of severe hypertension, or extremely high blood pressure, according to the team physician, Russell Warren.
Thornton is in stable condition at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center and the prognosis for him returning to football this season is good, team officials say.
The 300-pound Thornton was picked up off waivers before the start of the regular season after he was released by the San Diego Chargers.
Thornton, 25, showed signs of slurred speech and some dizziness as his blood pressure shot up late Tuesday night and this morning.


Ballard Medical Prod reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Music; Serkin's Particular 'Goldberg' Variations
"Long have I been away from you" are the playful words to an 18th-century popular tune Bach quotes near the end of the "Goldberg" Variations.
It is as if the tune's unsung lyrics were referring to the theme itself, about to return after a long sojourn through canons, gigues, fugues, arias and dances: 30 of the most exquisite variations written for the keyboard.
The explanation for the absence of the theme is in the words to another melody Bach quotes in the final variation: "Cabbage and turnips have put me to flight."
One problem with Peter Serkin's survey of this remarkable set of pieces at Carnegie Hall on Tuesday night was that Bach's playful allusion to mishaps of digestion after eating cabbage -- his coded suggestion that the theme was pushed into a fantastical flight of variation by something earthy and physical -- was completely overlooked.
Mr.
Serkin didn't care much at all about the physical world of movement and dance, the prismatic energy in the hand-crossing patter of the score, the body that listens to or creates this music.
There was something precious and detached about the performance.


Delchamps Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Structural Dynamics Research Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Health Reform Must Include Abortion
To the Editor:
While Helen Alvare, spokeswoman for the United States Catholic Conference's pro-life office, may be opposed to a health care reform plan that includes abortion, it is important to note that the organization she works for has not specifically made such a statement ("New Health Plan, Old Abortion Fight," news article, Oct. 4).


Mellon Bank Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fields Set for 6 Races At Belmont's Jamboree
More than 50 of the best race horses from England, Ireland, France, Canada and the United States were entered yesterday in this Saturday's great Belmont Park jamboree, six stakes races worth $2.4 million in prize money plus star billing for the Breeders' Cup three weeks later.
The fields are mostly small but select, and the early favorites are all leading candidates for championships.
They are Devil His Due at 2-1 in the $850,000 Jockey Club Gold Cup, the 2-year-old Dehere at 2-5 in the $500,000 Champagne Stakes, the undefeated Strategic Maneuver at 4-5 in the $250,000 Frizette for 2-year-old fillies, Lure at 3-5 in the $200,000 Kelso on the turf and Turnback the Alarm at 2-1 in the $250,000 Beldame for fillies and mares.


Patents Don't Grant Exclusive Right to Market
To the Editor:
A complaint concerning the Japanese patent system attributed to Bruce A. Lehman, Assistant Secretary of Commerce and head of the Patent and Trademark Office, incorrectly characterizes the main advantage of a patent, thereby perpetuating a common misunderstanding (Patents, Oct. 4).


Microchip Technology Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge
Enthusiastic analysts often consider this post-mortem question: Could it have been made double-dummy?
The reader can explore this question on the diagramed deal, given a contract of six hearts and the lead of the spade jack.
The deal occurred on Monday in the Stratified Flight A Pairs at the conclusion of the regional championships in Kiamesha Lake, N.Y., and helped Paul and Joan Dziekanski of Manhattan, as North and South, to win the title by a large margin.
Using a four-card major style, they climbed to six hearts.


Review/Music; Extremism in the Defense of Rock, From Iggy Pop
Rock often enough feeds on extremity, and few people have cultivated the image of a nihilistic binger as thoroughly as Iggy Pop, the now-middle-aged progenitor of just about every trend in alternative rock.
He and his band came through New York on Tuesday night, playing a sold-out show at the Academy; it was part bad-boyism, part hyperactivity and all wildness.
Rock loves voyeurism, and part of Iggy's appeal comes from the anticipation of his self-abuse.
In that respect, he didn't get too far: he sang a song or two with his pants around his ankles, but that was about it.
For the rest of the show, he wandered over his career, from early tunes he played with the Stooges, including "I Wanna Be Your Dog" to a handful of songs from his latest album, "American Caesar" (Virgin), nearly 25 years later.


Israelis and the P.L.O. Meet: Peace Is in the Details; Talks in Cairo
Foreign Minister Shimon Peres and Mahmoud Abbas, of the P.L.O., met here today to carry out the transfer of authority.
After a two-hour meeting, the two men said in a joint statement that they had agreed on five initial steps, to take effect Dec. 13, including setting up committees and scheduling frequent, in some cases continuous meetings.


Nichols Research Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Richard A. Wolters Dog Training Expert, 73
Richard A. Wolters, an expert on training hunting dogs, died on Saturday after he landed an ultralight aircraft that he had been piloting near his farm in Hanover, Va.
He was 73.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Birminghman Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Investigators Question Commerce Secretary
Investigators met on Monday with Commerce Secretary Ronald H. Brown to ask him questions about allegations by a Vietnamese businessman who said Mr.
Brown had been offered $700,000 to work toward removing the nation's trade embargo with Vietnam.
The meeting, involving an agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and a lawyer for the Justice Department, was reported by The Washington Post today and confirmed by a person involved in the case.
That person said the Justice Department was still weeks away from determining whether to seek charges against Mr.
Brown.


FIRST CHICAGO CORP. (N)
The First Chicago Corporation, parent company of the First National Bank of Chicago, said yesterday that gains on investments in other companies and growth in its credit card business produced a record profit of $284 million in the quarter ended Sept. 30.
Excluding an unusually large $117 million profit from venture capital investments, First Chicago earned $167 million, which was more than analysts had expected.
Most of the venture capital gain was from stock holdings in Nextel, a communications company.
The credit card business, in which the bank is one of the 10 largest in the country, grew rapidly, with fees totaling $186.7 million in the quarter, up 34.7 percent from last year.


A Princess Tightens Her High-Fashion Belt
Two hundred years ago on Oct. 16, Marie-Antoinette was guillotined in Paris.
Before and after that anniversary, another German-speaking princess with even more lavish tastes is likely to make $20 million selling off her family trinkets.
Sotheby's auction of "The Thurn und Taxis Princely Collection," as the seven-volume boxed catalogue is grandly titled, began today and will continue until Oct. 21.
Marie-Antoinette's death is being remembered in Paris by all manner of nostalgic events, among them a newly composed Requiem Mass and a play in which the audience gets to vote on her fate.
By and large, to the chagrin of the play's creators, they are choosing exile or death.


Henry H. Perlman, 97, Expert in Dermatology
Dr.
Henry H. Perlman, a pioneer in pediatric dermatology, died on Sunday at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital in Philadelphia.
He was 97 and lived in Philadelphia, where he practiced medicine for more than 70 years.
Dr.
Perlman was honorary clinical professor in both pediatrics and dermatology at the Jefferson Medical College of Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia.
He wrote a textbook, "Pediatric Dermatology," published in 1960, which helped establish the field as a recognized subspecialty in medicine.


Japan Is Urged to Insure Foreigners' Trade Share
As a keystone of its new approach to trade with Japan, the United States will demand that foreign companies gain the same share of the market for various goods and services in Japan as in other industrial nations, an American trade official said today.
The official, who is here for talks aimed at reaching detailed agreements under a broad trade framework signed by the United States and Japan in July, spoke at a news briefing as the talks began in earnest today.
The negotiator said that if the United States and Japan could not agree on "objective criteria" to measure the opening of Japanese markets, as was called for in July, Washington would establish such indexes itself.


Mosinee Paper Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sonoco Products (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Teen-Age Pregnancy Deserves Moral Censure
To the Editor:
"When the Cheering Had to Stop" (editorial, Oct. 5) continues the tradition of moral relativism you and other cultural leaders have so successfully espoused for 30 years.


Bowe's Extra Weight Doesn't Worry Him
Riddick Bowe ballooned to more than 270 pounds as late as last month, but the heavyweight champion has recently been punishing sparring partners, breaking one's nose, knocking out another's teeth and sending a third packing.
Bowe said yesterday by telephone from Lake Tahoe, Nev., that he was down to 250 pounds, and may lose 15 more for his Nov. 6 title defense against Evander Holyfield in Las Vegas, Nev.


Lehman Bros. to Move 900 Back-Office Jobs to Jersey City
After months of speculation, Lehman Brothers Inc. has decided to move more than 900 back-office employees to Jersey City, to the same 42-floor tower to which Merrill Lynch moved 2,500 back-office jobs a year ago.
Richard S. Fuld Jr., Lehman Brothers' president, said the decision to move was the result of a six-month study of future space needs, and reaffirmed plans to keep 5,000 employees in New York, the bulk at company headquarters at 3 World Financial Center.


U.N. Says Bosnia Factions Block Winter Supplies
As Bosnia heads into the second winter of its civil war with more than half of its population dependent on food relief supplies, United Nations officials have accused the warring factions of deliberately frustrating efforts to help the most vulnerable groups survive the winter.
With nighttime temperatures in mountainous regions already below the freezing point, and the first snowfalls only weeks away, there are no stockpiles of food and winter shelter materials in United Nations warehouses.
Food deliveries to the areas of Bosnia hardest hit by the war continue to fall far below United Nations targets, dropping to as little as 20 percent of what officials consider minimal needs.


Clinton Offers Job Training For Trade Pact Casualties
The Clinton Administration proposed a $100 million program today to help retrain Americans who lose their jobs because of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
But critics of the pact were unimpressed by the proposal.
The Administration, which has long insisted that few Americans would be put out of work by the trade agreement, put the plan forward as a way of blunting opposition by unions and some Congressional Democrats.


Shelby Williams Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stocks End Day Higher; Dow Up 10.06
Cable and entertainment issues led the stock market higher yesterday in reaction to the proposed acquisition of Tele-Communications Inc. by Bell Atlantic, which would be the nation's largest corporate merger ever.
Tele-Communications rose 3, to 31 3/8, while Liberty Media, which it hopes to reacquire, was up 2 5/8, to 29 1/4.
Disney advanced 4 3/4, to 44 1/2, and Time Warner increased 1 7/8, to 41 7/8.
Bell Atlantic itself rose 5 7/8, to 65 7/8.


A Picture of a Picture as Pretty as a Picture


California Water Service Co.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Glatfelter (P.H.) Co. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
3.07
3.96
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.01
3.04
2.92
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.09
3.12
3.00
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.81
4.82
6.04
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.91
5.92
7.49
TELEPHONE BONDS
6.95
6.93
8.58
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.39
5.39
6.43
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Sizing Up the Emerging Colossus
As Bell Atlantic and Tele-Communications Inc. officially announced their intent to merge, a significance well beyond the billions of dollars involved began to unfold.
The merger would create a company with the financial wherewithal and the management skills to cover American homes with a huge umbrella of entertainment and information, available at the flick of a wrist.


Ryan's Family Steak House Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Cunningham Among Bessie Winners
Merce Cunningham, Beverly Blossom and the Five Lesbian Brothers were among the 26 winners of Bessies, more formally known as New York Dance and Performance Awards, which were awarded on Monday night in a private ceremony at the Dance Theater Workshop.
The awards, given to dancers, musicians, scenic and lighting designers, a photographer and a dance producer, are named after the dance educator Bessie Schonberg.
Since 1983, when the Bessies were established, the awards ceremony has been held in such theaters as the Brooklyn Academy of Music, the Joyce and the Delacorte.
But at this year's 10th anniversary, there was no extra glitter.
The Dance Theater Workshop, sponsor of the awards, is a tiny space, which underlined what its director, David R. White, described as a "bare bones" celebration because of recessional cutbacks in financial support.


Lufkin Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Universal Health Realty Income Trust reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Despite Scandal, Politicians Still Want Wall St. Money
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York is already feeling the pinch of the move on Wall Street to stop political contributions aimed at winning bond-selling business.
Invitations to be on the committee for his Victory 1994 dinner on Dec. 1 were being opened on Wall Street just as 11 major firms last week announced a moratorium on contributions.
"I guess I'll have to turn this down," said one top executive at a major firm.


Giuliani Accuses Dinkins Of Being a Weak Leader
Rudolph W. Giulinai made a blistering advertising attack on Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday, criticizing his record and accusing him of weak leadership that has caused the city to lose 350,000 jobs, allowed government scandals and public disorder to flourish and encouraged racial divisiveness.
Though Mr.
Giuliani has attacked the condition of the city on the stump and in commercials before, the two new commercials mark the first time he has taken on Mr.
Dinkins's record -- and what Mr.
Giuliani calls his lack of accountability -- in paid advertising with such blunt, confrontational language that clearly seeks to put Mr.
Dinkins on the defensive.


Richter Gets Benched; Rangers Get the Point
Mike Richter was flat on his back, the puck behind him in the net, and Mike Keenan was pacing behind the bench.
Everybody knew this would happen sometime.
Keenan has only so much patience with his goaltenders.
Last night, he ran out.
A mere 5 minutes and 39 seconds into the Rangers-Nordiques game at Madison Square Garden, Quebec was ahead by two goals and Richter was banished to the bench.
Richter's on-ice failures and his tendency to struggle when behind certainly played into the decision.
But this was also a message, to Richter and his teammates.


A MERGER OF GIANTS: The 'Other' Deal; An Uncertain Impact on QVC's Plans
In the unpredictable drama over the looming takeover of Paramount Communications Inc., the plan by the Bell Atlantic Corporation to acquire Tele-Communications Inc. has abruptly altered the scenario and startled some of the leading players.
But the dominant performer, John C. Malone, the president and chief executive of Tele-Communications, the nation's largest operator of cable television systems, was center stage and controlling the plot.


Valmont Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Felix Grant Is Dead; Host of Jazz Show In Capital Was 74
Felix Grant, a jazz disk jockey in Washington for more than 40 years, died on Thursday at his home in Washington.
He was 74.
The cause was liver cancer, his family said.


But the Blue Jays Have Some Storybook Characters, Too
Now that the Toronto Blue Jays have proved they can repeat as American League pennant winners despite a wholesale change in their appearance, they go to the World Series to see if they can repeat there, too, with their adaptable dozen.
The Blue Jays, who wrapped up the pennant Tuesday night in Chicago, have 12 players among the 25 who were not on their World Series roster a year ago; the most important cast changes were Paul Molitor playing the role of Dave Winfield and Dave Stewart as Jack Morris.


Unitrin Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mosinee Paper Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Victims of Truck Hijacking Dial a Rescue
Handcuffed and locked in the back of a hijacked delivery truck yesterday, en route to who knows where, two delivery men did what any sensible kidnapping victims would do: They called 911 on a cellular phone.
It worked.
After the men told a police dispatcher where they were and what the truck looked like, two police officers spotted it near the entrance of the Manhattan Bridge, chased it into Brooklyn and caught it on Flatbush Avenue, said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck, a police spokeswoman.


California Water Service Co.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


3D JUROR AT ISSUE IN BEATING TRIAL
Legal combat over the composition of the jury continued today in the trial of two black men accused of beating a white truck driver during last year's riot, with a defense lawyer asking for the removal of a third juror during deliberations.
The lawyer, Edi M. O. Faal, asked the court to remove a white woman who he said appeared to be biased in favor of the prosecution.
Judge John G. Ouderkirk of Superior Court, who has removed two other jurors in the past two days, asked for a response from the prosecutors and said he would rule on the motion on Thursday.


Hans W. Heinsheimer Dies at 93; Top Publisher of Classical Music
Hans W. Heinsheimer, one of the most influential classical-music publishers of the 20th century, died on Tuesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 93.
Although Mr.
Heinsheimer's name lacked the recognition factor of his famous clients, he instigated, participated in or at least was present at many significant events in contemporary music.
In his work as publisher and promoter, he served as midwife and artistic broker for such composers as Bartok, Stravinsky, Barber, Copland, Kodaly, Antheil, Bernstein, Berg, Janacek and Krenek.


Anti-abortion campaign raises questions of proper role of TV.
AN expensive anti-abortion campaign, which has sparked debate over advertisements advocating points of view on controversial issues, has begun running on New York area television stations.
When WCBS, Channel 2 in New York, owned by CBS Inc., and WWOR, Channel 9 in Secaucus, N.J., started running the commercials last week, it marked the first time they had appeared on local broadcast stations in a major market.
Abortion rights organizations said they were outraged and would seek time from the stations to express their opposing opinions.


CHRONICLE
Two Supreme Court justices, SANDRA DAY O'CONNOR and RUTH BADER GINSBURG, attended a reception at the Court on Tuesday evening and came away with something new to wear: T-shirts that read "The Supremes" on the front and either "I'm Sandra, Not Ruth" or "I'm Ruth, Not Sandra" on the back.
The event was a reception given by the National Association of Women Judges and the Schlesinger Library on the History of Women in America at Radcliffe College in Cambridge, Mass.
The judges' organization has donated its archives of manuscripts and letters, including material from the two justices, to the library.


Silicon General Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brokerage Firm To New York Shop
A small New York agency has been awarded a major account by a discount brokerage firm based in Toronto.
Green Line Investor Services, a division of the Toronto Dominion Bank, said yesterday that it had selected Mad Dogs &amp; Englishmen to handle the creative portion of its estimated $3 million to $5 million advertising account.
Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Toronto had been Green Line's agency for the last nine years.


In Heart of Gun Country, Utah Is Changing Its Mind
Like starting to drive or date, owning a gun has long been a rite of passage for teen-agers in Utah, a state where many schools once closed during deer hunting season to accommodate the sport.
But a recent wave of violence has horrified residents of this famously prim-and-proper city, where street gangs were unknown only a decade ago, and prompted what was traditionally scorned as downright unpatriotic: gun control.


Don't Blame TV for Getting Us Into Somalia; U.S. Support Is Vital
To the Editor:
United States support for the United Nations mission in Somalia is vi tal.
U.S. global credibility is part of its national interest.
Somalia was chosen as opposed to the former Yugoslavia or any number of places because it was considered more doable.


Good humor plays peekaboo in Paris
This chiffon dress under a jacket was part of Valentino's fluid look. (pg. C10)


U.S.-Made Vehicle Sales Up 8.7% in Early October
Sales of cars and light trucks built in North America climbed 8.7 percent in early October, compared with lackluster sales for the period a year earlier.
"These are decent numbers, and I think they'll get better as we get deeper into the fall," said David Healy, an auto industry analyst with S. G. Warburg &amp; Company in New York.


CHRONICLE
JOSEPH BAUM has long been a prominent figure on the New York restaurant scene: he is the creator of establishments, past and present, like Windows on the World, Aurora, La Fonda del Sol, the Four Seasons and the restored Rainbow Room at Rockefeller Center.
But there are those who remember him in a different kind of kitchen, the one on the U.S.S.
Lindsey, a minelayer that was blown apart in a kamikaze attack southwest of Okinawa on April 12, 1945.
Mr.
Baum, then 22, was the supply officer on the vessel.
On Tuesday, he gave a dinner for 31 of the 100 or so surviving crew members and their wives and children in the Radio City Suite of the Rainbow complex.
It was the culmination of the group's reunion, which began on Saturday.


Hynes Urges Reno To Bring Charges On Crown Heights
The Brooklyn District Attorney has argued to the United States Attorney General, Janet Reno, that she has ample authority to prosecute a black teen-ager for civil rights violations in the slaying of a Hasidic Jew during the 1991 Crown Heights racial violence.
In a brief submitted last month but made public yesterday, the District Attorney, Charles J. Hynes, cited various Federal civil rights statutes that he held could be used to bring charges against the teen-ager, Lemrick Nelson Jr., 18.
Mr.
Hynes's office prosecuted Mr.
Nelson unsuccessfully on state murder and manslaughter charges in the death of Yankel Rosenbaum.


Hubbell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Irish President Backs New Call for Peace in Ulster
President Mary Robinson indicated today that she approved of the new initiative toward a settlement of the strife in Northern Ireland.
The opinion of Mrs.
Robinson, one of the most popular and respected figures in Irish politics, could add impetus to the initiative begun last month by two influential Catholic leaders in Northern Ireland, Gerry Adams, president of Sinn Fein, the political wing of the outlawed Irish Republican Army, and John Hume, the head of the moderate Social Democratic Labor Party.


U.S. MOVE ANGERS DIPLOMATS IN HAITI
One day after the abrupt withdrawal of a ship carrying 218 American and Canadian soldiers, some Western diplomats here expressed outrage that the United States had seemingly capitulated in the face of opposition by the Haitian military to a international settlement of this country's crisis.
Western diplomats who have been involved with negotiations here said that the sudden withdrawal of the American transport ship, the Harlan County, had not only delivered a serious blow to their efforts, but had also potentially exposed hundreds of foreigners in the country to a wave of xenophobic violence by heavily armed Haitians opposed to the return of the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Ryan's Family Steak House Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Pop and Jazz in Review
Huggy Bear and the Frumpies  ABC No Rio 156 Rivington Street Lower East Side
Punk rock may turn out to be as durable as the blues.
The music that marked rock's adolescent temper tantrum in the 1970's has become the idiom for disaffected youths, who accept nothing from their elders except punk rock's shouted vocals, clattering drums and choked power chords.
The music's discordant noise and defiant amateurism keep it on the fringes of pop, to be rediscovered and renewed by wave after wave of marginalized fans and musicians.


At the Wire, U.A.W. Balks On Ford Pact
Two hours before they were to formally sign a three-year contract negotiated last month with the Ford Motor Company, top officials of the United Automobile Workers union notified Ford that they were unhappy with the company's view of one provision and would not sign.
Ford officials said they were caught off guard Tuesday night by the union's objection, which deals with a section giving workers a four-day weekend around Independence Day.
Ford and the union had scheduled a signing ceremony at 10 A.M. today, which they called off at 8 A.M.
No new date for signing the agreement was scheduled.
No Longer Settled
It was a highly unusual, perhaps unprecedented, move by the U.A.W., since the Ford agreement had already been ratified by the union's members at the No. 2 auto maker by a 2-to-1 margin, and the union had publicly treated it as a done deal.
Furthermore, the U.A.W. is now locked in negotiations with the General Motors Corporation.


Reviews/Dance; Song in Easy Concert With Choreography
Concert Royal, a musical group directed by James Richman, and the New York Baroque Dance Company, directed by Catherine Turocy, have often collaborated to revive Baroque spectacles.
They did so again on Saturday night at Gould Hall in "An Evening of Opera-Ballet," a charming tribute to a French Baroque theatrical form that blended singing with dancing.
The first piece was for dancers alone.
"La Danse et Ses Plaisirs," a new suite choreographed by Ms.
Turocy to music by Jean-Joseph Cassanea de Mondonville, glorified fine manners.


Glatfelter (P.H.) Co. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


ROMANIA GRANTED FULL TRADE STATUS
The House of Representatives has given its seal of approval to Romania by voting to restore normal trade relations.
With Senate approval assured, the unanimous vote on Tuesday permits the United States to resume normal trade with Romania for the first time since 1988, when the former Romanian dictator, Nicolae Ceausescu, scuttled a trade deal because of his objections to American demands that Romania improve its behavior on human rights.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about the sentencing of two Detroit police officers convicted of beating a motorist to death referred incorrectly to the Rodney G. King case.
Mr.
King was injured in a beating by police officers in Los Angeles; he was not beaten to death.


Seagate Technology Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Texas Instruments
The stock of Texas Instruments Inc. has dropped precipitously since Sept. 27, when it closed at $80.75, reflecting analysts' views that semiconductor growth may be slowing.
Although Texas Instruments has not yet reported third-quarter earnings, profits of some of its competitors have been lower than expected.
Yesterday, its shares fell more than 6 percent.


Greenspan and Panel Clash Over Fed's Status
The Federal Reserve came under fierce attack at a Congressional hearing today, as House members called it undemocratic, unaccountable and an exclusive club made up mostly of white males.
But Alan Greenspan, the central bank's chairman, stoutly rejected numerous proposals that would give elected officials more power in choosing Federal Reserve policy makers, saying such steps would be a "major mistake" that could fuel inflation and hurt the economy.


Precision Castparts Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Matrix Service Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Calendar: Harvest Fair and Antiques
Garden Festivals and More  New York Botanical Garden, 200th Street and Southern Boulevard, the Bronx; (718) 817-8700.
A harvest fair featuring horticultural and craft demonstrations, a craft sale and children's activities will be held Saturday and Sunday, from 10 A.M. to 5 P.M.


Going After the Boors at the F.B.I.
After an F.B.I. agent, Suzane Doucette, complained about sexual harassment on the job, her co-workers started addressing her as "P.M.S. girl." Even though she had received cash awards from the agency and a military award for her counterintelligence work, she was turned down for the F.B.I.'s career development program, with the admonition to improve her relations with her male colleagues.
Then came further retaliation.
The agency placed her on administrative leave without pay after she testified about her case before the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs.
On Tuesday she tried to turn in her badge at F.B.I. headquarters but the agency refused to accept it.


After The Roast, Fire And Smoke
ON computer networks, across telephone lines, in newspapers, under dryers at hair salons and on radio and television talk shows, "Whoopi and Ted" have been the talk of the nation for almost a week.
Last night, Whoopi Goldberg, the Acdemy Award winning black actress herself spoke at great length about a situation that she said "has caused great hurt to a man who doesn't deserve it."


Transactions
Basketball  National Basketball Association
CLEVELAND CAVALIERS -- Signed Sedric Toney, guard.
NEW JERSEY NETS -- Waived Keith Hughes and Eric Manuel, forwards, and Steve Rogers, guard.


Rabin Says Sales to China Didn't Break U.S. Law
Israel's Prime Minister, Yitzak Rabin, acknowledged on a state visit today that his country had sold arms to Beijing, but he disputed a United States intelligence estimate of the size of the sales and insisted that they do not violate any restrictions on transferring American weapons technology.
At a news conference, Mr.
Rabin responded to a United States Central Intelligence Agency report in Washington suggesting that over the last decade, Israel had sold several billion dollars worth of arms and military technology to China.


Park Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Interstate Ascends As a Banking Phoenix
In the summer of 1990, Edward M. Carson, the newly appointed chairman of the First Interstate Bancorporation, promised angry shareholders that he would cut the bank's bad loans to 1 percent of assets by the end of 1993, from a level of 5 percent.
Recession interceded, real estate values here collapsed, and the only other major bank based in Los Angeles, the Security Pacific Corporation, was virtually destroyed.
But Mr.
Carson will deliver on his pledge: When First Interstate announces its earnings on Oct. 18, problem loans are expected to be below 1 percent, three months ahead of schedule.


Death Toll About 300 in Oct. 3 U.S.-Somali Battle
About 300 Somalis are believed to have been killed during the street fighting in Mogadishu on Oct. 3, and hundreds of women and children were among the 700 treated in hospitals after the battle, military and relief officials say.
The precise number of Somalis killed remains uncertain, but the American military and international relief agencies do not dispute the assertion by supporters of Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, the Somali faction leader, that there were at least 300.


Office Depot Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Jones Back in New York
KIM JONES, a two-time runner-up, will be running in the New York City Marathon once again.
The 35-year-old Jones, who turned in the fastest time by an American woman in the race's history (2 hours 27 minutes 54 seconds) in placing second to INGRID KRISTIANSEN in 1989, will do well to do better than second this time.
Among her opponents on Nov. 14 will be WANDA PANFIL, the woman who beat her to the line in her second second-place finish, in 1990.


Willamette Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Events: Open Houses And Walking Tours
Seven Beauties  United Cerebral Palsy of New York City; (212) 683-6700, ext. 217.
The New Yorker League for Cerebral Palsy is sponsoring a self-guided tour of seven residences on the Upper East Side of Manhattan on Oct. 26, from 12:30 to 4:30 P.M., including a prewar apartment with a 30-foot terrace, a renovated double townhouse and an apartment decorated with English Georgian furniture.
Tickets are $70 in advance only, with checks payable to United Cerebral Palsy of New York City, 105 Madison Avenue, New York 10016.


Rio Hotel &amp; Casino (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Where Hispanic Voters Sided With Dinkins, Now Defection
With its tree-shaded streets lined with tidy brick and stucco homes, parts of Soundview look downright suburban, and for many of its residents it is.
This corner of the southeast Bronx was the working-class promised land -- a house, garage and yard -- a hard-earned reward for sweating it out at work and toughing it out in the tenements of the South Bronx or Spanish Harlem.
Now, as residents prepare to vote for mayor, they grumble that the out-of-the way feeling that attracted them to the neighborhood in the first place may be its curse as New York City officials show little interest in their concerns, which range from uneven sidewalks and overgrown trees to the recent incursion of drugs and crime.
All they have to do, they say, is glance at the street through barred windows and fenced-in porches and wonder if the phrase "quality of life" will ever be more than a campaign catch phrase.


Scientologists Granted Tax Exemption by the U.S.
The Government said today that it had agreed to grant a tax exemption to the Church of Scientology and more than 150 of its related corporations, ending one of the longest-running tax disputes in American history.
"This puts an end to what has been an historic war," said Marty Rathbun, president of a Scientology organization that received a tax exemption.
"It's like the Palestinians and the Israelis shaking hands."


Poles Designed to Make Walking More Vigorous
CROSS-COUNTRY skiers know that poles give power and balance to their stride.
Now, there are poles for walkers, an idea based on the concept that two sticks are better than one.
Exerscience, a division of Nordic Track of Chaska, Minn.,introduced Power Poles in August 1992.
Exerstrider Products of Madison, Wis., also makes walking poles.
Both products are designed to add an upper-body workout to walking.


A MERGER OF GIANTS: The Cost of Advice; At $35 Million, the Bankers And Lawyers Seem Cheap
At $33 billion, give or take a billion or two, the Bell Atlantic Corporation's purchase of Tele-Communications Inc. stacks up as the biggest takeover in corporate history, rivaled only by the $30.6 billion that Kohlberg, Kravis, Roberts &amp; Company shelled out for RJR Nabisco four years ago.
But compared with the RJR deal and other multibillion-dollar combinations, including the current battle between Viacom and QVC for the right to buy Paramount Communications, Wall Street's bill for services in the Bell Atlantic transaction looks like a pretty small piece of change.


Fall Harvest Brings City Children Closer to Nature


Pioneer-Standard Electronics Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Total Petroleum (North America) Ltd. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Looking for Playmates, U.S. Finds Mexico
With a place in the World Cup already secured five years ago when the United States was named the host of next summer's extravaganza, the American team has been trying to prepare for the sport's pre-eminent event by playing competitive exhibition games in place of the tension-filled qualifying matches.
Coach Berti Vogts of Germany, which qualified automatically as the defending champion, said recently that it was traumatic for his team not to be involved in competitive matches before the World Cup.


Coltec Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


For New Jersey Dog, 1,000 Days on Death Row; Is Taro Vicious? Who Cares? By Now, Most of the State's Judicial System
The numbers just keep growing bigger in the saga of a death-row dog that has spent more than 1,000 days at the Bergen County Jail, running up at least $100,000 in legal costs and upkeep charges.
It's time to say enough, says the sponsor of the New Jersey "vicious dog" law, which has doomed Lonnie and Sandy Lehrer's pet Akita, Taro.
The dog stands accused of injuring the lower lip of the couple's 10-year-old niece, Brie Halfond -- just how she was injured is disputed -- at the Lehrer's home during a family gathering on Dec. 25, 1990.


Clayton Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Don't Blame TV for Getting Us Into Somalia; Charity Begins at Home
To the Editor:
How can any American read of the continuing despair and hardship of people caught in the Midwest floods and not be angered by talk of "nation-building" in Somalia, a country in which United Nations peacekeeping troops are being murdered?


Southwestern Public Service Co.  reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Gymnastics Site Flip-Flopped
The gymnastics competition of the 1996 Olympic Games will probably be moved to an arena with 13,000 fewer seats to accommodate television, Atlanta Olympic officials said today.
William Payne, president of the Atlanta Committee for the Olympic Games, said gymnastics will most likely be moved from the Georgia Dome to the Omni coliseum.
The 71,500-seat Georgia Dome is to be divided in half with one side used for basketball.
The gymnastics competition has been scheduled for the other half.
Each side of the building has 30,000 seats.


Dolphins Sign Hodson
The Miami Dolphins signed the former New England Patriot TOMMY HODSON as a backup quarterback yesterday and placed DAN MARINO on injured reserve, making him ineligible for the rest of the season.
Marino, who ruptured his right Achilles' tendon in Cleveland Sunday, indicated Tuesday there was a slim hope he could return for the Super Bowl if the Dolphins made it that far.
But going on injured reserve makes him ineligible for both the regular season and post-season.


A MERGER OF GIANTS: The Vision; A Phone-Cable Vehicle for the Data Superhighway
The Bell Atlantic Corporation and Tele-Communications Inc. announced the biggest media merger in history yesterday, a deal offering perhaps the clearest evidence yet that American industry is serious about building the vaunted "information superhighway" of the future.
In announcing the $33 billion deal, the cable industry entrepreneur John C. Malone held out the vision of a single powerful box on top of each home television set that would combine the diverse streams of information that now flow separately into the home: telephone calls, television shows, video rentals, newspapers and even books.


Beth Israel Buys a Chain of Doctors' Offices
Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan has purchased a chain employing 41 doctors in Westchester County with a base of 150,000 patients in an effort to compete in the changing market for health care.
The agreement, announced today, is one of the new relationships that hospitals, doctors and insurers are creating as they try to drive down medical costs and prepare for a more competitive future.
The arrangement is unusual because it formally links a major city hospital with a large group of physicians in the suburbs.


Essay; Waco, Reno, Iraqgate
If you were the Attorney General and had something terribly embarrassing to hide, to whom would you turn to oh-so-gently investigate your conduct?
Janet Reno had that problem in the wake of her blunder at Waco, Tex., after she ordered the storming of a fanatic's compound that resulted in 85 deaths, including 25 children.


Israel Glasser, Dean And Professor, 73, At 2-Year Colleges
Dr.
Israel Glasser, an educator and administrator in the municipal college system for 45 years, most recently at Kingsborough Community College in Brooklyn, died on Monday at his Brooklyn home.
He was 73.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Oilers Bench Moon, Will Go With Carlson
The Houston Oilers, who have lost four of their first five games, switched quarterbacks yesterday, with CODY CARLSON getting the starting job over the Pro Bowler WARREN MOON.
It was Moon's first demotion in 10 seasons with the Oilers.


Review/Fashion; Good Humor Plays Peekaboo
Over the years, after an Yves Saint Laurent fashion show, word would go out and soon women of the world would be appearing in pants suits or looking like Russian peasants.
This time, his message is more diffuse.
"Be happy," the designer said after his show on Wednesday.
"Be happy with your clothes."
Cheerful cotton dresses in dense tropical flower prints helped carry out his thought.
Navy knit separates striped in white could have enlivened any summer resort.
And of course there were all kinds of jackets and trousers.
A navy satin jacket short enough to show a sliver of skin at the midriff and bright blue wide trousers made one of his prettiest suits.


Fund Group Agrees to Pay Restitution
The First Investors Corporation, a mutual fund company known for high-pressure sales tactics, yesterday settled litigation stemming from its aggressive sales of two junk bond funds in the 1980's.
It agreed to pay an additional $7.5 million into restitution funds for customers, bringing the total amount it will pay to $33.4 million.
The settlement also bars four top executives of the firm from working as supervisors in its sales operation.
The firm's chairman, Glenn O. Head, was barred for three months; its president, David D. Grayson, for six months, and Howard Froman and Alvin Blumenthal, who direct part of the firm's sales force, for nine months each.


Review/Film Festival; Chillingly Clear Recall Of the Unspeakable
Although "Birthplace," Pavel Lozinski's documentary about an American Jew's return to his native village in Poland, unfolds in a quiet, unremarkable manner, this film is shocking simply on the basis of what is being said.
Henry Greenberg has gone back to inquire about the fates of his father and brother, and a surprising number of elderly villagers remember exactly what happened to them.
The villagers' attitudes are astonishingly unchanged and unguarded, as if the forces behind the Holocaust remained preserved in amber.
"You know, we were Poles and they were Jews, but I didn't mind going to their shop," says one of the town's atypically open-minded citizens.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Autumn Splendor
Q.
Now that summer is fading, I wish I had flowers that kept on going through the autumn.
Which would you suggest, and is it too late to plant? -- Steven Goldstein, Wilmington, Del.


Birminghman Steel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Accounts
*
Boots Co., London, to BMP DDB Needham, London, to handle the media planning and buying on its estimated $68 million British account, previously handled by various local agencies. *
Black &amp; Decker Corp., Towson, Md., to Eisner &amp; Associates, Baltimore, to handle its professional power tools division, previously at Leo Burnett U.S.A., Chicago.
Billings were estimated at $7 million.


Total Petroleum (North America) Ltd. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reviews/Dance; A Questioning of Sexual Identity
The dancing is fast, furious and fabulous, the choreographer himself has an eye-riveting presence, the music ranges from Stravinsky and Ravel to Yoko Ono and Elvis Presley.
Like everything else onstage, the occasional decor, including Cindy Sherman's slides of mummies and eyeballs, is never dull.
Yet something was always missing from the three premieres with which the Stephen Petronio Dance Company opened a weeklong run on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea).


Unitrin Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Panel Sends Cuomo a List of 7 For a Seat on State's Top Court
A state commission today sent Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo a list of seven nominees to fill a vacancy about to occur on the state's highest court, including three women.
The list also includes a Hispanic judge and a black judge from western New York.
The Court of Appeals has never had a Hispanic judge.
Once the vacancy occurs, the court will have no member who lives west of Rome, a city near Utica.


Untangling a Complex Deal
John C. Malone, never known for easy-to-understand deals, has started his most complex yet: selling his company, Tele-Communications Inc., to Bell Atlantic Corporation for $3.9 billion.
Analysts are having trouble figuring it out.
Big investors are unclear on details.
Even the principals are having trouble keeping it all straight.
Part of the problem is that there are so many moving pieces, given the number of companies peripherally involved in the deal, the different classes of stock, regulatory questions surrounding how much of Tele-Communications that Bell Atlantic will be allowed to swallow, and side deals like the fight between QVC Network Inc. and Viacom Inc. over Paramount Communications Inc.


Exabyte Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Willamette Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
The periodic table within a diagram in Science Times on Tuesday about heavy elements misidentified Element 81.
It is thallium.
The table also omitted a theoretical element, No. 115; it should have appeared in sequence after 114.


Towing Operation Conducted in Washington Heights


COMPANY BRIEFS
AMERIHOST PROPERTIES INC., Des Plaines, Ill., said it would build, own and operate a 59-room Holiday Inn Express hotel in Tuscola, Ill.
ASSET INVESTORS CORP., Denver, said it had completed the spinoff of a 70 percent stake in its newly formed Commercial Assets Inc. unit.


Matrix Service Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Hubbell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Moscow Journal; Russia Finally Finds a Free Market, Centuries Old
Moscow was always good at keeping secrets, which is one reason why it took so long for archeologists to start digging around the Kremlin walls, searching for evidence of the city's multi-layered civilization.
In the old days, when progress was at the wheel of the Communist bandwagon, archeology was relegated to a back seat.


Smith (A.O.) Corp. (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.N. AGAIN IMPOSES SANCTIONS ON HAITI AFTER PACT FAILS
The Security Council reimposed an oil and arms embargo on Haiti today because the Haitian Army and the police were violating the agreement under which the deposed President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, is supposed to return to power at the end of this month.
But the Council gave the Haitian military until Monday to reverse the campaign of violence they have unleashed in the capital, Port-au-Prince.
The violence forced the United States on Tuesday to pull back a troop ship carrying American and Canadian military advisers to Haiti for a United Nations peacekeeping force.


Clayton Homes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Products Meant to Be Kind
THE best products are those that can be used by the most people, from an active teen-ager to a person with limited hand dexterity.
That's what James J. Pirkl, professor emeritus of industrial design at Syracuse University, says he believes.
Mr.
Pirkl and other judges selected four trans-generational designs from a field of 200 in a competition sponsored by the Arthritis Foundation and financed by the McNeil Consumer Products Company, which makes Tylenol.
The winners were a driver's console with controls that are easy to reach and operate, in the Saturn car from General Motors; A.T.&amp; T.'s Big Button Plus telephone; Good Grip kitchen products by Oxo International and J. C. Penney's Easy Dressing fashions.


Retirement Care Associates Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Ginsburg at Fore in Court's Give-and-Take
The Supreme Court wrestled with two of the term's most important discrimination cases today, and for many minutes during the two intense hours of argument it was Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg's courtroom.
The newest Justice, who spent the first part of her legal career fighting and helping to define sex discrimination, brought some of an advocate's passion to the day's arguments.
In Plain English
One case asks the Court to decide what constitutes sexual harassment on the job.
The question in the other case is whether the Civil Rights Act of 1991, which strengthened the basic Federal law against employment discrimination, should be applied retroactively to lawsuits that were pending when it took effect.


Remains of Vehicle Shown To Jury in Explosion Case
The skeletal remains of a motor vehicle were hauled before the jury in the World Trade Center bombing trial yesterday as the prosecution presented its first evidence to tie the four defendants to a van the Government claims carried the bomb into an underground garage last February.
An officer of the Treasury Department's Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms testified that he and other searchers found the large frame and transmission sections -- one piece stamped with a vehicle identification number -- at the rim of the jagged crater two days after the Feb. 26 blast.


Seagate Technology Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


COMPANY NEWS: An Experiment for 1,000 Drivers; Sparking Interest In G.M.'s Electric Car
Want to be the first on your block to try out an electric car?
Or, put differently, want to try out an electric car that cost as much as your house did, without having to pay for it?
Then watch for an insert in your next utility bill.


Silicon General Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A headline on Monday about the wedding of Kathryn Emily Beebe misstated the name of the bridegroom.
He is James William Reilly.
The report also misspelled the last name of the bride's mother.
She is Robin Van Doren.


Tellabs Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


'Jack's Lad's' Leave Irish In a Precarious Position
Jack Charlton, the coach of the Republic of Ireland's national soccer team, is probably the best-loved Englishman ever to work in this robustly un-English country.
In seven years, what the headlines call "Jack's Magic" has turned "Jack's Lads" into a major soccer power.
But the lads, all of whom play for British club teams, didn't have it today, and 33,000 of the fans in "Jack's Army," trudged home in despair after Spain thrashed Ireland, 3-1.
The victory enhanced Spain's chances of qualifying for the World Cup in the United States next year.
Ireland will still qualify if it defeats Northern Ireland Nov. 17 in Belfast.


Whitman Goes on Attack, Accusing Florio on Funds
After a bruising week on defense, Christine Todd Whitman's gubernatorial campaign went on the attack today, charging Gov.
Jim Florio with violating state election laws by spending money designated for the general election before the primary was held in June.
Speaking at a news conference at the State House, the Whitman campaign lawyer, Peter Verniero, contended that the Florio campaign spent or transferred $225,000 in general-election funds between April 9 and the June 8 primary.
Ed Rollins, the campaign manager for Mrs.
Whitman, said the suspected violation was significant because it allowed Mr.
Florio to get a headstart on campaigning for the governor's race.


No Headline
"This is not a conventional merger in any sense. It's all about coming together to build the next generation of technology and services." -- JAMES MOORE, a consultant, on the merger of Bell Atlantic and Tele-Communications Inc.  [ D10:4. ]


Early Signs of a Russian Winter
This is the fifth season of the National Hockey League's peace dividend, the emigration of players from the former Soviet Union, a stream that began with the end of the Cold War.
Finally, New York fans are getting a look at the potential of Moscow by the Hudson.
Although the Devils were the first to hire Russian players in volume, they haven't developed a star on the level of Vancouver's Pavel Bure, Buffalo's Aleksandr Mogilny or Detroit's Sergei Fedorov.


Coke Gives More To Creative Artists
The Coca-Cola Company has awarded the Creative Artists Agency another assignment for its flagship Coca-Cola Classic brand, this one involving advertising for the 1994 World Cup.
Creative Artists, the Beverly Hills, Calif., talent agency that has assumed lead creative responsibilities on the Coke account from McCann-Erickson Worldwide, the brand's advertising agency, will produce ads promoting the World Cup, which will be held for the first time in the United States.
Coca-Cola is an official corporate sponsor of the world soccer championship.


Corrections
A picture caption on Sept. 13, about a visit to the Young Israel synagogue of Kew Gardens Hills, Queens, by the Israeli Ambassador to the United States, after the Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement, misstated the affiliation of the protester being restrained, and characterized the behavior of the congregation incorrectly.
In a letter dated Sept. 13, the congregation's rabbi pointed out that the protester was a member of a militant Jewish group, Kahane Chai, and that no member of the congregation took part in the disruption.
This correction was delayed by an editing oversight.


Public &amp; Private; Stinky Cheese Race
To: Mr. Dinkins and Mr. Giuliani From: A Mom Re: Bad Behavior
Those of us with young children have had occasion in the last year to read them a book called "The Stinky Cheese Man and Other Fairly Stupid Tales." The title story is a variation on the old "can't catch me, I'm the gingerbread man" story, except that no one wants to catch the Stinky Cheese Man, who has a chunk of gorgonzola for a head.


Raiders Deal Patterson
The Raiders' special-teams captain, ELVIS PATTERSON, has been traded to the Dallas Cowboys for a draft choice, the Raider coach, ART SHELL, said yesterday.


Ballard Medical Prod reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Protest at Nunn Speech
A speech by Senator Sam Nunn at the 92d Street Y.M.C.A. was interrupted several times last night by gay-rights advocates protesting his opposition to gays in the military.
Senator Nunn, Democrat of Georgia, the chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, addressed about 200 people, speaking on Somalia and other issues.
Five minutes into his speech, a group called the Lesbian Offenders started singing the Pledge of Allegiance and then yelled obscenities.
Security officers ejected them.
Moments later several men stood up, screaming, "You're taking away our civil rights." They, too, were ejected.
After three more interruptions, Senator Nunn finished his talk.


A MERGER OF GIANTS: The Policy Issues; A Marriage of Media
Can the merger of two huge companies -- each with monopolistic powers -- possibly usher in more competition?
That is the fundamental question that the Administration and Congress must address in evaluating the astonishing move by the Bell Atlantic Corporation to acquire the biggest cable television company in the country, Tele-Communications Inc.


Office Depot Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Dexter Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Woolworth To Shutter 970 Stores
The Woolworth Corporation said yesterday that it planned to eliminate 13,000 jobs and close 970 stores, including half of its remaining five-and-dime variety stores, in what would be the largest, most costly reorganization in the retailer's 114-year-history.
The retrenchment will take place over several months and will include 400 of the discount stores and 330 Kinney shoe stores.
The moves will further transform Woolworth from its Main Street dime store origins into a specialty retailing conglomerate.


Precision Castparts Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Reviews/Dance; Different Mood for 'Rite'
Martha Graham's version of Stravinsky's "Rite of Spring," which was a savage tiger of a dance at its premiere in 1984, is looking a bit like a sassy kitten in its current production by the Martha Graham Dance Company.
Although some of the work's ferocity has diminished, this "Rite" still permits dancers to offer distinctive interpretations of its leading roles, the Chosen One and the Shaman, as Christine Dakin and Peter London demonstrated on Tuesday night at City Center.
Ms.
Dakin, always a strong dramatic presence, has been in fine form this season.
As a woman who must be sacrificed to the gods, she looked horrified, rather than religiously honored, to be appointed the Chosen One, and her quick runs appeared to symbolize her futile efforts to escape her doom.
Death was inevitable, yet before she became a totally helpless victim, she faced the work's other characters defiantly.


Pioneer-Standard Electronics Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; Roping Maddux's Calf
WHEN Darren Daulton slashed a two-run double down the right-field foul line for the Phillies in the third inning, the Veterans Stadium voices roared, "Whoop, there it is" -- the latest streetcorner slogan.
When Dave Hollins crashed a two-run homer in the fifth, they roared, "Whoop, there it is." And when Mickey Morandini hooked a two-run triple into the right-field corner in the sixth, they roared, "Whoop, there it is."
But when Morandini's short-skip liner roped Greg Maddux's right calf in the first inning, whoop, there it really was.


Earnings Nearly Tripled In Third Quarter at CBS
The confluence of improved sales and several one-time factors provided record third-quarter earnings for CBS Inc., the company announced yesterday.
Net income for the period that ended on Sept. 30 rose to $118.3 million, nearly tripling that earned during the 1992 period.
CBS stock jumped $8.75 a share on the New York Stock Exchange, amid strong demand for broadcast, cable and entertainment issues, to close at a record $285.125; the shares traded as high as $288.50 during the day.


World Acceptance (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Campaign Trail; Rangel to Ask Farrakhan for a Delay
Representative Charles B. Rangel said yesterday that he would ask the Rev.
Louis Farrakhan, the Nation of Islam leader, to postpone a politically awkward rally planned for Yankee Stadium three days before the New York City mayoral election.
The Manhattan Democrat said yesterday that he had been asked by a member of the Congressional Black Caucus to contact Mr.
Farrakhan.


Rio Hotel &amp; Casino (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lukens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


A MERGER OF GIANTS: The Companies;
Offering a majestic vision of how communications would transform the American home, chief executives of Bell Atlantic and Tele-Communications Inc. disclosed details of their $33 billion merger yesterday.
Bell Atlantic's chairman, Raymond W. Smith, and Tele-Communications' president, John C. Malone, confirmed a complex stock swap in which the telephone company would acquire as much as regulators would allow of Tele-Communications, the nation's largest cable operator, and the Liberty Media Corporation, a cable programming company.
It would pay an estimated $34 a share for all of the assets, though Tele-Communications shareholders with enhanced voting rights -- including Mr.
Malone -- would get a 10 percent premium for their stakes.


2-Inch Crack Cited in Plane That Lost an Engine
Federal safety officials said today that an engine fell off a Boeing 747 cargo jet over Anchorage in March because of unusually strong turbulence and an undetected two-inch crack in the pylon connecting the engine to the wing.
The jet, a Japan Airlines flight to Chicago, returned safely to the Anchorage airport, and there were no injuries aboard the aircraft or where the engine landed between an apartment building and a shopping mall in Anchorage.
Damage to the plane was put at $12 million.


Opening New Freeway, Los Angeles Ends Era
More than half a century after Los Angeles ushered in the modern automobile era of urban commuting with the first California freeway, officials on Thursday will open what is almost certainly the area's last freeway.
The high-tech Century Freeway, a 17.3-mile stretch running east-west from Los Angeles International Airport through nine cities to suburban Norwalk, cost more per mile than any other road in America.


Dr. Lorie Tarshis, 82, Professor of Economics
Dr.
Lorie Tarshis, an economist who served as a department head at Stanford University and division chairman at the University of Toronto, died on Oct. 4 in a Toronto nursing home.
He was 82.
He died of Parkinson's disease, his family said.


A Lifetime of Folk Art, Going . . . Going . . .
BURTON AND HELAINE FENDELMAN are about to do a startling thing.
That's on top of the startling things they've been doing for the last 28 years.
During all those years, the couple -- referred to by some dealers in the antiques trade as "the Fendelpersons" -- have been amassing a collection of 19th-century American folk art that most museums would envy.
For nearly three decades -- the length of time their lives have been personally, professionally and philosophically enmeshed -- they carted and bartered, bought and sold and were obsessed with American folk art, back when just-plain-folk could still afford it.


A MERGER OF GIANTS: The Top Executives; A Corporate Man and a Cable King
They come from opposite directions.
John C. Malone -- called the King of Cable by his allies, a ruthless monopolist by his foes -- built the nation's largest cable television empire from scratch with daring and debt.
Raymond W. Smith plodded along the traditional corporate route to the helm of an even larger company, whose main business was and still is providing 18 million dull dial tones for local telephone customers.
But Mr.
Malone, the chief executive of Tele-Communications Inc., and Raymond W. Smith, his counterpart at Bell Atlantic, are brothers.
For if Mr.
Malone has as much financial and technical knowledge as anyone in the cable industry, Mr.
Smith has as much vision as anyone in the local telephone industry.


College Basketball Tickets on Sale
Individual seats for college basketball at Madison Square Garden will go on sale tomorrow for a 31-game schedule that includes five St.
John's regular-season Big East games, the preseason National Invitation Tournament and the E.C.A.C.
Holiday Festival.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-15  U.N.
REIMPOSES HAITIAN EMBARGO  The U.N. reimposed an oil and arms embargo on Haiti, accusing military authorities there of violating the agreement to return Haiti's exiled President to power.
A1  COMMITMENT TO HAITI'S FUTURE  A day after an American troop ship was forced to retreat from landing in Haiti, the White House and President Aristide sought to show their commitment to democracy.
A8


Scouting Report From Ryan: Brister Little Threat to Giants
Buddy Ryan may be having his own problems in Houston, where the Oilers (1-4) are about to be run out of town.
He may be on the verge of losing his job as defensive coordinator.
But he still found time to talk about the Eagles, Giants, and the National Football Conference East, a division his defense dominated for so many years when he was the Philadelphia head coach.
Ryan hasn't changed.
He's still the brash talker, the man who isn't afraid to speak his mind and as a result anger the target of his words.
You can be sure Eagles quarterback Bubby Brister won't like what Ryan said about him when asked if he thought Philadelphia could beat the Giants on Sunday -- and anyone else -- with Brister.
With Randall Cunningham out with a broken leg, Brister is now the man for the Eagles.


Books of The Times; Deceptions of Sex and Politics in 1930's Europe
While England Sleeps  By David Leavitt 304 pages. Viking. $22.
The year is 1936 at the start of the main action in David Leavitt's resonant new novel, "While England Sleeps," whose title comes from George Orwell's reference in "Homage to Catalonia" to "the deep, deep sleep of England" during Hitler's rise and the Spanish Civil War, and which leans heavily on, without acknowledging, Stephen Spender's 1948 autobiography, "World Within World."


Progress on the Waterfront
New York City's Planning Department gave itself an intimidating assignment when it developed a zoning plan for the waterfront.
With few exceptions, the city's 578 miles of shoreline have either been neglected to the point of deterioration or overdeveloped in ways that wall off the waterfront.
The trick was to improve the shoreline and the public's access to it without discouraging sensible development.
The new zoning changes, passed recently with some wise modifications by the City Council's Land Use Committee, contain unanswered questions and details that need ironing out.
But the proposal is a significant improvement over any policy the city has followed before.
The full Council need have no hesitation in approving the plan when it comes up for a vote later this month.


Greene Gives Braves His New Look
Tommy Greene, who was nervous and terrible and not around for long in Game 2 of the National League Championship Series, outdid Greg Maddux tonight to give his belligerent brethren with the bats all the room and comfort they required to take apart the Braves in Game 6 and earn a trip to the World Series.
Greene's effort was not impeccable.
He walked people, stayed away entirely from Fred McGriff, gave up a handful of hits, hard and long and otherwise.
But there were enough moments of moxie and punchouts of consequence for Greene to both win and be proud.
The line at the end read: 7 innings, 5 hits, 3 runs, 5 walks, 5 strikeouts.
It had a W next to it, too.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
THE end of the day at a preschool or child-care center is often filled with tension, tantrums and tears.
It is a difficult transition for both children and parents, as they try to adjust to one another's pace and expectations.
Some children who have been well-behaved since morning seem to fall apart emotionally when their parents appear at the classroom door.
They may whine or refuse to get off their tricycles.
A few may even hit their parents instead of hugging them.


Woody Allen Asks Connecticut to Discipline Prosecutor
Woody Allen asked yesterday for disciplinary action against a Connecticut prosecutor who had said there was "probable cause" to believe that Mr.
Allen molested his 7-year-old daughter, but then did not file charges.
Mr.
Allen filed complaints with two state agencies, asserting that the State's Attorney in Litchfield County, Frank S. Maco, was guilty of misconduct for his handling of the child molestation complaint.
One complaint was lodged with the statewide bar counsel, who has the power to disbar lawyers.
The other grievance went to the State Criminal Justice Commission, which appoints state's attorneys and can discipline or dismiss them.


People
*
Ron Louie was named creative director at the Evans Group, Seattle, succeeding Mike Mogelgaard, who was promoted to executive creative director for the agency's eight offices.
Mr.
Louie was previously a senior vice president and creative director at DDB Needham New York.


F.B.I. Adds a Woman, a Hispanic Man and a Black Man to Top Echelon


CHRONICLE
It's Mama Marla and Baby Tiffany: MARLA MAPLES gave birth to a 7 1/2-pound girl yesterday at St.
Mary's Hospital in Palm Beach, Fla.
And DONALD TRUMP, the child's father, couldn't wait to talk about it.
Speaking by phone 20 minutes after the early-afternoon delivery, he said jubilantly, "We have a perfect little girl, a combination in looks of both of us, to to go with my three other wonderful children." Mr.
Trump has two sons and a daughter with his former wife, Ivana Trump.


Clinton and Aristide Move To Affirm Policy on Haiti
A day after an American troopship was forced to retreat in the face of a small mob on a Port-au-Prince dock, the Clinton Administration and the exiled Haitian President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, sought to demonstrate the United States commitment to the return of democratic rule in the Caribbean country.
"Our commitment to this process is unshakable," William Swing, the recently appointed Ambassador to Haiti, said today, referring to the negotiated settlement between Father Aristide and Haiti's military rulers that was supposed to lead to the Roman Catholic priest's restoration as President on Oct. 31.
Countering the Images
Mr.
Swing made his comments as he presented his credentials to Father Aristide at the Haitian Embassy in Washington.
Advisers to Father Aristide invited the United States Information Service to record the event in hopes it would be broadcast to Haiti, where it might counter images of gun-toting police auxiliaries cheering on Tuesday as the American troopship retreated over the horizon.


Yeltsin, in Tokyo Limelight, Avoids Islands Dispute
President Boris N. Yeltsin ended a long-postponed trip to Japan today basking in his treatment by the Japanese as a democratic leader in full control of Russia, but neatly sidestepping any promises to return disputed territory to Japan.
At a news conference, he declared that after decades of suspicion, Japan and Russia had begun to "bring our two peoples closer together psychologically." But he quickly veered from diplomatic niceties to a defense of his actions last week in Moscow, telling critics in Japan that he was forced to act against his political adversaries "to avoid losing again millions of human lives in Russia, as was the case during the totalitarian regime."


Artisoft (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Superior Industries Intl.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Christian Science Church Settles Claim to Bequest
The Christian Science church, which recently lost several hundred million dollars trying to expand its communications empire, has agreed to share a conditional bequest of $100 million with two rivals for the money.
Eloise Knapp and her sister, Bella Mabury, residents of San Jose, Calif., who died more than 20 years ago, left the money to the church on condition that it publish a biography of its founder, Mary Baker Eddy, written by Mrs.
Knapp's husband.


American Steel Mill Is Being Shipped to China


Televised Debate
Mayor David N. Dinkins will debate George J. Marlin, the Conservative Party candidate for Mayor, at St.
Francis College in Brooklyn tonight.
The debate begins at 7:30 P.M. and will be televised live on New York 1.
It will also televise a debate at 9 P.M. between three candidates for comptroller: Alan G. Hevesi, the Democratic candidate, Howard Lim, the Conservative candidate, and Barbara Bollaert, the Right-to-Life candidate.


BUSINESS DIGEST
A Merger of Giants
Bell Atlantic and Tele-Communications announced details of their proposed $33 billion merger, offering a majestic vision of how telecommunications might transform the home.  [ Page D11. ]  The merger suggests a method of navigating the "information superhighway," with a box on top of each television combining diverse streams of data.  [ A1. ]
John Malone and Raymond Smith come from opposite directions, but they have much in common, including a vision.  [ D11. ]


Park Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bank of New York reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Automatic Data Processing reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Keystone Heritage reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
'Projects 42' 'Moira Dryer'
Museum of Modern Art  11 West 53d Street  Manhattan  Through Nov. 16
This poignant exhibition surveys the brief career of Moira Dryer, a talented painter adept at deploying waves of saturated color across wood panels, who died last year at 34.
It includes little-known early works that suggest that the artist's interest in adding objects to her panels was constant, not an aberration of her last two exhibitions (at the Mary Boone Gallery in SoHo).
It also makes one appreciate more fully Ms.
Dryer's sense of humor and her penchant for abstract narrative.


Goodrich (B.F.) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Westchester Man Sprayed by the Police Dies
A police experiment aimed at reducing injuries went awry here early Wednesday when a 34-year-old father of four died after police officers subdued him with a pepper spray and he went into cardiac arrest.
The victim, Lester Steven Yarborough, had a history of heart trouble, and had just ended a four-day hospital stay on Monday, the police said.
The police said Mr.
Yarborough met them with a fork, which he brandished in a menacing way.


Cullen/Frost Bankers (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
'Berlin' 'Designing a Capital for the 21st Century'
Goethe House  1014 Fifth Avenue (at 82d Street)  Through Oct. 23
This show of urban design proposals by New York architects for a new Government center in Berlin is a case study in displaced energy.
Ostensibly, the 12 firms represented here have set their sights on the reunified German city.
But what the show really records is the frustrated desire of these young architects to grapple with the urbanism of their own hometown.
The Berlin wall has fallen, but an invisible barrier appears to separate New York's aspiring architects from those who actually plan and build their city.
When will these divided sectors be reunited?


GZA Geoenvironmental Tech (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Leon Ames, Actor And Unionist, 91; Roles in 100 Films
Leon Ames, a character actor known for his fatherly roles and a founder of the Screen Actors Guild, died on Tuesday in a nursing home in Laguna Beach, Calif.
He was 91 and had been living in Corona del Mar, Calif.
The cause was complications brought on by a stroke, said Harry Medved, a spokesman for the Screen Actors Guild.


On Stage, and Off
Late Rising 'Moon'
Roger Berlind, the producer of the new musical "Paper Moon," announced yesterday that the show, due to begin performances at the Marquis Theater on Nov. 16, won't arrive on time.
After completing its pre-Broadway tryout at the Paper Mill Playhouse in Millburn, N.J., Mr.
Berlind said, the show will go back into full-time rehearsal.
It has not yet been decided, he said, whether it will open before the end of the year.
On Wednesday, new choreography for the second act opening was installed, as well as a new song to replace two other songs, and earlier this week it was announced that the playwright Christopher Durang had been hired to doctor the book.
Mr.
Berlind said the difficulty of rehearsing while the cast was playing an eight-performance weekly schedule had precipitated the decision to delay.


Bank of New York reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Watson Pharmaceuticals
Shares of Watson Pharmaceuticals, a generic drug maker, eased yesterday after a run-up earlier in the week.
The company reported record earnings on Wednesday and was cited as a possible takeover candidate after Hoechst Celanese announced a bid for Copley Pharmaceutical.


Hunt (J.B.) Transport Services Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Citizens Bancorp (Maryland) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CPB Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Metrobank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Scripps (E.W.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cooper Tire &amp; Rubber reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  DINKINS RAISES ISSUE OF RACE
Standing beside Hillary Rodham Clinton two weeks after her husband suggested that some New Yorkers were reluctant to back him because of his race, Mayor Dinkins appealed to voters "to support me not because of the color of my skin but because of the content of my heart." He accused Rudolph W. Giuliani of using the issue destructively.
A1.
POWERFUL UNION IS NEUTRAL IN CAMPAIGN
The United Federation of Teachers, one of the largest, most politically sophisticated and well-organized unions in the city, which provided critical support for Mayor Dinkins's election, has turned its back on him.
B4.


Art in Review
Josely Carvalho
Intar Latin American Gallery  420 West 42d Street  Clinton  Through Oct. 29
The Brazilian-born artist Josely Carvalho's two multi-media installations address the plight of street children in Brazil.
The boys and girls in question, the castoffs of inner-city poverty, often live together in packs, surviving through prostitution, drug-selling and stealing.
Numbers of them have reportedly been killed by government and citizen vigilante forces.


Coast Savings Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Investor's Dreams Rise From Decay
MILES P. BERGER has just bought one of the biggest empty buildings in Newark.
Soon he will take possession of the one next door.
Then Mr.
Berger will have two large empty buildings, only a fraction of the city's ample inventory.
But skeptics who think he has stumbled into the urban equivalent of investing in swampland should think again.
Mr.
Berger and his partners may be conspicuous in their daring, but they are not greenhorns.
They know Newark wants to promote, at almost any cost, the physical transformation of a distressed city that produces too little tax revenue.


Marshall &amp; Illsley Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nellcor Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Donnkenny Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 4


Shawmut National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First of America Bank Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Old Kent Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Commerce Bancorp Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Norwest Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2 South Africa Whites Guilty in Murder of Black
In a verdict that many viewed as a test of white South Africa's adjustment to post-apartheid justice, an all-white court today convicted two right-wing whites of assassinating Chris Hani.
The charismatic black leader was shot to death in the driveway of his home in April.
Janusz Walus, a Polish immigrant who was arrested 10 minutes after the killing with the murder gun in his car, was convicted of pumping four bullets into Mr.
Hani.


Dinkins's Loss of a Supporter
The decision by the teachers union not to endorse Mayor David N. Dinkins represents the culmination of building tensions.
Page B4.


Sun Microsystems Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


ALC Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Baltimore Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Geon Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Level One Communications (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Corrections
An article in Business Day yesterday, about the investment banking and legal fees involved in the Bell Atlantic Corporation's takeover of Tele-Communications Inc., misstated the terms of Bell Atlantic's investment in Grupo Iusacell, Mexico's second-largest cellular telephone company.
Bell Atlantic will spend as much as $1.04 billion to acquire up to 46 percent of Grupo Iusacell, not 23 percent.
In addition, the article misidentified Bell Atlantic's investment banking adviser on the investment in Grupo Iusacell.
It is Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, not Salomon Brothers.


Enron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Midwest Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


AmSouth Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Payco American reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shawmut National Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The selling of Discover magazine hasn't been an exact science, but Disney will try a new approach.
WELL, O.K., it's not splitting the atom, curing baldness or delivering an edible tomato to a supermarket.
But the Walt Disney Company hopes to achieve a feat that has eluded publishers as prestigious as Time Inc. and as schlocky as Family Media Inc.: making the science magazine Discover a consistently successful title.
In Disney's first trade campaign since it bought Discover two years ago, the monthly will be celebrated as having found the formula for "the art of science." A series of three print advertisements, which begin appearing Monday, declare that Discover "appeals to the general interest reader of the 90's" and is therefore "truly at home in the home."


Seles-Attacker Sentence Will Face Appeals
Shocked that GUENTER PARCHE, the unemployed 39-year-old German tennis fanatic who stabbed MONICA SELES on April 30 in Hamburg, Germany, received only a two-year suspended sentence, the International Management Group indicated yesterday that it may appeal the verdict on behalf of its client.
And in Hamburg yesterday, prosecutors said they planned to appeal the decision.
Seles, then the world's No. 1 player, has not yet set a timetable for her return to tennis.
In the meantime STEFFI GRAF, the player Parche contended that he wanted to help by hurting Seles, has reclaimed the No. 1 ranking.
I.M.G. has seven days to compile its formal motion for an appeal, which will be based on the absence of any eyewitness testimony in the hearing before Judge ELKE BOSSE.


INSIDE
Sprayed by Police, Man Dies
A Mount Vernon man died after officers subdued him with pepper spray and he went into cardiac arrest.
The spray was being used in a pilot program to subdue suspects.
Page B1.
Cortines Rehirings Assailed
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines met with a barrage of criticism for his decision to reinstate 10 principals in a scandal-scarred Bronx school district.
Page B1. 2 South Africa Whites Guilty
An all-white court in Johannesburg convicted two whites of assassinating Chris Hani, head of the South African Communist Party and a leader in the African National Congress.
Page A5.


Geodynamics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27


Corrections
A chart in some editions on Wednesday, with a front-page article about the proposed merger of the Bell Atlantic Corporation with Tele-Communications Inc. and the Liberty Media Corporation, misstated the 1992 financial results of Tele-Communications.
It lost $49 million in 1992; it did not earn $49 million.


At Red Sea Resort, a Push to End Old Hatred
For those who see symbolic importance in matters like physical settings, the choice of this Red Sea resort for crucial negotiations that got under way this week between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization could be both hopeful and worrisome.
Hopeful, because a 1989 agreement on control over Taba, on the Egyptian-Israeli border, was the final jewel in the peace treaty between the two countries, the only one that the Jewish state has reached with an Arab neighbor.
Besides, on a sultry fall day, with the wind in one's hair and the waters of the Gulf of Aqaba lapping the pebbly beach, old hatreds seem remote.


Chrysler Net Doubles and Stock Jumps
The Chrysler Corporation, selling increasingly popular vehicles in a rebounding North American car and light-truck market, reported today that its earnings more than doubled in the third quarter, compared with the period a year earlier.
The results, a third-quarter record for the company, handily beat analysts' expectations, and Chrysler stock surged on the news in heavy trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
Chrysler stock closed at $51.75 a share, up $3.25, as 5.8 million shares changed hands.


Altera Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; Insurers flock to Bermuda, and insurance investors follow.
THE hottest place in the insurance business these days appears to be Bermuda, where private and corporate investors are pouring billions of dollars into new and expanding offshore insurance companies.
The new companies are rushing in to fill two yawning gaps in the world market: liability insurance and reinsurance -- the insurance that is bought by the insurers themselves -- to cover disasters like Hurricane Andrew last year.
Bermuda's reinsurance business has grown this year, in part because the role of London reinsurers, including Lloyd's of London, has diminished.


No Headline
"These union officers have been selling their members down the river for years. Now we hope to send these people up the river for years." -- DISTRICT ATTORNEY ROBERT M. MORGENTHAU, announcing the indictment of 10 current or former union officials.  [ B2:4. ]


Giuliani on the Attack
Striving to put Mayor David N. Dinkins back on the defensive, Rudolph W. Giuliani has begun broadcasting two new 30-second television commercials and two similar radio ads, harshly attacking the Mayor's record in office and a range of personal or professional lapses dating back two decades.
This is one of them.
ON THE SCREEN: The ad opens with big words on screen "Maybe we should have known better," next to a tiny picture of Mr.
Giuliani noting that his campaign paid for it.
Followed by pictures of a Comptroller's report, and a quotation from it: "...serious internal control weaknesses over revenue..." Then newspaper headlines, title noting that Mr.
Dinkins failed to file tax returns from 1969 through 1972, footage of Korean boycott, Crown Heights, asbestos sign on a dumpster, and titles that repeat much of the narration.
It ends with a picture of Mr.
Dinkins's tenure from 1975 to 1985.
He failed to file income tax returns and pay all taxes due from 1969 through 1972, but he later paid the taxes with penalities and there was no prosecution.
As one of the Giuliani radio ads notes, the lapse prevented Mr.
Dinkins from becoming the city's first black deputy Mayor in 1973.
The school asbestos problem long predated the Mayor's tenure in office, and economists say the city government cannot be held accountable for all the jobs lost in a severe regional recession.
Moreover, Mr.
Dinkins has acknowledged fault in several of the cases cited, particularly with respect to Crown Heights.
SCORECARD: This tough ad attacks Mr.
Dinkins for a range of old and new lapses, throwing in everything but the kitchen sink.
It is Mr.
Giuliani's attempt to counteract the Dinkins ads that have sought to rehash old aspects of his record of service to Republican administrations and link them to his current policy views.
Similarly, this ad attempts to paint Mr.
Dinkins's entire career as an endless skein of mediocrity and bumbling -- typified by his failure to pay income taxes.
The "You think you'd get away with it?" line is an indirect echo of a charge the Giuliani camp sometimes makes more overtly: that if Mr.
Dinkins were white, he would never have been forgiven such a lapse.
That is a way of saying whites need not feel guilty for voting against him now, having given him a break four years ago.
By citing the most notable crises of the Dinkins administration, the ad may ring uncomfortably true.
But its rapid-fire mix of images and charges, and its final sneering tone of blaming the electorate may also put voters off.&lt;?
TODD S. PURDUM


Immigration's Impact On Nation's Resources
To the Editor:
The debate on immigration seems to focus almost exclusively on its impact on jobs and wages.
This is important, but the central issue, almost always ignored, is the degree to which immigration contributes to U.S. population growth, and the devastating impact that growth has on our resources and environment.


Kimball International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
You never know who you going to hear from when you are a governor.
Yesterday, for example, Gov.
JIM FLORIO of New Jersey received an impassioned letter from BRIGITTE BARDOT, seeking a pardon for one of his canine constituents.
According to the office of the Brigitte Bardot Foundation in Paris, the former film star and ardent animal-rights crusader saw a television program about the case of Taro, an Akita accused of injuring the 10-year-old niece of his owners, Lonnie and Sandy Lehrer of Haworth, N.J.
Taro has been in a kennel in the Bergen County Jail for more than 1,000 days, running up $100,000 in fees.
He was sentenced to death by municipal and state courts, and an appeal is now pending.


Ponce Federal Bank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Is Still Trying to Spread Democracy
To the Editor:
In "Theory vs. Practice" (news article, Oct. 1), it is mistakenly argued that President Clinton's recent expressions of caution in undertaking new foreign policy initiatives reflect an abandonment of the Administration's announced policy of supporting democratic "enlargement." The mistake lies in confusing high-profile, expensive interventions, such as that in Somalia or that contemplated in Bosnia, with the long-term efforts of recent American Administrations to extend democracy.


Total Petroleum of North America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gertrude DePass; Administrator, 86
Gertrude Marie Derrick Bolden DePass, the first black administrator of a New York City welfare center in Harlem and a former deputy director of the city's Bureau of Public Assistance, died on Oct. 8 in a nursing home in Brooklyn.
She was 86.
The cause was complications from Alzheimer's disease, her family said.


ALC Communications Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dionex Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Automatic Data Processing reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NBD Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TRC Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Art; Sampling of Treasures From 18th-Century Korea
Of the three major East Asian cultures -- China, Korea and Japan -- Korea is the one least familiar to the West, and the one most obscured by the vicissitudes of power politics.
Positioned between two historically aggressive neighbors, Korea partook of the full radiance of Chinese art and helped transmit its influence to Japan.
But Korea was also savagely invaded by both countries, with the result that its own artistic traditions were, at crucial periods, all but obliterated.
"Korean Arts of the 18th Century: Splendor and Simplicity" at the Asia Society -- the centerpiece of the society's yearlong Festival of Korea celebrations -- sets out to restore an integral picture of those traditions.
It does so not only by looking beyond the Korean porcelains that are museum staples to painting, sculpture, calligraphy and furniture, but also by concentrating on a single era: a century when China was at peace, Japan had retired into an isolationist shell, and Korea was left in relative peace to establish an identity of its own.


Failure of Haiti Operation Backs Initial Pentagon Skepticism
While the State Department has held out hope that the Haiti military would go along with a peace accord to restore President Jean-Bertrand Aristide to power, Pentagon officials believed the junta was never serious and has now proved its bad faith.
For months, Defense Secretary Les Aspin and the Director of Central Intelligence, R. James Woolsey, have warned of the risks in sending troops to Haiti, according to Administration officials.


Potlatch Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Huntington Bancshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30





Stanley Furniture Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Digital Communications Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Altera Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Continental Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BMC Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Cites Progress In Talks on Opening Japan's Rice Market
Japan and the United States are making progress toward an agreement that could open Japan's rice market, a United States trade negotiator said today.
"Obviously it is our intention to conclude this round with the rice market opened up," said Joseph O'Mara, the special trade negotiator for agriculture, said today, referring to the Uruguay Round of world trade talks.


Pittsburgh Symphony
Lorin Maazel is to conduct the Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra tonight and tomorrow night at 8 at Carnegie Hall.
Tonight's program features the New York premiere of Krysztof Penderecki's Adagio, composed to commemorate the bicentennial of the French Revolution.
Also to be performed is Brahms's Symphony No. 1.
Tomorrow evening's program is to be devoted to Mahler's Sixth Symphony, opening Carnegie Hall's two-year Mahler celebration.
Tickets are $12 to $55.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


First Federal Savings of Puerto Rico reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mid-Am Inc. Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CIT Group Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Honoring a Conductor
The New York Chamber Symphony, led by Gerard Schwarz, is to give two concerts, tomorrow at 8 P.M. and Sunday at 3 P.M., at the 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue.
The concerts are in honor of Paul Sacher, the conductor and patron of the arts, who has canceled his direction of this concert because of poor health.
The orchestra is to perform Frank Martin's "Petite Symphonie Concertante" and Bartok's Divertimento for Strings, both of which were commissioned by Mr.
Sacher.
Also on the program is Beethoven's Violin Concerto, with Miriam Fried as soloist.
Tickets are $25 and $30.
Information: (212) 996-1100.


Enclave Outgrows Its Racial Tensions
Nina Gennaro Suarez remembers when the glow of Ebbets Field's lights danced on her bedroom wall and the roar of Brooklyn Dodger crowds rolled over her neighborhood.
She wistfully recalls the Saturday morning "kiddie shows" at the old Patio Theater on Flatbush Avenue.
And she will never forget the brick that came through a window of her house on Rutland Road after her father refused to join with neighbors demanding that he help buy out the first black family on the block.
That was in 1949.


Neworld Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Somalia G.I.'s: They're Bitter And Grousing
Lieut.
Col.
Bill David could only grimace when asked the other day if he believed that military force could put a stop to the anarchy that has made south Mogadishu a hell for his infantry troops.
The battalion commander finally replied that such questions were best left to politicians.
But in Company C, the most battle-tested unit in Colonel David's quick-reaction force, there was no disguising the frustration and confusion felt by some American combat soldiers.


A Story of Electricity: Men, Women and Con Ed
"Mr. Wonderful" finds Matt Dillon playing Gus, a Con Edison electrical worker, and Annabella Sciorra playing Lee, Gus's ex-wife, who left him none too amicably and is now a college student.
"Somebody please explain to me how I get into a situation where my ex-husband is finding me dates!" Lee cries exasperatedly at one point.
Indeed, it would have been nice if the screenplay had explained that, since the dating gimmick becomes all too central to the plot.
"Mr. Wonderful" is well cast and convincingly played, but its actors are hamstrung by the cute excesses of the story.
Gus is supposedly eager to marry off Lee so that he can stop paying alimony and sink his money into an abandoned bowling alley he plans to refurbish, with the help of four equally handy friends.
Even viewers who buy that idea will have a hard time understanding why Gus and Lee, who supposedly hate each other, can spend so much time conspiring over Lee's social life.
Lee has been seeing her English professor (William Hurt) and Gus has an adoring girlfriend, a nurse named Rita (Mary-Louise Parker).
So in theory these ex-spouses are otherwise engaged.


Reynolds Metals Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Named Willie Randolph, Billy Connors and Brian Butterfield coaches and Glenn Sherlock bullpen catcher.


Art in Review
New Photography 9
Museum of Modern Art  11 West 53d Street  Manhattan  Through Jan. 4
This year's installment in the Museum of Modern Art's continuing series of showcase exhibitions of new photographs is a varied but drab affair.
Beat Struli, a young Swiss photographer, is represented by oversized black-and-white prints of street scenes in New York City, taken with a telephoto lens.
The pictures suggest surveillance photographs, but lack distinctive subjects and are reduced to patterns of overlapping posters, signposts, bus shelters and the like.


John Nuveen Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Why Does Israel Arm China?
Israel is expanding its cooperation with China on military technology, according to the Central Intelligence Agency.
That's the latest sign of Israeli willingness to engage in dubious arms deals.
In this case, Israel is supplying China with advanced technology that the U.S. and other Western powers won't supply.
In the past, compelling security needs drove an isolated Israel to forge alliances of convenience with outcasts like South Africa and Iran, sometimes with U.S. connivance.
But why would Israel engage in such risky trade now -- especially with a country that has armed Israel's sworn enemies like Iran?
Washington, Israel's protector, should demand a good answer before supplying its ally with more advanced military technology.


Ferruzzi Rescue Plan Is Rejected by Banks
In a blow to efforts to rescue Italy's Ferruzzi group, the nation's second-largest private enterprise, foreign creditor banks tonight rejected a complex rescue plan worked out by Italian banks to prevent the company from going under.
The rejection, announced after meetings in Milan, was not only a blow to the $17 billion rescue plan, but appeared to be a rebuke of Mediobanca, the Government-controlled Italian bank that was the chief architect of the Ferruzzi rescue package.
The collapse may also have far-reaching consequences for the outcome of a debate here about the future shape of Italy's economy.


Carolina First Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Caremark International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ben Franklin Retail Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Restaurants
Going into Lora, you see the photographs first.
Right near the door there's a large portrait of Jodie Foster, and it's signed.
Go closer to inspect the inscription, and you find it's not one of those gooey celebrity testimonials ("Loved the food!"), but the autograph of the photographer, Annie Leibovitz.
In another restaurant this would be an ironic twist.
But the people who run Lora don't seem to know that they have done something funny, that they have made a comment about all those restaurants plastered with portraits of the rich and famous.
There is not much humor here, which is probably why this rather wonderful restaurant has not become more popular.


Audiovox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


First Fidelity Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kidnapping Summons City to Action
Nothing has been the same here since Polly Klaas, 12, opened her bedroom door during her slumber party and a tall bearded man holding a large knife ordered her and her two friends not to make a sound.
Polly gasped, the police said, but the two other girls giggled, thinking that the sudden appearance of the man was a friend's practical joke.


Inacom Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Gander Mountain Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Nellcor Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Campbell, Though Liked, May Not Win in Canada
Prime Minister Kim Campbell still leads in public opinion polls as Canada's preferred choice for the post, but her popularity is failing to exert the pull needed for her Progressive Conservative party to win a third term in voting on Oct. 25.
In an election campaign that is challenging the traditional power structure of this country of nearly 30 million, Ms.
Campbell is being pressed by the Liberals on the left and by two new parties eroding her support in traditional conservative strongholds.


First of America Bank Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TRC Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Georgia-Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Presses for New Haitian Plan In Effort to Restore Ousted Leader
Jolted by the assassination of Haiti's Justice Minister, Administration officials scrambled today to develop plans to salvage the stalemated effort to return to power the exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Even before the killing in Haiti, the Administration was considering tighter sanctions against Haiti by the United Nations, freezing Haitian assets in the United States and perhaps sending American ships to enforce the cutoff of oil and arms, the officials said.


Corrections
A headline yesterday about a study on the use of sunscreen referred incorrectly to the basis of its conclusion about reducing the risk of skin cancer.
The study found a reduction in skin growths that are precursors to squamous-cell skin cancer.
It did not find a reduction in melanoma.


HAITI JUSTICE MINISTER SLAIN IN DEFIANCE OF U.S. WARNING TO MILITARY TO KEEP PEACE
Further defying international efforts to restore democracy in Haiti, gunmen shot and killed the Justice Minister and two aides this afternoon as they were leaving the minister's office.
The killing of the minister, Guy Malary, came less than two hours after radio stations here broadcast a warning by President Clinton that the United States would hold Haiti's military responsible for the safety of members of the transitional Government.
The Cabinet was appointed six weeks ago by the ousted President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Georgia-Pacific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article yesterday about the New Jersey campaign for governor included an incorrect paraphrase of a statement by Carl Golden, a spokesman for Christine Todd Whitman.
He said a state legislator had given Mrs.
Whitman information that the state was spending tens of thousands of dollars on Adidas sneakers for prisoners.
He did not say the information was faulty.


Enron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Evidence In Bomb Case Is at Issue
Confronted with a damaging piece of evidence in the trial of four men accused of bombing the World Trade Center, defense lawyers yesterday picked away at an expert's testimony linking a twisted metal frame found in the rubble to the vehicle that prosecutors say carried the bomb.
For a second day, the burned six-foot section and another large metal assembly held center stage in Manhattan Federal Court as the Government began building a case to tie the Feb. 26 blast to Muslim extremists charged with carrying the bomb into an underground garage in a rented Ryder van.


Baltimore Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Norwest Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Carter Will Mediate Parley By Warring Sudan Factions
Two of the warring factions in the southern Sudan have accepted invitations to begin peace negotiations this month under the mediation of former President Jimmy Carter, he said today.
Mr.
Carter said representatives of factions, the Sudan People's Liberation Army and the Sudan People's Liberation Army-United, are to begin talks on Oct. 25 at the Carter Presidential Center.
The length of the talks and conditions have not been set, he said.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  HAITIAN MINISTER IS SLAIN  Gunmen killed Haiti's Justice Minister, less than two hours after the radio broadcast a warning from President Clinton that Washington would hold Haiti's military responsible for the safety of members of the transitional Government.
A1  U.S.
SEEKS TACTICS ON HAITI  American officials scrambled to develop other plans to salvage the stalemated effort to return Haiti's exiled President to power.
President Clinton is following the Pentagon's advice and stopping short of military intervention.A1


Peoples Heritage Financial Group Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Health Plan Is Now Seen as Less of a Deficit Fighter
Acknowledging that its plan to overhaul the health care system will be more expensive than anticipated, the Clinton Administration has lowered its estimate of how much the plan would cut the budget deficit.
Several Administration officials said today that the plan would reduce the growth of the deficit by $70 billion to $80 billion between 1994 and 2000, down from the original estimate of $91 billion.


A Small Profit for Apple Computer
Apple Computer Inc. reported a steep drop in its fourth-quarter earnings and profit margins today, but it defied Wall Street's most pessimistic expectations by eking out a small profit and posting a substantial gain in sales.
The results are a sign that Apple's strategy of slashing prices and cutting operating costs might still pay off.
Analysts had been anticipating a small loss and far lower sales.


New York Officials Of Plumbing Union Charged in Bribery
Asserting that every major plumbing contract in Manhattan and the Bronx in the last decade involved kickbacks to union officials and mobsters, Manhattan prosecutors yesterday unsealed sweeping racketeering indictments against top leaders of a plumbers' union, five plumbing companies and a suspected mob figure.
District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau of Manhattan said payoffs, which dated to 1983, were made by contractors to get work rules relaxed on scores of projects, including the Federal Office Building under construction in lower Manhattan.
They also involved recent renovations at the Plaza Hotel, the Ritz Carlton New York Hotel, the Midtown North Precinct police station house, the Jewish Museum, the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center and the Veterans Affairs hospital in the Bronx.


American Steel &amp; Wire Corp.(NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Donnkenny Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 4


Microsoft Seeks to Pad Wide Lead in PC Suites
Amid a light show, music and fanfare, William Gates of Microsoft will stride onto the stage at the Hudson Theater in Manhattan next week to raise the ante in the "suite wars," a battle for the fastest-growing part of the personal computer software business.
Suites are bundles of applications like spreadsheets, word processing and graphics, sold together for a fraction of the cost if the programs were purchased individually.
These office packages are hot sellers in corporate America, with sales growing nearly 40 percent a year, twice the rate of the total applications market.


Now Free of Rice, Sherrard Blossoms
When Giants receiver Mike Sherrard was in San Francisco, he was in the difficult position of, oh, playing behind maybe the best receiver of all time in Jerry Rice.
That can be one of the greatest learning experiences ever, but it can also be suffocating.
Because he is such a competitor, Rice wants the ball all the time, every play.
He wants to do it all.
There were rumors that Sherrard and Rice didn't get along.
Last season with the 49ers Sherrard played in all 16 games and started in eight for the injured John Taylor.
As the rumors go, Rice thought Sherrard was getting too many catches (he finished the season with 38 for 607 yards).


Commerce Bancorp Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Flighty No. 3 and 4 Starters Worry Jays
Cito Gaston, preparing to manage in the World Series for the second successive season, made some easy decisions yesterday.
He saved the harder ones for later.
Gaston, as expected, named Juan Guzman and Dave Stewart as his starting pitchers for the first two games, which the Blue Jays will play against the Philadelphia Phillies tomorrow night and Sunday night in Toronto.
Guzman and Stewart provided the Blue Jays with their four victories over Chicago in the American League playoff, each winning two games.


Mets Are Expected To Move Account
The New York Mets are expected to change agencies soon, advertising executives who spoke on condition of anonymity said yesterday.
Since January 1991, the baseball team's account has been handled by TBWA Advertising Inc. in New York, which succeeded Della Femina, McNamee Inc. in New York.
Billings were not disclosed.


Art in Review
'Sylvia Plachy'  'The Call of the Street'
Whitney Museum of American Art at Philip Morris  120 Park Avenue (at 42d Street)  Through Dec. 31
The quirky energy of New York City provides the spark for Sylvia Plachy's sometimes whimsical, sometimes weird photographs.
Until earlier this year, Ms.
Plachy's "Unguided Tour," consisting of a single evocative photograph presented without a caption, appeared every week in The Village Voice; here she presents a selection of her work from the last decade.


Coast Savings Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Crestar Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Marshall &amp; Illsley Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hunt (J.B.) Transport Services Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


PROGRESS IS CITED ON CYSTIC FIBROSIS
Using gene therapy, scientists have taken an important step toward correcting the molecular defect thought to be the cause of cystic fibrosis.
Dr.
Michael J. Welsh of the Howard Hughes Institute of the University of Iowa College of Medicine in Iowa City and his colleagues say they have used inactivated cold viruses to carry corrective genes to cells lining the nose.
The genes, they found, provided the cells with a protein that is missing in cystic fibrosis.


CPB Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ruth Gilbert Dead; Actress, 71, Starred On Berle's TV Show
Ruth Gilbert, a stage actress discovered by Eugene O'Neill who went on to perform on television as Milton Berle's lovesick, scatterbrained secretary, Max, died on Tuesday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
She was 71 and lived in New York.
The cause was brain cancer, said Dick Davis, a friend.


High-Grade Phillies Defy Low Expectations
To continue to term it incongruous what the Philadelphia Phillies accomplished in defeating the Atlanta Braves for the National League pennant is to continue to do what the Phillies love.
And that's underestimate them.
It is perhaps the fatal mistake the Braves made, for after having forged a two-games-to-one lead they lost the final three of the National League Championship Series.
It is a mistake the Phillies would dearly love to have the Toronto Blue Jays stumble into as well.
Lull a well-oiled, businesslike opposition to sleep with their ragtag, holes-in-the-pants, Hole in the Wall approach.


Scripps (E.W.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mustaf Charge Dropped
A judge in Phoenix yesterday dismissed a misdemeanor assault charge against Suns reserve forward JERROD MUSTAF because the man he was said to have attacked did not appear and give testimony.


GZA Geoenvironmental Tech (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Aching Anderson In Form For Nets
Although Kenny Anderson complains he still has problems with the left wrist that was fractured on a flagrant foul by the Knicks' John Starks last season, he hardly looked like an ailing player tonight in the Nets' preseason opener against the Detroit Pistons at the Buffalo Auditorium.
Anderson scored 10 points, making 5 of 11 attempts, led the Nets with 5 assists and tied for the team lead in steals with 2.


Dinkins Aides Seek to Halt Some Ads
Under pressure from the city's Campaign Finance Board, the Dinkins campaign has asked the State Democratic Committee to suspend advertisements that lawyers for Rudolph W. Giuliani argue circumvent election spending limits.
During a four-hour hearing before the board, lawyers for Mr.
Giuliani argued that the state Democratic Party in effect was illegally helping Mayor David N. Dinkins by buying nearly $220,000 worth of advertising that touts Mr.
Dinkins's accomplishments and criticizes Mr.
Giuliani's position on abortion.
The ads have been running for about a week.


Reviews/Film; Cut to: A Screenwriter, Very Harried. Present Day.
"Inside Monkey Zetterland," a dark comedy set in contemporary Los Angeles, strains so hard to be hip, zany and offbeat that you can almost feel the movie gasping for breath.
Written by Steven Antin, who also plays the title character, and directed by Jefery Levy, the movie offers a view of Los Angeles that echoes Robert Altman's "Short Cuts" in its grimness, although the tone of Mr.
Antin's movie is more farcically cheeky than grandly pessimistic.
The movie flaunts a number of audacious cinematic tricks.
In one early scene the camera faces a blank wall while overlapping arguments by off-screen characters converge.
In other scenes, the halting dialogue sounds as though it were improvised on the spot.
The soundtrack keeps shifting between excerpts from Tchaikovsky's Piano Concerto No. 1, played straight, and the same music heard on a calliope.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Arkansas Power and Light, a unit of the Entergy Corp., is offering $175 million of 7 percent first-mortgage bonds due 2023 at 98.637 to yield 7.11 percent through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The bonds, which are noncallable for five years, are rated Baa2 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB by Standard &amp; Poor's and Duff &amp; Phelps. *
Associates Corp. of North America, Irving, Tex., a unit of the Ford Motor Co., is offering $300 million in 5 3/4 percent notes due 2003 at 99.758 to yield 5.782 percent through Lehman Brothers.
The noncallable securities are rated A1 by Moody's and AA- by S.&amp; P. and Duff &amp; Phelps.


Review/Film Festival; Reconstructing the Tale Of a Wellesian Disaster
In terms of cinema history and scholarship, the highlight of this year's New York Film Festival is the presentation of "It's All True: Based on an Unfinished Film by Orson Welles." This is the story of the aborted production of the master's 1942 Latin American, three-part "It's All True."
The documentary will be shown at the festival today at 6:15 P.M. and tomorrow at 9 P.M.
Both screenings are sold out, but the film begins a regular run in Manhattan on Sunday.
It's a must-see.


Boatmen's Bancshares Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Keystone Heritage reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
'Dona Nelson' 'New Paintings'
Michael Klein  594 Broadway (near Houston Street)  SoHo  Through Oct. 23
Like many recent artists, Dona Nelson explores the effects that paint can create when applied with little direct control.
Ms.
Nelson pours enamel paint, often a blistering white or black, onto her canvases in broad flowing expanses.


Goodrich (B.F.) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Papandreou Draws Fire for Appointing Relatives
Within a day of assuming office, Prime Minister Andreas Papandreou has provoked a new political controversy and criticism from his own supporters by granting his wife and other family members top political posts in his administration.
Mr.
Papandreou, who won back the job as Prime Minister as a result of the Socialist victory in last weekend's elections, has further fueled controversy by announcing he planned to stop major privatizations and to renationalize the public transportation system, and to overturn a property settlement that had been reached between the previous Government and ex-King Constantine, the deposed Greek monarch who now lives in London.
Chooses His Son
But the biggest controversy, drawing quick criticism from pro-Socialist newspapers as well as the opposition press, was over a list of appointments in which Dimitra Liani-Papandreou, the Prime Minister's 37-year-old wife, was named as director of Mr.
Papandreou's private political office.


Cullen/Frost Bankers (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Summit Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Standard Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Caremark International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Fidelity Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Permanent Ban for 13 Russian Newspapers
President Boris N. Yeltsin's Government imposed a permanent ban today on 13 newspapers and a television show known for friendly treatment of his former opposition in the disbanded Russian Parliament, but said it would allow two nationally circulated dailies to reopen under new names.
Pravda, for more than 70 years the flagship organ of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, and Sovetskaya Rossiya, a bastion of Russian ultranationalist views, were told they could register under new names and resume publication if they dismissed their editors.


Inacom Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


On My Mind; Here We Go Again
Israel sells weapons and the technology of warfare to Communist China.
The U.S. prepares the way for the Chinese military to get the American supercomputers for which it has lusted so long.
So, fellow suckers, citizens of the Free World, here we go again.
Democratic governments are helping increase the military power of despotism.


Neworld Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


John Nuveen Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Making Art of Madness
On Nov. 15, 1934, Virginia Woolf began her rewrite of a novel eventually titled "The Years." "Lord! Lord!" she noted in her diary, "10 pages a day for 90 days: three months. . . . now, damnably disagreeable, as I see it will be -- compacting the vast mass -- I am using my faculties again. &amp; all the flies and fleas are forgotten."
Seven years later the flies and fleas and larger plagues drove Woolf, who had fought mental illness throughout her life, to suicide.
An increasing number of psychiatrists, neurologists and geneticists, says an article in this week's Science Times, believe there's a link between the genius and madness of artists such as her.
Maybe so.
But as anyone who's ever read Woolf's letters and diaries can attest, it's the link between imagination and self-discipline that got her a place in literature's pantheon.
Her mind may have had a grasshopper's fleetness, but her industry was the ant's.


Kmart Gives Glimpse of Plan To Offer Stakes in Its Units
The Kmart Corporation provided a few more details yesterday about its plans to sell the pieces of some of its specialty store businesses to the public.
In a presentation to the Toronto Society of Financial Analysts, Thomas F. Murasky, the chief financial officer of the country's second-largest retailer, also said the company's earnings this year were likely to be slightly less than those of last year, which were $941 million, or $2.06 a share.


Wachovia Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Report Finds 20% of Students In New York City Carry Arms
More than a third of New York City's public high school students say they are physically threatened during the school year, nearly a fourth say they get into fights and one in five admits carrying a weapon, a study by Federal and local health authorities and city school officials has found.
It said attitudes among students and their families played crucial roles in violent behavior.
The study -- a survey of 1,400 students in 15 high schools selected as a representative sample of the city's 290,000 students in 160 high schools -- was conducted in June 1992 by the Federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the city Health Department and a school system that has reeled with shootings, knifings and a rising epidemic of violence in recent years.


George Pierson, 88, A Professor at Yale And Its Historian
George W. Pierson, the first official historian of Yale University and an authority on Alexis de Tocqueville, died on Tuesday at his home in Hamden, Conn.
He was 88.
He had had a long illness, a spokeswoman for the university said.


A Little Bit of Series History
When the Philadelphia Phillies play the Toronto Blue Jays in the World Series beginning tomorrow, they will meet a team from the city in which they once raised players who performed for them in another World Series.
Furthermore, they will play a team whose nickname they used before it made the major leagues in 1977.
The Phillies had their first Class AAA minor league team in Toronto for three seasons, 1948, '49 and '50, and seven players who played on the Phillies' 1950 pennant winner, known as the Whiz Kids, spent time there.


CHRONICLE
The encounter between WILLIAM F. BUCKLEY JR. and the other speakers at an 85th-birthday party this evening in Boston for JOHN KENNETH GALBRAITH should be an interesting one, at least if Mr.
Buckley lives up to his provocative word.
"Having Gloria Steinem, two Harvard presidents, Arthur Schlesinger Jr. and Teddy Kennedy all together, that's quite a catch," Mr.
Buckley said in his typically puckish manner yesterday.
"The rumor has reached me that there will be a mass defection to conservative principles and they will elect me Pope, but of course that's just a rumor."


Keystone Consolidated Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reynolds Metals Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Diagnostek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Republic Gypsum reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Diagnostek Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Federal Savings of Puerto Rico reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mid-Am Inc. Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CIT Group Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gander Mountain Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Seven Big Drug Makers Are Sued Over Pricing
Struggling with growing competition from cheaper mail-order pharmacies and health maintenance organizations, 20 drugstore companies filed a lawsuit yesterday accusing large drug makers of price fixing and Federal antitrust violations.
The drugstores, including the Rite Aid Corporation, Revco D.S.
Inc., and the Thrifty Corporation, contend that the manufacturers refuse to give drugstore chains the big discounts and rebates that they offer mail-order pharmacies, hospitals and H.M.O.'s, resulting in higher drug prices that cost consumers hundreds of millions of dollars a year.


American Steel &amp; Wire Corp.(NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Digital Communications Associates Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Prudential Securities Agrees to Settle Lawsuit
Prudential Securities agreed yesterday to pay $120 million to settle a class-action suit by about 130,000 investors in 35 oil and gas partnerships that went sour.
If the Federal judge in the case approves the settlement, it will be sent to the investors, who would have the option of accepting it or pursuing their own actions against Prudential for recovery of principal and loss of investment income.


Premier Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Andrew S. Zysman, 38; Pushed AIDS Research
Andrew S. Zysman, a doctor who campaigned in San Francisco and nationally for accelerated AIDS research, died on Tuesday in the Kaiser-Permanente Medical Center in San Francisco.
He was 38.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said a spokesman for the American Association of Physicians for Human Rights, an organization of gay and lesbian doctors and medical students.


U.S. Trust (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Star Banc Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Diner's Journal
Out of the Shadow
When asked who does the cooking when he's not in the restaurant, Paul Bocuse, the Michelin three-star chef known for his globe-trotting, usually replies, "The same person who does the cooking when I am in the restaurant." That person is Roger Jaloux, who has been the chef de cuisine at Mr.
Bocuse's eponymous restaurant near Lyons, France, since 1976.
But now it looks as if Mr.
Bocuse himself will have to be in the kitchen in early December.
Mr.
Jaloux, an award-winning chef in France, is making a rare trip to America to cook with David Bouley at Bouley, 165 Duane Street, at Hudson Street, in TriBeCa.


Producer Prices Up Only 0.2%
Wholesale price inflation was unexpectedly low in September, and consumers continued spending at a brisk clip, Government reports showed today.
The news drove interest rates lower; the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond slipped to 5.85 percent, the lowest in 25 years.  [ Page D14. ]


Slain Official Was A Threat to Junta
To symbolize the coming transformation of Haiti's violent military and police forces, Guy Malary, the country's new minister of justice, last month welcomed the first contingent of French and Canadian police officers arriving to help with the retraining.
This morning, the 59 foreign officers departed after street violence had stymied any larger deployment.
A few hours later, Mr.
Malary was dead, slain by gunmen on a Port au Prince street.


Review/Art; Baudelaire as Painterly Inspiration
On the way to Huntington, where the Heckscher Museum has on view an exhibition called "Baudelaire's Voyages: The Poet and His Painters," I was eager to see what could be done on a small scale, and with limited resources, on this tremendous subject.
It was no small problem.
"Baudelairean" is an awesome adjective.
Charles Baudelaire was one of the great European poets of all time.
As much as anyone, he marked out the parameters of modern metropolitan life, and of the specific sensibility that goes with it.


Payco American reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
SHIRLEY CHISHOLM, the former Congresswoman from Brooklyn who ran for the Democratic Presidential nomination in 1972, has asked that her nomination as Ambassador to Jamaica be withdrawn.
According to the White House press office, Mrs.
Chisholm has been suffering from a progressive eye disorder that has significantly compromised her vision.


Genter Commun reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Alltel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Total Petroleum of North America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Irving Atkins, 83, Dies; A Former Tax Official
Irving Atkins, former chief of the litigation department of the New York State Department of Taxation and Finance, died on Wednesday at Hackensack Medical Center in New Jersey.
He was 83 and lived in Teaneck, N.J.
The cause was acute leukemia, said his son, Charles.


Review/Film Festival; Cruising Nighttown in Quest of the Ultimate Light
Meet Johnny (David Thewlis), the 27-year-old Manchester lad who is the central figure in Mike Leigh's "Naked," a brilliant somersault of a movie that lands this fine English director in dark new cinematic territory.
As nothing that Mr.
Leigh has done in the past (especially his recent "High Hopes" and "Life Is Sweet") is adequate preparation for "Naked," no movie character you may have met quite measures up (or down) to the caustic and abusive Johnny.
He's "not waving, but drowning." Though the cool order of the poet Stevie Smith's line succinctly describes Johnny's situation, it has little to do with his often revivifying, sardonic fury.


Dionex Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Teleflex Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Same Winter Racing, but Three More Days at Saratoga
New York's race tracks defused their dispute with Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo yesterday when they agreed to continue racing all winter at Aqueduct despite severe losses last winter.
But they pleaded for the Governor to soften the financial crunch by deferring the payment of some taxes and by allowing New York to expand simulcast betting on races televised from Florida.
The tracks also voted to add three days to the booming summer season at Saratoga.
The five-week season will not be expanded to six full weeks.
But three days will be added as a "preview weekend" starting on Friday, July 22, for a total of 33 days at the homey 126-year-old track in the foothills of the Adirondacks.


Stanley Furniture Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Raytheon Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


J.P. Morgan &amp; Co. (N)
J.
P.
Morgan &amp; Company, a banking concern that increasingly resembles a securities firm, said yesterday that strong trading profits in the third quarter lifted earnings by 46 percent from a year earlier, to $468 million.
Although the $464 million of trading revenue was down from the record $520 million in the previous quarter, the $1.45 billion total for the past nine months is nearly twice the level of a year earlier.
Foreign exchange revenue was down, but securities trading in Europe and other overseas markets was up, as well as mortgage backed securities trading in the United States.
The company also earned a $179 million profit from other investments, mostly by selling 22 percent of the stock it holds in the Hospital Corporation of America.


Teleflex Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


A Triumph of One Man's Personality: The American Courtroom's Buffalo Bill
Gerry Spence's co-counsel and his adversaries tend to agree on at least one thing: there are the normal boundaries of acceptable trial conduct, and then there are Gerry Spence's.
This summer, in the trial of Randy Weaver, the racial separatist charged with conspiracy and murder in the death of a Federal marshal at Mr.
Weaver's remote Idaho cabin, Mr.
Spence pulled out all the stops.
To ridicule a Government ballistics expert who did not know the height of Mr.
Weaver's 14-year-old son, fatally shot in the back by a Federal marksman during the siege that sprang from the marshal's death, Mr.
Spence measured one of his own lawyers, made a pen mark on the associate's neck and joked about entering him as evidence.


Pinnacle Banc Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


An 'Honor' for Jordan
Just when you thought that MICHAEL JORDAN had won it all, here comes Dr.
STANFORD SHULMAN with a new honor: a strain of salmonella.
Shulman, chief of infectious diseases at Children's Memorial Hospital in Chicago, discovered the unique strain and decided to name it Salmonella mjordan.


P.C. Gender?
To the Editor:
For reasons that escape me, it has become politically correct to apply the word "gender" to the male-female dichotomy that in a simpler time was always referred to as "sex." The proposed standard medical claim form you recently reproduced asks for the patient's "gender," and "Gay Parents: Living in Fear" (editorial, Oct. 4) mentions "same-gender partners." For the sake of consistency, shouldn't we refer to "genderal orientation" and to "heterogenderals" and "homogenderals"?
LOUIS JAY HERMAN  New York, Oct. 7, 1993


Breaking Down an Arms Buildup
Having earned billions of dollars building weapons for the military, many contractors think they have found a new growth area -- dismantling and recycling the weapons they were paid to make.
"If you are looking for someone to take things apart, the first guy you are going to look for is the guy who made them," said Steven Malevich, a marketing director for Alliant Techsystems Inc. of Edina, Minn., which makes bullets, cluster bombs and torpedoes.


Boatmen's Bancshares Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Genentech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fastenal Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Potlatch Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cheshire Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Central Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Carolina First Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Citizens Banking Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hoped-for Scandal Fails to Materialize at Hearing
The advance word on a Republican-sponsored hearing today into bonds issued by the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority was that it would produce an "October surprise" against Gov.
Jim Florio.
Instead, it produced one of the oddest bits of political theater of the campaign season.
The star witness -- the former chairman of the Sports and Exposition Authority, Peter L. Levine -- complained at length about "outside interference" with his agency and repeatedly referred to "wrongs" done, but he never named names or said what they did.


Backing Clinton, Senate Rejects Bid to Speed Somalia Pullout
The Senate early this morning rejected efforts to accelerate the withdrawal of American troops from Somalia faster than President Clinton's timetable, but only after an impassioned debate during which Republicans and Democrats offered harsh critiques of the Administration's policy.
For five hours, one Senator after another rehashed the bitter lessons of Vietnam and Lebanon, suggesting the White House needed a dramatic reminder lest it fall into old traps.
Several Senators launched into rhetorical checklists of the mistakes they said the Administration has made in allowing the United Nations to put American forces in harm's way.
They accused the White House of drifting from one soundbite to another while 29 American soldiers died and 170 were wounded.


Antiques Fair Comes of Age
THE International Fine Art and Antique Dealers Show is no longer the new kid on the block.
Now in its fifth year, the seven-day event, which opens today at the Seventh Regiment Armory in Manhattan, is firmly entrenched in the international collectors' circuit.
Falling somewhere between the over-the-top Biennale Internationale des Antiquaires in Paris and the terribly stuffy Grosvenor House Antiques Fair in London, it's the most impressive art and antiques show that New York City gets to see, both in the quality of its contents and the originality of their presentation.
This fair is also the only New York event that collects works as diverse and rare as a suite of 19th-century Russian furniture, a group of Syrian alabaster sculptures dating from the fourth to the third centuries B.C., a Canaletto scene of Venice that once belonged to King Ludwig I of Bavaria and a 19th-century cross of garnet and diamonds.
Prices are generally high.
While small objects like a nice pair of earrings or a botanical drawing can be had for several thousand dollars, many of the big-ticket items, whether furniture or artifacts, cost up to $1 million.
Even if buying isn't on your agenda, it's a stimulating place to train the eye.


Commerce Bancshares Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Electronics For Imaging (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Coastal Banc Savings Association reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Court Upholds Payment for Life-Sustaining Care for Woman in Right-to-Die Dispute
In a major right-to-die case, New York's top court ruled today that a Long Island man must pay a nursing home for its life-sustaining care of his comatose wife even though he had asked that she be allowed to die.
The unanimous ruling by the Court of Appeals underscored the strictness of New York's laws and legal precedents on the rights of patients and their relatives to terminate life.
And it gave new impetus to calls for the Legislature to expand the rights of family members to make medical decisions for incapacitated relatives.


Whitman on Florio: Accusations of Corruption
Candidate: Christine Todd Whitman Producer: The Murphey Pintak Gautier Agency.
Washington Text: (Voiceover) Whitman and Florio.
Compare.
Christie Whitman wants to cut state spending.
Jim Florio increased spending by three billion dollars.
Christie Whitman wants to create new jobs with tax cuts.
Jim Florio raised taxes billions and he won't rule out raising taxes again.
Whitman will clean up state Government.
Florio's administration is under two grand jury investigations.
Jim Florio.
Rising unemployment, corruption, high taxes.
We can't afford more.
Christie Whitman.
A change for the better.
Visual: Still photos of Mrs.
Whitman and Mr.
Florio appear side by side -- predictably she is smiling engagingly while he is frosty -- while graphics echo the truncated words of the narrator.
Her image disappears when the specter of corruption is mentioned, replaced at the Governor's side by stacks of money and news headlines reading "State Jobless Rate Reaches 7.7 % For Second Rise in a Row" and "Lax Ethical Standards." Analysis: What's new here is the odor of corruption.
In earlier television spots, Mrs.
Whitman tried to saddle Mr.
Florio with all the bad effects of a prolonged recession while contrasting the $2.8 billion tax increases he pushed through the Legislature in 1980 with her campaign promise to cut taxes by $1.4 billion. (Mrs. Whitman herself refuses to sign a no-new-taxes pledge.) While mention of the two grand juries is fair game, equating them with proof of corruption is not, and Mrs.
Whitman's pledge "to clean up state Government" not only lacks specifics but means little without evidence that it is dirty.
A state grand jury is looking into allegations that $1.5 million in excess state school aid was sent to the Democratic-controlled town of Lyndhurst , which GOP partisans have painted as a political payoff ordered by the Governor's office.
Meanwhile, a Federal grand jury has been examining the old practice, unique to neither party, of directing profitable state bond business to Wall Street fat cats who make hefty campaign contributions to the party in power.
The fly in Mr.
Florio's ointment here is that Joseph C. Salema Jr., his chief of staff and political satrap, was a partner in a bond consulting firm that profited handsomely from state decisions.
Mr.
Salema resigned last May to spare the Governor further embarrassment, but so far Federal investigators have not indicated that any laws were broken.
Some Democrats question whether Mrs.
Whitman, whose husband is a wealthy Wall Street broker and whose late father was a Republican power broker and fund-raiser, is all that shocked by back-room deals between Trenton and captains of finance.
JON NORDHEIMER


Diagnosing Realities of Health Care Reform; Parity for Mental Care
To the Editor:
Health reform measures unveiled by the Clinton Administration offer real hope for better medical care for people with mental and emotional illnesses, but they will have to wait until the year 2001 for comprehensive coverage to become available.
We applaud the Administration's bold movement toward coverage of mental illnesses on a par with physical illnesses, but questions remain why this parity cannot be achieved today.


Rubbermaid Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Longfellow and Crane Added to Poets' Corner
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow and Stephen Crane are to be added to the roster of major American poets and writers who are honored for their work by inclusion in the Poets' Corner at the Cathedral of St.
John the Divine, Amsterdam Avenue and 112th Street.
The ceremony is to take place during the Vespers service at 7 P.M. on Sunday.
During the service, which is open to the public, selections from Longfellow's poetry will be read by two poets, Dana Gioia and Richard Wilbur, and from Crane's writings by Alfred Kazin, the literary critic, and Daniel Hoffman, poet in residence at the Cathedral.


Fingerhut Cos.  reports earnings for 13wks to Sept 24


Republic Gypsum reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Midlantic Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Amarillo Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Music; Complex Delving Into Myth
A visitor to the Cave of Machpelah in Hebron -- the site, according to the Bible, where Abraham, Sarah and the Patriarchs are buried -- never actually sees a cave.
It is covered with layers of construction: a wall erected by Herod, the remnants of a Byzantine church, a 12th-century mosque.
Inside that mosque both Jews and Moslems now come to worship, with an Israeli army presence preventing conflict.
No one knows what lies underneath the mosque's floor.
In "The Cave," a work of opera, theater and video that received its American premiere at the Next Wave Festival of the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Wednesday night, Steve Reich and Beryl Korot are preoccupied with the cultural counterparts of such layers of accumulation and appropriation.
The work received its first performance last spring in Vienna and was commissioned by seven organizations (including the academy).
It is divided into three acts.
Each deals with a different group of people -- Israeli Jews, Palestinian Muslims and Americans -- reacting to the same questions: Who for you is Abraham?
Who for you is Sarah?
Hagar?
Ishmael?
Isaac?
The cave Abraham purchased as a burial site for Sarah is a recurrent image.


Mayor's Race Shows Soaring Atlanta Is Not Above Urban Ills
With its boom-town image, long history of powerhouse mayors and giddy anticipation of being the host of the 1996 Olympics, Atlanta should be one place where urban politics has the potential to rise above the nation's urban ills.
But instead of grand visions of renewal, three politicians are waging a campaign centering on issues of crime, corruption and government efficiency.
The race underscores the pervasiveness of the nation's urban ills and the gap between the troubled real-world Atlanta and the glittering international pageant it will put on in 1996.


Review/Film; Finding a Little Sentiment In a Macho Mayhem Setting
"Judgment Night," a tight, energetic sleeper in the action-adventure genre, manages to pack a few anti-machismo sentiments into an otherwise brawny tale.
The story concerns four suburban buddies who take a wrong turn en route to a boxing match and wind up lost in Chicago's inner city.
As such, it sounds like a fairly standard occasion for mean-spirited mayhem.
But the film manages to avoid excessive gore, lurid violence and the potentially racist aspects of its story.
Indeed, it even includes a moment when one hero hugs his brother and says: "Hey John, everybody gets scared, whether they admit it or not.  I'm scared too." Emilio Estevez, in the role of this sensitive guy, strikes another blow for gentleness by actually stating that he would like to survive the evening's death race and get home to see his wife and baby.
Thoughts like that are generally anathema in a manhunt story.


Alfa Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about James A. Buchanan, an official and major benefactor of Rotary International, misstated the number of children immunized against polio by the World Health Organization with Rotary's help.
It is 500 million, not 500,000.


Manitowoc Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


A Regional Shift For Midas Account
The Midas International Corporation of Chicago has awarded two of its local agencies additional regional advertising, marketing and promotional duties as part of a continuing program to decentralize its estimated $35 million to $40 million account.
Levlane Advertising and Public Relations in Philadelphia, which already handles Midas's account for the Philadelphia area, was named to handle responsibilities in five East Coast markets including Baltimore and Washington.
Billings were not disclosed.
Houston, Effler &amp; Partners of Boston, which already handles Midas's estimated $1.5 million account for the Boston area, was awarded seven additional markets, with billings estimated at $3.5 million.
The markets include Hartford; Providence, R.I., and Burlington, Vt.


Liberty National Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mercantile Bankshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


LOCKHEED CORP. (N)
The Lockheed Corporation, the second-largest weapons maker in the country, yesterday reported a 36 percent increase in third-quarter income and a 40 percent gain in revenue.
The company said the gains reflected the consolidation of the former General Dynamics fighter division, which it acquired in February.
The new business will contribute about $1 a share to Lockheed's earnings this year, which are expected to be $6.65 a share, said Cai von Rumohr, a defense analyst for Cowen &amp; Company


Ben Franklin Retail Stores Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Keystone Consolidated Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Frank Renkiewicz; Historian, 58
Frank Renkiewicz, an historical interpreter at the Ellis Island Immigration Museum and an expert on Polish history, died on Saturday at his home in the Bronx.
He was 58.
The cause of death was heart failure, his mother said.


Lasermaster Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Star Banc Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Today, It's Art When You're a Somebody (Sorry, Aunt Millie)
To the Editor:
Morley Safer's introduction to the "60 Minutes" segment "Yes . . . but Is It Art?" incorrectly attributed "There's a sucker born every minute," to P. T. Barnum (news article, Oct. 4).
After 10 years' research, the historian Arthur Saxon conclusively determined that this phrase has been erroneously ascribed to Barnum ("P. T. Barnum, the Legend and the Man," Columbia University Press, 1989).


For Children
The Spirit of New York
Pier 9, at South and Wall Streets  Lower Manhattan  (212) 742-7278  Recommended ages: 8 and up
For Suzanne Lupovici, who lives in New Jersey, celebrating her 13th birthday on a boat cruise around Manhattan was a new teen-ager's idea of bliss.
She and her friends, clinging to balloons on the top deck, said they enjoyed their large meal in what is, essentially, a fancy moving restaurant.
What pleased Suzanne most?
"The music and the service," she said.


CDW Computer Centers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BMC Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


IP Timberlands Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Executive Changes
CAPITAL BANK, Miami, a subsidiary of Capital Bancorp, appointed David Konfino executive vice president of the international division.


Grainger (W.W.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Crown Cork &amp; Seal Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Citizens Bancorp (Maryland) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Critic's Notebook; Ellington: Beyond Category
HE was "something of an African Stravinsky" to a Dallas News critic.
A trumpeter said he was "the epitome of elegance" to the fashion-conscious musicians of Washington, "strolling up to the corner attired in a shimmy back herringbone suit." One Los Angeles reporter compared his hotel suite, crammed with sheet music, pencil stubs, cigarette butts, a piano and a record player, to a wartime factory.
"The Duke works like a longshoreman loading tanks for the Red Army," he wrote, but the Duke also greeted him in a silk dressing gown and gave the interview while breakfasting on peaches and pears.
Orson Welles put it very simply: Ellington, he said, was the only genius he'd ever met other than himself.
The highest praise Duke Ellington bestowed on people or music he loved (not least his own) was the phrase "beyond category." The handsome exhibition devoted to his life and music opening tomorrow at the Museum of the City of New York is titled just that.


House Rejects Democratic Leaders' Plan to Extend Jobless Benefits
In an embarrassing defeat for the Democratic leadership, the House of Representatives today rejected a plan to extend emergency benefits for workers who had been unemployed more than six months and had exhausted their state benefits.
Congressional budget rules require that the $1 billion cost of extending the benefits be offset by spending cuts or tax increases, but Democrats were deeply divided over where to come up with the money.


First Midwest Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Force This Killer to Live
Oklahoma and New York are locked in a peculiar custody battle.
Each wants to impose its top penalty for murder on Thomas Grasso, a 30-year-old man who committed a murder in each state.
Oklahoma wants to execute him, a punishment the prisoner himself also seeks.
But New York, which has priority, wants him to serve 20 years to life first, after which Oklahoma could execute him.
Gov.
Mario Cuomo is right to insist that New York carry out its sentence despite Mr.
Grasso's desire for swift execution in Oklahoma.
Since when do convicted felons get to tell the authorities what punishment they will receive?


Central Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Innocence Is the Winner
Well, it finally happened.
A model took out a gun at a fashion show and fired four shots at the pool of photographers at the end of the runway.
The gun was shooting blanks, but the outfits by Jean Colonna were in his signature outlaw style.
One retailer wondered before the show whether Mr.
Colonna, seeing an end to the trendy desire to look slatternly, might "go pretty" this season.
Never fear.
A wrinkled black acetate slip dress, opened at the bodice to show a magenta bra beneath, was as pretty as it got.


Sherwin-Williams reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


PPG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Family Dollars Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Fastenal Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Genter Commun reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dr. Harriet Hardy, Harvard Professor, Dies at 87
Dr.
Harriet L. Hardy, a pioneer in occupational medicine and the first woman to become a full professor at Harvard Medical School, died on Wednesday in Boston.
She was 87.
Dr.
Hardy died from lymphoma, a cancer of the immune system, at the Massachusetts General Hospital, where she had worked since 1940, hospital officials said.


Teledyne Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Electronics For Imaging (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Coastal Banc Savings Association reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Strain High as Judge in Beating Case Refuses to Oust Another Juror
The judge in the trial of two men accused of beating a truck driver during last year's riots refused today to remove a juror who her colleagues said ran down a hotel hallway screaming, "I can't take it any more!"
At the same time, the judge released transcripts of a closed hearing in which the jury forewoman described a another juror -- whom the judge did remove on Monday -- as "incapable of understanding what she reads, what is read to her, what is discussed and what is decided upon one way or the other."


COMPANY REPORTS; U.S. Surgical Sets Cutbacks After 2d Consecutive Loss
The United States Surgical Corporation, until recently one of the nation's great health care success stories, announced hundreds of layoffs and other cutbacks yesterday, including a 20 percent salary reduction for its highly paid chairman.
The announcement by the maker of surgical staples and equipment for endoscopic surgery came as the company reported its second consecutive loss and a 19 percent decline in third-quarter revenues.
It also slashed its stock dividend.


Crestar Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
Leland Bell
Salander-O'Reilly Galleries  20 East 79th Street  Manhattan  Through Oct. 30
Like Jean Helion and Balthus, Leland Bell, who died two years ago at 69, was determined to meld the advances of modern abstraction with the grand tradition of figure painting that stretches back to the Renaissance.
He never quite succeeded: his art remains limited by a self-consciousness that verges on the academic, and a dry, unanimating touch.
Yet the complexity of his ambition and the gusto with which he embraced his many inspirations and goals can be fascinating to watch, and never more so than in this exhibition of 13 big paintings from the last 16 years of his life.


U.S. Warns North Koreans of U.N. Action on Nuclear Inspections
The United States and the International Atomic Energy Agency have warned North Korea that they will seek action by the United Nations Security Council unless Pyongyang admits inspectors to its nuclear sites within two weeks, according to officials in several countries.
For months the Clinton Administration has been trying to keep the issue of North Korea's suspected nuclear weapons out of the Security Council, in hopes that its direct talks with Pyongyang -- the first since the Korean War -- would derail its effort to build a nuclear bomb.
But officials from South Korea and Japan, who have also been involved, now characterize the talks as an empty exercise that has allowed North Korea to buy time.
Equipment Not Serviced
Officials of the International Atomic Energy Agency, based in Vienna, which conducts the inspections, said that North Korea had repeatedly prevented inspectors from servicing equipment monitoring key nuclear sites.
The equipment is expected to run out of film and batteries in November.


'Wait Till Next Year' Is Here For Braves
The front office executives for the Braves, in trench coats and frozen stares, huddled at one end of the clubhouse.
Their difficult task appeared to be for control -- of their emotions, their perspective on the season, their belief in their club and its future.
The executives then turned and faced the questions.
For the next hour,there was not much relief from the inquisition.
Would there be major player changes?
Was there a subtle but stubborn defect that had once more undermined Atlanta's quest for a world championship?
Would Bobby Cox, who has been nearly crippled by bad knees, be back as manager?


Cheshire Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Iomega Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


BankAtlantic reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Teachers Union's Crucial Alliance With Dinkins Is Shattered
When Mayor David N. Dinkins was running for office four years ago, the powerful teachers union and its president, Sandra Feldman, broke a 12-year tradition of silence and endorsed him early, then worked hard for him as he eked out a narrow victory.
When he gave the teachers a large pay increase that first year in office, despite a worsening fiscal picture, many saw it as a reward.


Alfa Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


SOMALI CHIEF FREES AMERICAN CAPTIVE; MEETS REPORTERS
Saying that he wants to play an important role in his country's future politics, the Somali factional leader Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid today released an American helicopter pilot who had been held captive for 11 days.
The freeing of Chief Warrant Officer Michael Durant and a Nigerian soldier who had been seized by General Aidid's militia on Sept. 5, Umar Shantali, came after two days of intense negotiations between the White House's special envoy to Somalia, Robert B. Oakley, and aides to the Somali general.


Geodynamics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 27


AmSouth Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


KeyCorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Huntington Bancshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Giant Deal Continues to Drive Up Stocks
Stocks moved strongly upward for the second consecutive day yesterday, with much of the impetus again from the huge proposed acquisition of Tele-Communications by Bell Atlantic.
"The strength of the market was primarily in the Baby Bells," said Edward Nicoski, managing director of Piper Jaffray in Minneapolis.
"That's because of prospects that we are going to see more combinations of cable companies and telephone companies."


CDW Computer Centers Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Detroit Official Joins For-Profit Schools Venture
The Superintendent of Detroit schools, Dr.
Deborah M. McGriff, has been hired by the Edison Project, a Whittle Communications-affiliated company that is developing profit-making schools, to help the project reach partnerships with school districts around the country.
The announcement was made here today by Benno C. Schmidt Jr., the former Yale University president who is leading the Edison Project, which seeks to develop a broad program for redesigning and managing schools in concert with local districts.


Home Video
Movies for Less?
A cassette of blank videotape costs around $7, and to listen to some analysts one might wonder if the prices of tapes with movies on them could eventually drop almost as low.


Dr. Eliot Stellar, 73; Viewed Psychology Through Physiology
Dr.
Eliot Stellar, a physiological psychologist associated with the University of Pennylvania since 1954, died on Tuesday at the University Medical Center in Philadelphia.
He was 73 and lived in Ardmore, Pa.
The cause was cancer, the university said.


Lazare Kaplan International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


George R. Carley; Advertising Executive, 80
George Robert Carley, a retired advertising and marketing executive, died last Friday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 80.
He had had a brief illness, his family said.


Ponce Federal Bank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Crowd Swamps Fifth Avenue to Meet a Radio Star


U.S. Study Says Job Retraining Is Not Effective
An internal Labor Department report says the Government job training program for workers hurt by foreign trade is largely ineffective and used primarily as an income crutch for the unemployed.
The $200 million program, one of the biggest and most generous for unemployed Americans, was enacted 19 years ago in an effort to help laid-off manufacturing workers who could show that imports cost them their jobs.
They were to be retrained in computer operation, nursing, accounting and trades like welding and air conditioning repair.


Texas Court Spares Vermont Man Just Before Scheduled Execution
A Texas appellate court early this morning spared the life of a Vermont man, Robert Drew, hours before he was scheduled to be executed by lethal injection for the 1983 killing of a teen-ager who picked him up as a hitchhiker.
Mr.
Drew's lawyers took the case to a state civil court on Tuesday, asking it to order that new evidence of Mr.
Drew's innocence be heard.
The civil court denied the request, and on Wednesday Mr.
Drew's lawyers appealed to the Third District Court of Appeals in Austin.


Mercantile Bankshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


From Bench, Aid for Women in Prison
Women on the bench have begun to view with alarm the conditions faced by the rapidly increasing number of women behind bars, and particularly the plight of the children whom those women leave behind.
Officials of the National Association of Women Judges, which gathered here last weekend for its 15th annual conference, cite a number of court-ordered studies that taken together portray a kind of built-in bias against female convicts in criminal-justice and corrections systems around the country.


U.S. Davis Cup Seeded No. 2
The United States Davis Cup team, the 1992 champion but a first-round loser against Australia in 1993, has been seeded second behind Germany for 1994 competition, the International Tennis Federation announced yesterday.
Australia was seeded third ahead of Sweden, Czechoslovakia and France.


Rangers Finding They Must Measure Up or Find the Bench
Shortly after practice today Mike Richter walked into the dressing room and saw Glenn Healy talking to reporters about his impressive performance during the Rangers' 6-4 come-from-behind victory over the Quebec Nordiques on Wednesday night at Madison Square Garden.
Healy had replaced Richter, who allowed two goals before the game was six minutes old.Richter was booed even before the game began and was heckled unmercifully when he was pulled from the game by Coach Mike Keenan.
Healy, the former goaltender of the hated Islanders, was cheered wildly when he skated onto the ice.


Alltel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sore of Body and Strong of Mind
After a week in Coach Pat Riley's training camp, Saturday's preseason opener will be a welcome relief for the Knicks.
Riley, while not naming them, said that several Knicks did not report to camp in the shape that he expected.
Meanwhile, some players have picked up nagging injuries.
Rolando Blackman missed two days of workouts with sore knees.
Anthony Mason has a sore left shoulder.
Anthony Bonner's lip is cut and swollen.
And many other players are sore.


NBD Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Standard Federal Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rubbermaid Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gundle Environmental Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CBS Is Getting Out Just as It Gets It Right
Tomorrow night starts the last of CBS's four World Series, the end of a stormy relationship between the network and baseball and between the network and tube-watchers.
For most of the first three years, CBS was viewed as an interloper on NBC's sacred turf, because itabandoned the Game of the Week and because of its inferior productions.
Remember 1991's post-season Dance of the 1,000 Replays?
Worst of all for CBS was sustaining losses that equaled about half the $1.06 billion it (over)paid for the rights to major league baseball.


Review/Film; TV's Favorite Hicks Come Home to Hollywood
Consider it a sign of the times that when "The Beverly Hillbillies" first appeared on television, the show was excoriated for lowering the level of popular taste.
Now "The Beverly Hillbillies" has been lovingly expanded into a full-length movie, and it is by no means the dopiest thing on the big screen.
The director, Penelope Spheeris, doing her best to turn the cheerful no-brainer into an art form, has moved effortlessly from the purple haze of "Wayne's World" to the pink stucco mansion that becomes home to Hollywood's favorite hicks.
In this setting, the film enshrines every last staple of the television series and also adds some modern references, like a distinct hint that the Clampetts of Arkansas are related to the Clintons.
You'll hate yourself for enjoying this, but enjoy it you will.


Reviews/Fashion; Vive Chanel, Ever So Young
The House of Chanel is younger than springtime.
Karl Lagerfeld is constantly rejuvenating it.
This time, with baby colors, tiny skirts and cropped jackets, he seemed to be reaching for the most juvenile clients, prepubescent.
Just how young was the customer for whom these clothes were intended? he was asked seriously after his show this morning.
It was the last of the major presentations here for the spring and summer season, and it left its audience in a buoyant mood.


Family Dollars Stores reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Magic Show in Israel
MAGIC JOHNSON earned one of his biggest assists yet while on an exhibition tour of Israel: He united bitter political rivals.
A game last night between Johnson's team and five legislators from Israel's Knesset (parliament) sold out Jerusalem's newest and biggest basketball arena with proceeds going to AIDS research in Israel.
It also ended after only one quarter because of the crush of photographers with Johnson's team leading, 18-6.
"Magic let us off easy," AVI YEHEZKEEL, a legislator for the ruling Labor party, said after the game.
"Let him last a week in the Knesset," said conservative Tzomet party legislator GONEN SEGEV.
The Israeli team was made up of legislators bitterly opposed on the issue of the Sept. 13 Israel-P.L.O. agreement.
Said Johnson: "I'm just happy to . . . come here and play basketball. If I'm a peace person, O.K., cool, I'll be one."


Kimball International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Iomega Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  MARTHA GRAHAM DANCE COMPANY, City Center, 131 West 55th Street, Manhattan.
Centennial Celebration including new work by Twyla Tharp.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M.; Saturday at 2 and 8 P.M. and Sunday at 2 P.M.
Tickets: $18.75 to $43.75.
Information: (212) 581-1212.
MOLISSA FENLEY, the Kitchen, 512 West 19th Street, Chelsea.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today through Sunday, 8 P.M.
Tickets: $20.
Information: (212) 255-5793.


Meeting Gay Bias Face to Face in Class; Teen-Agers Get Direct Answers
The human visual aid for teaching teen-agers here about homosexuality is Suzanne Westenhoefer.
"I'm here to show you gay people are not going to kill you or harm you," Ms.
Westenhoefer said recently in introducing herself to a class of juniors at Pascack Hills High School here.
The two dozen students greeted her with a few nervous twitters.


Five Are Arrested In a Kidnapping
Five kidnappers were arrested yesterday after their attempt to collect $150,000 from the family of a victim went awry, the police said.
Two victims were freed, unhurt.
The two victims, Jose Marizan, 34, and Luis Felipe Rodriguez, 19, were kidnapped on Wednesday around 4:30 P.M. on Northern Boulevard in Queens, Sgt.
Tina Mohrmann, a police spokeswoman, said.


Antagonists Abroad at Play in Qatar
It was lunchtime at the Gulf Sheraton Hotel today.
Up on the seventh floor, the Japanese and South Korean soccer teams were eating in different rooms, enjoying the familiar tastes of food prepared by their own chefs.
Downstairs, in a small banquet hall just off the lobby, the Saudi Arabians were dining underneath the benevolent gaze of their King Fahd, whose portrait had been hung on the wall last week.


TV Weekend; 'Against the Grain': Football and Family Values
In some respects, the new NBC series "Against the Grain" does have the courage of its title.
It's not just another half-hour sitcom running on wisecracks.
It's an hourlong drama admirably aiming, according to one executive producer, Bruce Sallan, to present "real-life problems and family issues." Another executive producer happens to be Lee Rich.
He produced "The Waltons," which gives you a giant clue as to the kind of family warmth "Against the Grain" would like to generate.
It isn't all that easy these days.
The setting is a small Texas town that is just nuts about football.
Ed Clemons (John Terry), the best quarterback in county history, seeks and wins, at least for one season, the job of coach of Sumpter High's football team.
Ed is not your average jock.
After spending two months in a hospital because of an accident, he has returned to his wife, Maggie (Donna Bullock), and their children, the standard three, with consciousness-raising in full throttle.
"I love you, Son," he tells Joe Willie (Ben Affleck), his eldest, "and don't you wait 16 years to say that to your son." As Ed spells it out even further, "I've had a lot of time to think about what's important and what's not."


PPG Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Green Tree Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dealing With Somalia: Vagueness as a Virtue
A week after President Clinton announced plans to be out of Somalia in six months, the Administration's new approach is clear: from now on it will act less like a sheriff come to clean up Mogadishu and more like a clan leader, engaging in the sort of murky politics and gray compromises it believes are necessary to stabilize the country.
Officials say this new approach of playing the game by the local rules has one simple goal: to prod the Somali factions with various sticks and carrots into a minimum level of political reconciliation that will allow the United States to withdraw without seeing an immediate collapse into chaos.


Corrections
A picture caption on Monday about an after-school program in Upper Saddle River, N.J., that is fighting to stay open misstated the species of the snake with which a group of boys were playing.
It was a ball python.


Challenging Giuliani, Dinkins Spells Out His Politics of Race
Standing beside Hillary Rodham Clinton two weeks after her husband suggested that some New Yorkers were reluctant to back him because of his race, Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday appealed to voters "to support me not because of the color of my skin but because of the content of my heart." He accused Rudolph W. Giuliani of using the issue destructively.
In some of the most candid public remarks he has ever made on the subject, Mr.
Dinkins told a noontime fund-raiser at the Grand Hyatt Hotel in Manhattan: "Race should never be a subject of political debate. But race relations, if our city is to reign preeminent, must be spoken about -- without fear and without rancor.


Pinnacle Banc Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


MGIC Investment reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


WARNACO REFINANCES $500 MILLION IN DEBT
The Warnaco Group Inc., which manufactures lingerie, men's clothes and accessories under brand names like Warner's, Olga and Chaps by Ralph Lauren, said yesterday that it had refinanced $500 million in bank credit at a lower interest rate, which will save the company about $8 million a year, or an additional 40 cents a share.
The company has also reached an agreement with its banks, which include the Bank of Nova Scotia, Citicorp U.S.A., the GE Capital Corporation, Credit Suisse and the Union Bank of Switzerland, to lower the interest rate further as its credit rating improves.
Warnaco's shares rose $1.375, to $33.75, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Boulevard Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BankAtlantic reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.89
2.85
3.40
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.99
3.01
2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.08
3.09
3.02
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.76
4.81
6.08
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.85
5.91
7.50
TELEPHONE BONDS
6.93
6.95
8.59
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.37
5.39
6.43
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Alternative Therapy
To the Editor:
Dr.
Usha Mukhtyar's interesting letter about homeopathic therapy for migraine headache (Oct. 2) errs in part: the National Institutes of Health and independent investigators, not the Food and Drug Administration, study the efficacy and safety of medications.
An N.I.H. division, well funded, now studies the efficacy and safety of alternative medical practices.
And nothing stops manufacturers of homeopathic medicine from applying to the F.D.A. for licensing.
Dr.
Mukhtyar can do the same for his homeopathic medication for migraine.
THOMAS L. FABRY, M.D.
Assoc.
Clinical Prof. of Medicine Mount Sinai Medical Center New York, Oct. 5, 1993


Leftist Leader Is Named Prime Minister of Poland
President Lech Walesa said today that Waldemar Pawlak, a 34-year-old leader of the rural wing of the former Communist Party, would be Poland's next Prime Minister, but at the same time expressed reservations about whether he could handle the job.
Mr.
Pawlak will head a left-wing coalition of two ex-Communist parties that emerged as the winners of a general election last month.
Mr.
Walesa said he would officially appoint Mr.
Pawlak, who served briefly as Prime Minister last year, as soon as the outgoing Government resigned, probably by the end of the week.


Yanks Hire 3 New Coaches While Dismissing 4 Others
The Yankees completed the juggling and reduction of their coaching staff yesterday, but did not specify job titles.
Willie Randolph, Billy Connors and Brian Butterfield were added, while four coaches -- including Frank Howard, the first-base coach -- were dismissed as the Yankees sliced their staff from seven to six.
Connors, one of Manager Buck Showalter's closest friends, was hired from the Chicago Cubs and will presumably become pitching coach for the second time with the Yankees.
Randolph, the former Yankee infielder who had been an assistant general manager the last three months, will return to the field and could be the third-base coach.
Butterfield, a coach with the Yankees' Class AA Albany-Colonie team in 1993 and another friend of Showalter's, was promoted to the majors and is most likely to coach at first base.


Anti-Smoking Ads For Massachusetts
Massachusetts introduced an anti-smoking campaign yesterday that will spend $14 million on messages aimed at a variety of audiences.
"It's time we made smoking history" serves as the theme for television, radio, print and outdoor ads created by Houston, Effler &amp; Partners of Boston.
One television commercial is narrated by a teen-age boy who asserts that "too many kids have gotten hooked by believing the lies of the tobacco companies," which he characterized as falsely portraying smoking as "attractive or cool."


Art in Review
'Jeremy Dickinson' 'Civic Pride Paintings'
Cohen Gallery  1018 Madison Avenue (at 77th Street)  Through Oct. 25
There's a tongue-in-cheek Conceptualism to the English artist Jeremy Dickinson's tiny paintings of the public buses of different British communities, seen here in his first solo show anywhere.
All of them are based on photographs taken by bus buffs, the late-20th-century cousins of train buffs and the urban equivalent of bird watchers, and together the images present a kind of species of vehicle.


A Blunder for Mr. Cortines
New York City's Schools Chancellor, Ramon Cortines, has reinstated 10 principals in Bronx School District 12 who were dismissed in June by his predecessor, Joseph Fernandez.
It's Mr.
Cortines's first blunder, and it's a doozy.
He says he wanted to refocus attention on education.
But to a district rife with mismanagement and allegations of corruption, he has sent a message that it can carry on business as usual.
He has undermined the new superintendent, diligent school staffs and parents who are struggling to clean house despite a local board that still resists reform.
And he has compromised the good work of Edward Stancik, the school system's special investigator, whose devastating report on the district spurred Mr.
Fernandez to act.


Sherwin-Williams reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kasparov Survives a Near-Fatal a Blunder
Gary Kasparov stumbled but did not go down for the count against Nigel Short in Game 17 of their world championship match yesterday in London.
The Russian blundered into a clever trap set by the Englishman, but pulled himself together and struggled into a draw.
The bottom line is that with 11 points now to Short's 6, Kasparov inched closer to the 12 1/2 needed to decide the match and collect $1.43 million of the $2.55 million purse.


Abroad at Home; Mean What You Say
The crisis in Haiti offers President Clinton a difficult challenge -- but also an opportunity to answer swelling doubts about his foreign policy leadership.
The doubts, to put it bluntly, go to whether his words carry any conviction.
Shilly-shallying has been a feature of Mr.
Clinton's Presidency.
Friends and allies have come to suspect that what he says, like a cut-rate air ticket, is good for that day only.


Wachovia Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Scripps Howard Broadcasting Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Art in Review
Jane Wilson
Fischbach Gallery  24 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through Oct. 23
The landscapes in Jane Wilson's beautiful paintings are almost entirely composed of sky.
A small white nugget of a moon sails over the ocean in one; bruise-colored clouds scud across an autumn sky in another, and in a third, the summer sun pulsates with a blinding white-yellow light.
In each case, earth and sea are little more than thin strips of gestural brushwork at the canvas's lower edge.


Assailing Dinkins, Koch Backs Giuliani
Former Mayor Edward I. Koch, who has called Rudolph W. Giuliani "a dog" for his political and prosecutorial attacks on him and his administration, endorses his candidacy for Mayor in his column in The Daily News today.
Last night, Mr.
Giuliani won the endorsement of Robert F. Wagner Jr., a former Koch Deputy Mayor and president of the Board of Education and the third-generation scion of one of the state's most prominent Democratic political dynasties.


Glad and Sad At Show House
There's nothing like a designer show house to make you feel glad and sad all at once.
The done-up rooms are either eminently entertaining, in the "I adore that huge fringed chandelier and all those plaster heads" mind set, or frustrating, in the sense of "Why does it take two months to paint our bedroom when these walls have been done in Venetian palazzo fresco in two days?"
The 1993 French Designer Show House, which opened yesterday in Manhattan, offers just such an emotional excursion.
Twenty-eight designers, decorative painters and landscape artists have brightened up a late 1920's building that has vintage Spanish, Georgian, Gothic and medieval touches.


Teledyne Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Johannesburg Journal; Circle the Wagons? Or Just Start a New Country?
In the years of racial division called apartheid, the Afrikaners became world masters at the invention of new and fantastic countries.
To rid South Africa of an inconvenient black majority, these white South Africans of Dutch ancestry created such "traditional" homelands as Bophuthatswana, QwaQwa, Ciskei and Lebowa, mostly destitute little dictatorships that neither their residents nor the world regard as real states.


William D. Jenkins; Expert on Joyce and Doyle, 77
William D. Jenkins, an expert on James Joyce and Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, died on Oct. 4 at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 77 and lived in Manhattan.
He died of heart failure, the family said.


Portland Journal; Fugitives Find Haven In the Land Of Mellow
In "The Electric Kool-Aid Acid Test," Tom Wolfe's dizzying, psychedelic snapshot of the 1960's, the epic party ends at a small farm in Oregon.
"In the Spring," reads Mr.
Wolfe's final passage, "various pranksters began finding their way to Oregon. Kesey was writing again, working on a novel. The bus was there, parked behind the space heater house."


Washington at Work; Chief and Agency Both at Crossroads As Bellamy Takes Peace Corps Helm
The Peace Corps, as Carol Bellamy, its new director, likes to point out, is an agency with "140,000 constituents and 140,000 plus 1 opinions" about how to run it.
The one thing that those 140,000 or so opinions (one for each former Peace Corps volunteer) seem to converge on these days is approval of who is running the agency.
For the first time since the era of Camelot and the cold war, a former Peace Corps volunteer is at the helm.


G.O.P. to Challenge Judicial Nominees Who Oppose Death Penalty
Senate Republicans have given notice that they will challenge any of President Clinton's judicial nominees they consider insufficiently committed to the death penalty.
The effort to impose a new kind of litmus test comes as the White House is preparing to fill dozens of vacancies in the Federal courts, hoping to counter 12 years of Republican rule in which hundreds of conservative lawyers were appointed to the bench.


Net Owners' Way Out Is Through the Door
Whatever the actual figure is, and it seems to be increasing as if it were the counting board on a Jerry Lewis telethon, the Nets' ownership believes that acceding to Derrick Coleman's contractual demand would be akin to committing financial suicide.
Ownership, on the other hand, at least understands that not extending Coleman's contract and eventually losing him to unrestricted free agency would likely create a chain reaction -- starting with Coach Chuck Daly's exit next spring -- that would reduce their franchise to the laughingstock it has been more often than not.


Like the Greek Myths Say, Prometheus Watches Over Mankind


Firefighters Injured in Georgia Blaze


Commerce Bancshares Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TENNIS: Secret Sharer: O'Reilly Is Dead, but Her Gift Lives On; A Tennis-Playing Triplet Made Sure She Spent Her Life as More Than a Mere Curiosity
When Maryann Tierney, coach of Ridgewood High School's girls tennis team, boarded a school bus for the ride to a meet against neighboring Paramus the other day, she was taken aback by the silence that had replaced her players' usual pre-game chatter.
As the bus inched out of the school parking lot and passed under the scarlet-tinged canopy of oaks and maples that make this suburban village seem more pristine than bustling, Tierney discovered the reason behind the long faces.


Citizens Banking Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Audiovox Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Gundle Environmental Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bell Atlantic Faces Regulatory Hoops
On the morning after the euphoric announcement of the biggest communications merger in history, analysts said that the harsh light of day would reveal the many wrinkles and creases in the Bell Atlantic Corporation's plan to acquire Tele-Communications Inc.
Because Bell Atlantic is one of the nation's biggest phone companies and Tele-Communications is the largest cable-television concern, there will be many regulatory hurdles to clear.
And some of the most important aspects of the deal, analysts said, such as Bell Atlantic's potential to become a long-distance carrier, had escaped public attention. 'Long, Long Time'
"It won't be a done deal for a long, long time because this is a regulatory nightmare," Todd A. Dagres, a communications analyst for the Yankee Group, a high-technology research firm in Boston, said yesterday.
"These two companies may not be able to offer services until well into 1995."


Continental Bank Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lazare Kaplan International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


KeyCorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


30-Year Bond's Yield Hits New Low
The yield on the 30-year bond dropped to a new 25-year low yesterday.
But that new low -- 5.85 percent -- was just below the old one of 5.86 percent.
As such, yields will need to drop even lower to confirm that the rally at the long end of the bond market has resumed.


Summit Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Genentech Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reviews/Film; Surviving an Air Crash, But With Consequences
Peter Weir's "Fearless," adapted by Rafael Yglesias from his own novel, is a serious, confidently made film that's as singular and remote as Max Klein (Jeff Bridges), the successful San Francisco architect whose story it is.
En route to Houston on a commercial airliner, Max survives a horrendous crash without a scratch, though he is profoundly changed.
Moments before the plane hit the ground, while other passengers were screaming in panic, he experienced an epiphany.
"This is it," he told himself.
"This is the moment of your death, and I am not afraid." He later sees himself as liberated.
Having passed through death, he feels not immortal but forever freed from the fear of death.


Metrobank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


At the Bar; The Demjanjuk episode, two old friends and adebate from long ago.
Representing the unpopular person or cause is not always easy or kind.
Ira Salzman of Pasadena, Calif., counsel for Sgt.
Stacey C. Koon in the Rodney King case, received dozens of death threats plus a pile of abusive mail.
"How could a nice Jewish boy like you defend those brutal bigot gentiles who were trying to murder Rodney King?" went one representative letter.


Sun Microsystems Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Geon Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


IP Timberlands Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Books of The Times; Gabriel Garcia Marquez, Short Form
Strange Pilgrims
Twelve Stories
By Gabriel Garcia Marquez
Translated by Edith Grossman. 188 pages. Alfred A. Knopf, $21.
There are moments in these 12 stories that are instantly, incontestably recognizable as the work of Gabriel Garcia Marquez.
In "Maria dos Prazeres," an aging prostitute picks out her own cemetery plot and teaches her little dog to cry at her grave.
In "I Sell My Dreams," a Colombian woman finds permanent employment as the interpreter of dreams for a wealthy family.
In "Light Is Like Water," an entire fourth-grade class drowns in an apartment flooded with light.


Review/Theater; A Singer's Life, From Protest to Pop
There is an oddly schizoid quality to "Fire in the Rain," the autobiographical show that Holly Near, the folk singer and tireless advocate for leftist causes, has brought to the Union Square Theater.
As she cheerfully relates her life story in songs, anecdotes and slides, one picture that emerges is of an aspiring pop singer and actress trying and failing to grasp the brass ring of show-business glory.
As a child growing up in the wilds of Northern California, Ms.
Near recalls, she used to sing along with the records of pop divas like Edith Piaf and Lena Horne.
Her parents rigged up a device that allowed her to fly like Peter Pan on Broadway in her own backyard.
Eventually she made it to Broadway as a cast member of "Hair." She even appeared in an episode of the television series "The Partridge Family."


Hiss Case 'Smoking Gun'?
he Alger Hiss case, born in the first years of the cold war, has outlived it and now occupies the lofty zone where history merges into myth.
Just last year, a Russian general, Dmitri A. Volkogonov, said he had examined a mountain of K.G.B. files and declared Mr.
Hiss innocent of spying charges first raised by his accuser, Whittaker Chambers, in 1948.
Under pressure from Sovietologists and experts on the Hiss case, the general then beat a hasty retreat, admitting he had consulted only selected archives and that key files had probably been destroyed during the Stalinist era.


Today, It's Art When You're a Somebody (Sorry, Aunt Millie)
To the Editor:
Lost in the debate over the "60 Minutes" treatment of abstract art is the question asked for centuries: What makes a work of art?
There are countless responses, including the old "I'll know it when I see it" nonanswer.
Clearly, Morley Safer doesn't see it in a mounted urinal or a whitewashed canvas (news article, Oct. 4).
Others see more.


Lasermaster Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Diagnosing Realities of Health Care Reform
To the Editor:
When it comes to health care reform, William Safire's recent essay, "The Fifth Person," has it right on one front: Health insurance will be universal and irrevocable.
But Mr.
Safire's "realities" accept the superficial judgments too many critics are reaching before serious consideration.
Some reality checks:


Bigger Merger Forces QVC To Review Paramount Bid
Eager to move ahead on its proposed $9.6 billion merger with Paramount Communications, QVC Network Inc. is preparing to begin discussions with Paramount's advisers early next week, several executives close to the talks said yesterday.
But even as the QVC team does so, it must assess the impact on its own deal of the far larger, $33 billion merger looming for the Bell Atlantic Corporation and Tele-Communications Inc.


Review/Art; A Grand Phantasmagoria From a Catalan Poet
WHEN Joan Miro first lived in Paris, a shy young man on the fringes of an incredibly vibrant cultural scene, he was so hungry that he hallucinated (or so he said years later).
Those hallucinations helped to fuel the fantastical and dreamlike paintings that secured his reputation.
Fast forward half a century, from the cliche of the starving artist to the cliche of the grand old man, the head of a virtual Miro industry, so famous that in 1981 The New York Times even saw fit to print an article headlined "Miro Recovering From Cold."


COLLEGE FOOTBALL REPORT
Penn State
The scene is set, all the tickets long since sold.
The Nittany Lions, who have been playing well lately, entertain Michigan at Beaver Stadium before 95,000 tomorrow, and it's a milestone event for several reasons.


Crown Cork &amp; Seal Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Grainger (W.W.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Scripps Howard Broadcasting Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Green Tree Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cortines Is Assailed For Rehiring Of Principals
A day after he reinstated 10 principals stripped of their Bronx school posts because of accusations that their hiring was part of a corrupt process, Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines endured a barrage of criticism from the Dinkins administration and others, who characterized his decision as a blunder that would have the effect of endorsing graft.
First Deputy Mayor Norman Steisel, two mayoral appointees to the Board of Education, school employees and parent leaders had reactions that ranged from mild censure to furious reproach.
Even Mr.
Cortines's supporters on the seven-member Board of Education grumbled that they had not been consulted, though they said they agreed with the Chancellor's arguments that the reinstatement would restore stability to one of the city's most troubled districts.


Sports of The Times; Judge Rules: Open Season On Athletes
A LITTLE local baseball tournament is about to be held in Toronto and Philadelphia for the next week or so.
They call it the World Series, but the vast majority of the world, oddly enough, spins onward, taking no notice.
Like many fans around the world, I spent Wednesday in front of the tube, following qualifying matches for the 1994 World Cup of soccer in the United States.
I would love to tell you about the gorgeous soft passes Roberto Baggio made for Italy, and the sensational curling free kick Erwin Koeman made for the Netherlands.


Premier Financial Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Trust (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Midlantic Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Amarillo Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Wholesale price inflation was unexpectedly low in September and consumers continued to spend at a brisk clip, the Government reported.
Analysts said the data confirmed the moderate-growth, low-inflation direction of the economy.
The news drove the yield on the 30-year Treasury bond down to a 25-year low.  [ Page D1. ]
A Government job training program for workers hurt by foreign trade is largely ineffective, according to a report by the Labor Department.  [ A1. ]  The House rejected an extension of emergency unemployment benefits.  [ A16. ]


The Spoken Word
TERRY WAITE, 92d Street Y, 1395 Lexington Avenue.
The former adviser and envoy for the Archbishop of Canterbury speaks about his experiences as a mediator in the Middle East.
Sunday at 8 P.M. $15.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
GALWAY KINNELL, New York Open Center, 83 Spring Street, SoHo.
A reading by the poet.
Tonight at 8 P.M.
Admission: $12.
Information: (212) 219-2527.


Raytheon Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Smoking Will Draw A Penalty at Coliseum
When the Islanders open their home schedule tomorrow night against the Devils, their fans will notice at least two new rules meant to make the Nassau Coliseum a better place to watch a hockey game.
The first is a strict no-smoking policy, covering the corridors, restrooms and stands.
The second is a strong request for fans not to stand and move down the aisles during play.


Fingerhut Cos.  reports earnings for 13wks to Sept 24


Liberty National Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


LOTUS DEVELOPMENT CORP. (NMS)
The Lotus Development Corporation yesterday reported a 39 percent drop in net profits from the comparable 1992 period, when it recorded a one-time gain from selling stock in another company.
Excluding that gain, however, the Cambridge, Mass., company's earnings jumped 151 percent in the quarter.
Revenues were up 16 percent.


Boulevard Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Old Kent Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


MGIC Investment reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Peoples Heritage Financial Group Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Manitowoc Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


COMPANY BRIEFS
HOUGHTON MIFFLIN CO., Boston, said it would transfer the assets, business and employees of its software division to a newly formed company, Infosoft International Inc., which would offer shares to the public.
KERR-MCGEE CORP., Oklahoma City, said production had started at the 100-million-barrel Gryphon field in the North Sea.


Level One Communications (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


BMW Denies Rift With Mullen Agency
BMW of North America said a new print advertisement for its 325i convertible and R1100 RS Boxer motorcycle had been created by Burkhardt &amp; Christy in New York, its motorcycle agency, rather than by its automotive agency, Mullen Advertising of Wenham, Mass.
But Richard S. Brooks, a BMW spokesman in Woodcliff Lake, N.J., strongly disputed a report this week in The Delaney Report newsletter that Burkhardt had been named to develop advertising for BMW's line of convertibles.
Mr.
Brooks said the concept of combining motorcycle and convertible advertising predated Mullen's appointment as the automotive agency in February.
He denied that there was any friction or tension between BMW and Mullen, which has been reported in trade publications.


Aspen Imaging International Inc.(NSC) reports earnings for Year to June 30


Sterling Electronics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Walbro Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge
A year of play in the Greater New York Bridge Association's Von Zedtwitz Double Knockout Teams ended Wednesday night at the Beverly Club, 130 East 57th Street.
The winners of the final, by a convincing margin of 73 imps over a group led by Bill Rosenbaum of Manhattan, were Jeanne and Albert Rahmey, Simon Satanowsky, all of Brooklyn; Michael Prahin of New City, N.Y., and Alan Sontag and Win Allegaert, both of Manhattan.
There were many borderline slam deals, one of which is shown in the diagram.
The North-South pair for the Rosenbaum team reached six spades, which stands or falls on the trump distribution and was duly defeated.
Both six diamonds and six no-trump are substantially better contracts, and the latter was reached by Allegaert and Sontag with the North-South cards.
Allegaert presumably counted his heart jack and the club ten as assets in assessing his weak two-bid as a maximum, and was vindicated in the play.
His three-diamond rebid showed a useful honor in that suit, clearly the king, and encouraged his partner to try six no-trump.


Bizarre Crime, Shocking Sentence
It seems Gunter Parche has accomplished exactly what he set out to do.
In April Mr.
Parche, a 39-year-old unemployed machinist, sank a kitchen knife into the back of the tennis star Monica Seles as she sat between games during a match.
He later said he was obsessed with Steffi Graf and wanted to disable Ms.
Seles so that Ms.
Graf could regain her No. 1 ranking.
He has succeeded.
Now it seems he will suffer no consequences for his bizarre and violent intervention.
This week a judge in Hamburg, Germany, where the crime took place, gave Mr.
Parche a two-year prison sentence, then suspended it.


Robert Hoguet, 88, A Theater President And a Banker, Dies
Robert L. Hoguet Jr., a former banker, investment firm chairman, civic leader and president of the Repertory Theater of Lincoln Center, died in his Manhattan home on Thursday.
He was 84.
His family said the cause was heart failure.


BCT International Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


A No-Debate Mayoral Race?
New York City's mayoral election is 17 days away, and the candidates have yet to schedule a debate.
Sound familiar?
It is.
It was down to the wire four years ago too, when David Dinkins and Rudolph Giuliani debated the terms of the debate for weeks.
Ultimately, they held two televised debates -- on the last weekend of the campaign.
Then as now, the same disagreement separated them: who participates.
Mr.
Giuliani wants to debate the Mayor one on one, while Mr.
Dinkins wants George Marlin, of the Conservative and Right to Life parties, included.
Obviously Mr.
Giuliani doesn't want to lose even one vote to Mr.
Marlin, and Mr.
Dinkins hopes Mr.
Marlin will attract votes that would otherwise go to Mr.
Giuliani.


Tailhook Affair Brings Censure Of 3 Admirals
The Pentagon today censured three admirals and took milder administrative action against 30 other senior officers, including Adm.
Frank B. Kelso 2d, the Chief of Naval Operations, holding them responsible for the atmosphere of debauchery at the Tailhook Association convention.
In announcing his judgment on the performance of 35 admirals and Marine generals -- all present at the convention -- Navy Secretary John H. Dalton described a failure of leadership.
Because of that, he said, he reserved the severest actions for the three naval officers most closely involved in planning and running the convention of Navy aviators in 1991 at a hotel in Las Vegas, Nev., during which scores of women were sexually assaulted.


MISSION IN SOMALIA: Secretary Besieged -- A special report; U.N. Chief Has to Direct Peace Efforts at U.S., Too
The world's No. 1 peacemaker is spending much of his time making peace with Washington.
It is a task that does not come easily to the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
In a series of interviews over several months, the 71-year-old Egyptian lawyer-turned-diplomat has revealed himself as a man with no stomach for taking orders, no tolerance for fools, no patience for protocol, no reverence for tradition.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.99
2.99
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
2.99
2.99
2.89
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.08
3.08
3.02
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.73
4.76
6.09
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.78
5.85
7.52
TELEPHONE BONDS
6.89
6.93
8.59
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.33
5.37
6.46
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


A Sudden Surge in Media Stocks
An aftershock of the mammoth Bell Atlantic-Tele-communications deal broke over the television networks yesterday, as the share prices of CBS Inc. and Capital Cities/ABC jumped nearly 5 percent to highs for the year.
Even before the plans for the merger were announced this week, the bidding and maneuvering for Paramount Communications Inc. by Viacom Inc. and QVC Network Inc. had unleashed a torrent of speculation that the media business was the best game in town.


U.S. Adviser Meets Haitian But Sees No Breakthrough
As American warships steamed toward Haiti to enforce an international embargo, President Clinton's special adviser met with with the Haitian Army commander and afterward expressed little hope of a breakthrough in the showdown with the country's military leadership.
In a brief news conference, Lawrence A. Pezzullo, the special Presidential adviser, who was accompanied by Gen.
John Sheehan of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, provided no details of his conversation with the Haitian military leader, Gen.
Raoul Cedras, and declined to say whether he had obtained a new commitment for the general's retirement.
General Cedras had agreed to resign by today as part of the agreement negotiated last summer aimed at restoring democracy to Haiti.


Detection Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Frisch's Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 19


Price Data Flat, Curbing Cost-of-Living Raises
Fifty million Americans who collect Social Security and other Federal benefits will get cost-of-living increases of only 2.6 percent for 1994, the Government announced today.
The increase, the second-smallest annual rise since the payments were automatically linked to inflation in 1975, was based on data released today showing that consumer price inflation had vanished in September.


Beliefs
When people talk about sin, they like to get explicit.
That explains why there was so much advance interest in Pope John Paul II's latest encyclical, "Veritatis Splendor" ("The Splendor of Truth"), and so much perplexity once it appeared.
Instead of the anticipated inventory of specific sins, the encyclical, which was released on Oct. 5, was a philosophical and theological treatise on the basic principles of the moral life and moral reasoning.
It discussed conscience, reason, freedom, the sources of morality, natural law and universal moral norms.


Delta &amp; Pine Land (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Grand Valley Gas Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Business Digest
The Economy
The Consumer Price Index was unchanged in September, bringing inflation so far this year to 2.5 percent, below last year's 2.9 percent rate for the first time this year.
As a result, however, Social Security and other benefits for 50 million people will be raised only 2.6 percent next year, the second-smallest increase ever.  [ 39. ]


Cracking a Door of Communication; Physicians Talk About Bridging Gap With Chiropractors
Like emissaries from countries that have not yet established diplomatic relations, the prosperous-looking men in their well-tailored suits took their places at opposite ends of the oblong table.
"We're trying to open up the doors of communication," said one of the men seated on the left.


Engraph Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


FIGURE SKATING: On the Comeback Ice; Zayak, Former World Champion, Has Eye on Olympics
On the gleaming ice in the Sky Rink on the 16th floor of a building on 33d Street, a woman in a lavender sequined skating dress, a blond pony tail tied with a white ribbon and white skates was warming up for the competition, along with several others.
She was, at age 28, considerably older than the others, and clearly more accomplished.
The others were young hopefuls.
She was a hopeful, too, but also a former world champion trying to make a comeback.


Columbus Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Bausch &amp; Lomb reports earnings for 13wks to Sept 25


CHRONICLE
Here's a mathematics question.
The American Express Company gives you $1 million.
How many pennies does it take to reach $5 million?
Simple answer: 400 million. But it takes a lot more than math to get there.


Press Clippings From Dinkins
ON THE SCREEN Black-and-white photo of Rudolph W. Giuliani appears at left while titles repeating the narration flash on a bulletin board background, along with newspaper headlines ("A Victim's Mantle for Mr. Giuliani" and "Rudy's big, muddy guns").
Ominous music plays.
Final image is cover of The Village Voice, with unflattering caricature of Mr.
Giuliani, over tiny picture of Mr.
Dinkins and credit line noting his campaign paid for commercial.
As ad ends, black-and-white headline "Department of Dirty Tricks" turns brilliant blue.
PRODUCER Doak, Shrum, Harris, Carrier, Devine of Washington


Morrison Knudsen reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


PRESIDENT ORDERS SIX U.S. WARSHIPS FOR HAITI PATROL
President Clinton ordered six American warships into the waters off Haiti today with instructions to stop and board any ships that appeared to be violating the reimposed United Nations embargo on the turbulent nation.
The President also dispatched a reinforced Marine company to the nearby Guantanamo Bay Naval Base in Cuba, and Administration officials said they expected ships from Canada, France and Argentina to join the naval cordon.


Eagle Precision reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Hollywood Park (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Union Ratifies Agreement In Kennedy Center Strike
The Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts and the musicians who play for its ballet and musical theater presentations reached an agreement tonight to end a seven-week strike over whether the center should guarantee them a minimum amount of work each year.
In a separate negotiation, between the Washington Opera and the same musicians, an agreement was reached that is expected to partly salvage the company's season, which has seen two operas canceled.


Observer; What Fun These Huns!
In a decadent age it is social death to seem undecadent, so let me make it absolutely clear that I am just as happy as the next person about living in an era when Sylvester Stallone can appear on the cover of a $3 magazine wearing nothing but his pelt.
All I said when the magazine was thrown in my lap was that it was all right by me if Stallone wanted to do it, but you would never catch me doing it.


Mirage Resorts Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CCAir reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


After Wrangling, House Supports Extending Extra Jobless Benefits
After more than two weeks of wrangling, the House voted today to extend the program of emergency unemployment benefits for workers who have been jobless for more than six months and have exhausted their state assistance.
It is the fifth extension of emergency Federal unemployment benefits since November 1991 and is intended to continue helping the 60,000 unemployed workers who become eligible for such assistance every week.


Enhanced Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Walter Newman Dies; Screenwriter Was 77
Walter B. Newman, who wrote the screenplays for "The Man With the Golden Arm" and "Cat Ballou," died on Thursday at his home in Sherman Oaks, Calif.
He was 77.
The cause was lung cancer, said his wife, Connie.


MOTIVE IS SOUGHT IN KILLINGS AT CLUB
The 19-year-old man who opened fire at a health club on Thursday, killing four people with a shotgun before taking his own life, had a history of drug abuse and had been receiving counseling for depression, the police said today.
Nonetheless, in the aftermath of the shooting in this suburban town 10 miles east of San Diego, friends, neighbors and the police are wondering what drove the man, James M. Buquet, to open fire.


Kansas City Power &amp; Light reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chelios Suspended
CHRIS CHELIOS, who set two Chicago Blackhawks team records for penalty minutes in a game Thursday night against Hartford, has been suspended, the National Hockey League announced yesterday.
Terms of the suspension will be determined after the league completes its investigation.
Chelios was assessed eight penalties, tying a club record, and he set two team records for penalty minutes: 51 for the game and 37 for one third-period brawl when he was the third man in a fight and was ejected.


Celanese Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
It seems that every Joseph, Edward and Ted in the Kennedy clan is getting married, but still no John.
Next Saturday Representative JOSEPH P. KENNEDY 2D, Democrat of Massachusetts, is to wed ANNE ELIZABETH KELLY, the daughter of Leo and Claire Kelly of Burlington, N.J., in a civil ceremony at his home in Brighton, Mass.
The two announced their engagement last July after dating for three years.


Teppco Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Archer-Daniels-Midland reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dun &amp; Bradstreet reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International 2-7  U.S. WARSHIPS HEAD TOWARD HAITI
President Clinton ordered six warships off Haiti with instructions to stop any ships that appeared to be violating the reimposed United Nations embargo on the island.  1  STANDOFF UNBROKEN IN HAITI
President Clinton's envoy met with Haiti's military leader, Raoul Cedras, but suggested that no progress had been made toward obtaining a commitment from General Cedras to step down.  4
Members of human rights groups are leaving Haiti.  4  AN OUTSPOKEN U.N. LEADER
Boutros Boutros-Ghali is the most contentious U.N.
Secretary General since Dag Hammerskjold.
In particular, Mr.
Boutros-Ghali has locked horns recently with the United States on policy for Somalia.  1  NOBEL FOR MANDELA AND DE KLERK
Nelson Mandela and President F. W. de Klerk of South Africa won the Nobel Peace Prize for their quest to end apartheid and to create an interracial democracy.  1  A DELICATE BALANCE IN SOMALIA
The shift from near-war in Mogadishu to an uncertain peace has presented U.S. and U.N. forces with a quandary: how to re-establish a military presence without provoking a return to fighting.  6
Grudgingly, the Senate approved the President's Somalia policy.  6
The U.S. pilot freed in Somalia arrived in Germany.  6  A CANADIAN BOMB PLOT TRIAL
In Canada, five Muslims are on trial for plotting to bomb two sites near Toronto.
The trial has shaken Canada, which thought itself immune from terrorist attacks.  5  YELTSIN SETS CONSTITUTION VOTE
President Yeltsin ordered a popular referendum for Dec. 12, the same day as parliamentary elections, on whether to accept a new constitution that is not yet finished.  3  NEW APPROACH ON BOSNIA
Facing a stalemate, the international mediators seeking peace in Bosnia outlined a new approach that would tie a solution in Bosnia to an overall accord on regional conflicts.  5  Ramallah Journal: Peace and pragmatism on the West Bank.  2  National 8-10  GUILTY PLEAS IN MEDICAL FRAUD
In the largest health fraud case ever handled by the F.D.A. and Justice Department, C. R. Bard Inc. has agreed to plead guilty to 390 counts involving untested heart devices and to pay $61 million.  1  PENALTIES FOR NAVY LEADERS
The Pentagon censured three admirals and took less serious administrative action against 30 other senior officers, signaling the view that the top echelons were responsible for the atmosphere of debauchery at the Tailhook Association convention of Navy aviators two years ago.  1  NOW FREE, MILKEN IS TEACHING
Michael Milken may be disgraced on Wall Street, but at U.C.L.A., where he teaches what he knows about high finance, he captivates classes of young M.B.A. candidates.  1  SMOKING AS A CUSTODY ISSUE
A judge's order removing an asthmatic girl from the home of her tobacco-smoking mother is the latest in a spate of similar cases that have emerged since Federal environmental officials began to emphasize the dangers of secondhand smoke.  8  A PEEK INTO SECRET JURY WORLD
The jury room is that most private, even mysterious inner sanctum of the American legal system, yet rarely have the troubles of a jury been made so public as in the Los Angeles-riot beating trial.  8  CONTEMPLATING MORAL THEORY
Beliefs: Pope John Paul II's latest encyclical, "Veritatis Splendor" ("The Splendor of Truth") evoked much interest in advance, and much perplexity once it appeared.  10
An Iran-contra report is said to charge a high-level cover-up.  8
An extension of jobless benefits cleared the House.  10
New safety labels on meat were delayed by a Federal court order.  9
A California gunman was a depressed drug abuser.  10  Social Security benefits will rise by only 2.6 percent next year.  39  Metro Digest 25  CAMPAIGN SPENDING BATTLE
Mayor Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani may spend $8 million each running for mayor, but they do not have to count what they spend to comply with election laws.
That exception is the center of a fight between the two campaigns in the closing weeks.
Paul R. Smith, art director.
Editorials/Op-Ed 22-23  Editorials  A no-debate mayoral race?
The politics of food.
Bizarre crime, shocking sentence.
The invisible cost of global virtue.
Letters  Russell Baker: What fun these Huns!
Kent Barwick, Brian J. Strum, Jackie Mason, Penn Jillette, Robert Campbell, Luc Sante, Susan Orlean, Steven Ragoobarsingh: The next Times Square.
Frank Cammuso and Hart Seely: Scooter at the mike.
Bridge 17 Chronicle 24  Crossword 16


Aggressive Growth's Risk and Rewards
Some aggressive growth funds have posted spectacular results for the last three years, an extraordinarily profitable period for growth-oriented small-company stocks.
Because most funds in the category look for earnings momentum at any price, they are much riskier than value funds, whose managers look for bargain prices.


Brajdas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Imcera Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Next Times Square; Lies, All Lies
After city and state officials and the architect Robert A. M. Stern unveiled new guidelines for redeveloping the area west of Times Square -- a pulsating, kaleidoscopic vision of "billboard parks," loudspeakers and oversized television screens -- the Op-Ed page asked interested parties, and others, to comment.
Here are their responses.
Ever since I've been old enough to understand English, I've been told that each war was the one to end all wars; that the last crackdown on the Mafia will finally put them out of business; that the capture of Noriega will put an end to the drug problem.
We were told that equal rights for women would translate into equal pay.
In whose lifetime were they talking about?
I'm sorry, but I don't respect all these other lies.
Why should I have respect for the story of the resurrection of Times Square?
I've seen more pictures, plans and diagrams depicting the "new Times Square" more times and for more years than I've been told about the return of the Messiah.
As an Orthodox Jew, I have to believe in the Messiah because I was taught in Hebrew school that if I doubt it I will die.
But I was never told that I will die if I don't believe in the rebirth of Times Square.
That's why I believe we will live to see the rebirth of Times Square after we live to see the Messiah.
P.S. A word of advice to the Messiah: Stay out of Times Square.
-- JACKIE MASON, comedian.


Brajdas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


International Airline Support Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Wordperfect Sues Microsoft in Ad Dispute
The Wordperfect Corporation filed a court complaint yesterday seeking to block the Microsoft Corporation from claiming that its word processsing software was the most popular in the world.
Wordperfect also figured in a report yesterday in Computer Reseller News, a trade publication, that said the company was in talks regarding the acquisition of Borland International.
Neither company would comment, but they have collaborated recently to offer Borland Office, a suite of products that combines Wordperfect's word processor with Borland's data base and spreadsheet programs.


INSIDE
Low Inflation Restrains Rise in Social Security
Fifty million Americans who collect Social Security and other Federal benefits will get cost-of-living increases of only 2.6 percent for 1994.
The increase, the second-smallest annual rise since 1975, was based on Government figures showing that consumer price inflation had vanished in September.
Page 39.
Apple's Chairman Resigns
John Sculley resigned as Apple Computer's chairman.
He was responsible for helping spread the use of personal computers.
Page 39.
Constitution Vote for Russia
Boris Yeltsin ordered a referendum for the December elections on a new Constitution, even though a draft has not yet been completed.
Page 3.
Smoking and Child Custody
With secondhand smoke emerging as an issue in child custody cases, a judge took an asthmatic 8-year-old away from her mother.
Page 8.
Police Spray Focus of Debate
The death of a Mount Vernon, N.Y., man has raised questions about a spray that police are increasingly using to subdue suspects.
Page 25.
A Rags vs.
Riches Series
The Phillies' overachieving misfits meet the Blue Jays' highly achieving champions in the World Series opener tonight in Toronto.
Page 31


American Health Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NDC Automation Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Interspec Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


The Big Wheel Hogue Is Now a Spare Tire
During practice today at the Long Island Skating Acadamy, Benoit Hogue was a member of the fourth line, which is sort of like being the fifth wheel on an automobile.
He has earned the demotion with a slump as the Islanders went 1-3 in their first four games, all on the road.
Hogue has one goal and two assists going into Saturday's home opener with undefeated New Jersey.
He also has four penalty minutes, two of them at a crucial time in Los Angeles Tuesday night.


Diodes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A brief background summary on Wednesday, headed "Haiti at a Glance," included incorrect dates in some editions for the country's independence and for the election of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide as President.
Independence was in 1804, not 1934.
Father Aristide was elected in December 1990; February 1991 was the date of his inauguration.


Cor Therapeutics Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Giuliani Draws Criticsm From a Running Mate
Susan D. Alter, the Republican-Liberal candidate for Public Advocate, yesterday faulted her ticketmate, Rudolph W. Giuliani, for failing to take forceful enough positions on women's issues.
Ms.
Alter made the remark in her first debate with Mark Green in the general election campaign.
She said she would keep Mr.
Giuliani's "feet to the fire" on women's issues if they are both elected.
She said she had "not seen a strong platform" on women's rights from Mr.
Giuliani.


Corrections
An article on Thursday about United States policy toward Haiti misidentified the home district of Representative Charles B. Rangel.
It is in Manhattan, not the Bronx.


Noland Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


White Is Gone but Not Forgotten
Even though Reggie White is no longer with the Eagles, his presence was so immense in the National Conference East that his muscular frame still casts a huge shadow over the Giants-Eagles series.
White was so good that he's still talked about in the division.
It's almost as if he's Elvis.
"Boy, will it be different not seeing him in there," said Giants guard William Roberts.
"A lot different."


Cray Computer (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Paccar Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Texas Instruments' Net Up on Strong Sales
Texas Instruments Inc. said today that third-quarter net income more than doubled and revenues jumped 14 percent because of strong orders for microchips and higher royalty revenues.
The record results exceeded Wall Street expectations and helped increase the shares of Texas Instruments, which, along with other semiconductor stocks, had fallen in recent weeks amid investor worries about potentially weaker industry sales, eroding profit margins and slower growth next year.


Poe &amp; Brown Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Harry W. Jones Memorial
A memorial service for Harry Willmer Jones, Cardozo Professor Emeritus at the Columbia University School of Law, will be held on Tuesday at 3 P.M. at St.
Paul's Chapel at Columbia University.
Enter the campus at 116th Street.
Professor Jones died on April 6 at the age of 82.


Black Hills Corp. reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


Valero Natural Gas Ptnr. L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jackson Goes to Brooklyn High School to Start Antiviolence Effort
Students at Thomas Jefferson High School in East New York, Brooklyn, which became a symbol of urban disarray after two youths were shot to death there last year, lined up in the auditorium yesterday to sign a pledge against violence.
The occasion was the start of a campaign by the Rev.
Jesse Jackson to curtail school violence, especially in minority communities.
With revival-meeting fervor he told the 1,800 students in the room that it was "not snitching" to turn in drug dealers and people who carried guns.
"It is self-defense," Mr.
Jackson said.


Foothill Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Knicks and Riley to Put Changes Into Practice
Anthony Mason's shoulder injury was the only negative for the Knicks today as they prepared for Saturday's preseason opener.
Mason, the Knicks' key sixth man, is not expected to play against the Houston Rockets on Saturday night at the North Charleston Coliseum.
Mason injured his left shoulder during training camp this week when he pulled it out of joint trying to strip the ball from Anthony Bonner.


Russian Mob Mind-Set Is a Soviet Leftover
To the Editor:
To David Remnick's "Yeltsin and the Possessed" (Op-Ed, Oct. 6) should be added the following:
Russia's painful transition to free markets, together with a sudden rise in corruption, lawlessness and organized crime, results not from a moral vacuum created in the sudden absence of a constraining Communist ideology, but from several generations of Russians raised by a system that fostered a culture of duplicity and cynicism on the one hand, and another, equally damaging culture of paranoia and mass fear on the other.


Bitwise Designs Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Utah Medical Products (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TechKnits Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Latin American Leaders Open Regional Trade Summit in Chile


Suprema Specialties Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Year to June 30


Franklin Electric (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Sidney Roos, Realtor And Philanthropist, 90
Sidney W. Roos, a leading member of the New York real-estate industry for more than 60 years and a prominent Jewish philanthropist, died on Thursday at his home in Rockville Centre, L.I.
He was 94.
His family said he died of natural causes.


Bulgaria, Too, Rescued Jews From Hitler
To the Editor:
I have read with interest your coverage of the commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the Danish rescue of Jews from the Nazis during World War II.
A less known but more dramatic rescue took place in Bulgaria a few months before the Danish rescue.
Bulgaria was Nazi Germany's ally; its king, Boris III, was a personal friend of Hitler.
The Fascist party was in power and the country swarmed with German troops.
Nevertheless, when Adolf Eichmann's deputy, Theodor Dannecker, came to Bulgaria to deport the Jews, this small Balkan nation refused to let them go.
The young secretary of the Commissar for Jewish Questions, Liliana Panitza, discovered the secret agreement between her employer and the German envoy and hurried to inform Jewish and Bulgarian leaders of the forthcoming deportation.


B.I. Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fibreboard Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Columbus Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Yeltsin Orders Referendum on a New Constitution
Continuing to change the Russian political system by fiat, President Boris N. Yeltsin today ordered a popular referendum on Dec. 12 on whether to accept a new constitution that is not yet finished and that voters have not yet seen.
Mr.
Yeltsin decreed that when Russians vote for a new, two-chamber legislature that day, they will also find a single referendum question on the ballot: "Do you agree to the constitution of the Russian Federation? Yes or no."


Kansas City Power &amp; Light reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Graf Wins Song Suit
A German rock band was ordered yesterday to pay the tennis star STEFFI GRAF more than $37,000 in damages for recording a song suggesting that she had an incestuous relationship with her father.
A Mannheim, Germany, court ruled that the lyrics of the song, "I Wanna Make Love to Steffi Graf," were a major interference in the private life of the top-ranked player.
The group, called the Run-Over Schoolchildren, recorded the song in English last year.
Graf got a court injunction to withdraw the recordings from shops.
Graf's lawyer said she planned to give the money to a good cause. (Reuters)


Celanese Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Junk Bond Ruling Could Aid Companies in Fraud Suits
A Federal appeals court, in a ruling that could make it much easier for companies to quickly win lawsuits over the adequacy of their financial disclosures, has upheld the dismissal of a suit stemming from the rapid default of junk bonds issued to finance Donald Trump's Taj Mahal casino.
The ruling late Thursday by the Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit in Philadelphia was a sweeping affirmation of a legal doctrine known as "bespeaks caution," which says that if there are enough warnings of possible trouble in a securities offering, the fact that one part of a prospectus is misleading is irrelevant.


Larizza Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mirage Resorts Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gwen Welles, 42, Dies; Actress in 'Nashville'
Gwen Welles, a screen actress best known for her role in the 1975 movie "Nashville," in which she played an aspiring country singer, died Wednesday at her home in Santa Monica, Calif.
She was 42.
The cause was cancer, said her husband, the actor Harris Yulin.


Three-Five Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


How to End Bribery of New York City Building Inspectors
To the Editor:
The perennial scandals of payoffs by plumbing contractors and bribes to inspectors and other employees of New York City's Department of Buildings for quicker approvals ("18 Inspectors Arrested on Bribe Charges," Oct. 1) demand a time-tested approach -- rooting out corruption by eliminating the cause.
The plan offered by the Dinkins administration in the form of two bills in the City Council would have a costly negative impact on building owners and the public.
The bills would transfer the functions of the Plumbing Division to a new, private, not-for-profit corporation headed by the same officials who have headed the agency for nearly four years.


Morrison Knudsen reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NDC Automation Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Iraqi Soccer Team Takes Its First Shot at a Big Target and Misses
The small, energetic group of Iraqi soccer fans conveniently tucked away in the corner of Khalifa Stadium had all the necessary supplies.
They had their flags.
They had their banners.
They had their Saddam Hussein posters.
Early in the second half, their team even had a 2-0 lead.
But by the time the Dutch referee, Jacob Uilenberg, blew the final whistle, the only ones waving any portraits of their leaders were the Saudi Arabians, who had thrown their support behind the North Koreans simply because they were the ones playing the Iraqis.


Hollywood Park (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sanders Trying to Escape the Lions
A lawyer for Barry Sanders said yesterday that the premier running back would become a free agent after this season.
The Lions said that was untrue, contending that Sanders was under contract through 1994.
Sanders is the National Football League's leading rusher, with 534 yards in five games.
His contract expires after this season, with the Lions holding an option for next season.
But R. David Ware of Atlanta, a lawyer representing Sanders, said the contract did not specify a salary for the option year and thus violated Michigan law.


Enhanced Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Surprise: Poll Finds Bandwagon Jumping
Call them fickle if you must, but a recent New York Times/WCBS-TV News poll provides evidence that when it comes to baseball, New York City residents are front-runners, or at least runners-up runners.
A telephone survey of 1,223 New Yorkers 18 and over conducted from Sept. 29-Oct. 3 -- just as the Yankees were ending their season in second place in the American League East and the Mets were winding up last in the National League East -- found that 27 percent of the respondents said they were Yankee fans, and 21 percent describe themselves as Mets fans.


Circadian Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


METRO DIGEST
MAKER OF HEART DEVICE PLEADS GUILTY
One of the world's largest medical-device manufacturers, C. R. Bard Inc., which is based in Murray Hill, N.J., has agreed to plead guilty to more than 390 counts of fraud and human experimentation for selling untested heart catheters, Food and Drug Administration officials said.
The sales resulted in at least one death and 22 emergency heart surgeries.
Page 1.
NEW YORK CITY  TESTING THE LAW ON PUBLIC FINANCING
Under New York City's campaign finance law, Mayor Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani are allowed to spend $8 million each on their campaigns for mayor, but they do not have to count against this limit the money they spend to keep their books in compliance with election laws.
That exception is now the center of a major fight between the two campaigns in the closing weeks of the mayoral race.
Page 1.


Review/Pop; From Madonna, a New Palatability but Still Spicy
Madonna has stopped trying to top herself.
Yes, "The Girlie Show," her current touring spectacle, does include bumping and grinding, polymorphous caresses and couplings, crotch-grabbing, four-letter words, some Bible recitation and a bare-breasted female dancer.
But after the proudly uningratiating "Blond Ambition" tour in 1990, not to mention the "Sex" book last year, "The Girlie Show" tweaks fewer taboos.
Despite the naughty bits, most of the two-hour show is devoted to repositioning Madonna from trend-spotter to part-time nostalgia merchant, and from titillating novelty act to all-round entertainer.
With "Blond Ambition," she was pop's least flirtatious sex symbol; in "The Girlie Show," which started its three-night stand at Madison Square Garden on Thursday, she's likable again.
Like innumerable other entertainers, Madonna proselytizes for universal love.
She simply makes clear that her idea of love is carnal and pansexual as well as warmhearted.


Graco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Stryker Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Power Authority Chairman Rebuts Criticism at Hearing
The chairman of the State Power Authority, under fire for his use of a state airplane, poor management at two nuclear plants and his opposition to letting independent companies compete with the authority in supplying power, defended his record in a hearing yesterday.
In sometimes contradictory testimony, the chairman, Richard M. Flynn, said that it is unnecessary to regulate his agency as other utilities in the state are regulated; he argued that the marketplace does that job, because the Power Authority must provide electricity at competitive rates.
But he acknowledged, under questioning, that the authority has been using revenues from half-century-old hydroelectric plants to support an unsuccessful nuclear reactor.


BCT International Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Spending by Dinkins Campaign Tests Law on Public Financing
Under New York City's campaign finance law, Mayor David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani are allowed to spend $8 million each on their campaigns for mayor, but they do not have to count against this limit the money they spend to keep their books in compliance with election laws.
That exception is now the center of a major fight between the two campaigns in the closing weeks of the mayoral race.
The outcome could either leave the Dinkins campaign short of money to spend in the final days or raise questions about the effectiveness of the five-year-old campaign finance law.


Giuliani Draws Criticsm From a Running Mate
Susan D. Alter, the Republican-Liberal candidate for Public Advocate, yesterday faulted her ticketmate, Rudolph W. Giuliani, for failing to take forceful enough positions on women's issues.
Ms.
Alter made the remark in her first debate with Mark Green in the general election campaign.
She said she would keep Mr.
Giuliani's "feet to the fire" on women's issues if they are both elected.
She said she had "not seen a strong platform" on women's rights from Mr.
Giuliani.


Detection Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Steeplechase Has Cozy Field
Belmont Park's day of racing glamour -- billed as the Breeders' Cup Preview -- one race won't be a preview.
It will be a final.
It is the Breeders' Cup Steeplechase, and it is traditionally run on a different day at a different track from the seven other races in the Breeders' Cup series, which will run on Nov. 6 at Santa Anita.
Today's running has another distinction.
Nine horses are entered in the Steeplechase, but there is only betting to win.
No other betting will be taken.
The reason is that four of the horses are being run as an entry trained by Jonathan Sheppard, four as an entry trained by Janet Elliot and the ninth is running by himself.


Suprema Specialties Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Year to June 30


MISSION IN SOMALIA: Secretary Besieged -- A special report; U.N. Chief Has to Direct Peace Efforts at U.S., Too
The world's No. 1 peacemaker is spending much of his time making peace with Washington.
It is a task that does not come easily to the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali.
In a series of interviews over several months, the 71-year-old Egyptian lawyer-turned-diplomat has revealed himself as a man with no stomach for taking orders, no tolerance for fools, no patience for protocol, no reverence for tradition.


Tax and Medicaid Concerns
Taxes may be the most unsettled aspect of living benefits.
Although the proceeds of a life insurance policy are subject to estate taxes when the insured dies, beneficiaries pay no income tax on the money.
But what if payment precedes death?
Last December the Internal Revenue Service proposed that living benefits -- at least when paid by insurers -- be exempt from Federal income tax under certain conditions.
The proposal is not final, but many expect it to be adopted.


The Invisible Cost of Global Virtue
Among nations as with people, no good deed goes unpunished.
Consider Bulgaria, a former Communist country that has set high standards of decency in the Balkans.
Unlike its neighbors, Yugoslavia and Romania, Bulgaria has managed its transition to democracy and free markets without civil or ethnic strife, repudiating its brutal assimilation campaign in the mid-1980's to "Bulgarianize" ethnic Turks and other minorities.
Under the temperate leadership of President Zhelyu Zhelev, Bulgaria has strived to contain what he calls "the barbaric war" in Bosnia.
Sofia has avoided all involvement in hostilities; it fully supports United Nations sanctions against Serbia, which shares its longest land frontier.
It has recognized the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, renouncing the territorial claims that once helped trigger a bloody Balkan war.
Not least, Bulgaria supported peacekeeping in Cambodia by sending its own volunteers, 10 of whom were killed.


Koch Enjoys His Moment In Campaign
Former Mayor Edward I. Koch basked once again in the limelight of a mayoral race yesterday as political strategists scrambled to assess the effects of his reach across party lines to endorse Rudolph W. Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal challenger to Mayor David N. Dinkins.
"Isn't it wonderful at 68 to still be relevant?" Mr.
Koch chuckled after his endorsement of Mr.
Giuliani in his Daily News column brought him a barrage of attention and phone calls.


Stocks Continue Climb; Dow Advances by 8.10
The stock market posted its third gain in a row yesterday, although some profit taking pulled prices down from their afternoon highs.
Contributing to the market's gains was the sharp rally in bond prices following the Government's favorable report on inflation.


Grand Valley Gas Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Youth Hit by Car in Harlem
An 8-year-old youth was struck by a hit-and-run driver in Harlem last night, and a motorist was captured after another driver cut him off two blocks away and a crowd held him until the police arrived, the police said.
The youth, who was not identified, was in serious but stable condition early this morning at Harlem Hospital Center, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.
Paul Jacobs, 66, of 2190 Eighth Avenue, was charged with driving while intoxicated, assault and leaving the scene, Sergeant McCluskey said.
The youth was struck at 7:50 P.M. as he crossed 143d Street from the east to the west side.


Walbro Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


ITT Cutting Headquarters Staff
The ITT Corporation said yesterday that it would reduce the staff at its world and division headquarters by about 25 percent, or about 1,100 people.
The decision was based on recommendations from McKinsey &amp; Company, the management consultant firm that ITT hired to help it trim costs and improve its return on equity.
In a memo to employees earlier this week, Rand V. Araskog, ITT chairman and chief executive, said the cuts -- through layoffs, attrition and retirements -- would save ITT about $147 million next year.


The Politics of Food
The old view of U.S. farm policy is that it strikes an unconscionable blow to the poor: It jacks up food prices so that Congress can funnel billions to a rich and well-organized constituency.
The new view of farm subsidies -- which follows from a series this week in The Times -- is that the old view was much too kind.
Dean Baquet and Diana Henriques expose the Department of Agriculture as the handmaiden of powerful agribusiness.
The department oversees programs to subsidize food exports.
Yet the subsidies haven't done much to increase exports; nor have they done much to help family farmers, the supposed beneficiaries when supporters in Congress argue for more ill-deserved support.


Atalanta/Sosnoff Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


USA Truck Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Solomon Drops Out of Race To Be G.O.P. House Leader
Representative Gerald B. H. Solomon of upstate New York has dropped out of the race for House Republican leader, leaving the way open for Representative Newt Gingrich of Georgia to be the leader in the next Congress.
Mr.
Gingrich, who is now the minority whip, announced last week that he had rounded up more than 100 commitments from House Republicans for the caucus race to come after the election next year.


Frisch's Restaurants Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 19


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Friars Roast Prejudice
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 13 Editorial Notebook about the Friars' Whoopi Goldberg roast missed the point.
Friars Club roasters have a long and happy history of using stereotypes to confront -- and subvert -- prejudice.
So much so that 2,000 people paid upwards of $250 each to attend Whoopi's roast.


B.I. Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Alternative Medicine Needs Protection of Law; Local Side Effect
To the Editor:
The dietary supplement industry's campaign pressuring Congress to loosen Food and Drug Administration regulations should trouble us for the reasons you cite, and then some ("The Snake Oil Protection Act," editorial, Oct. 5).
If the Hatch-Richardson bill becomes law, one side effect would be the crippling of local law enforcement that protects the very sick, including people with AIDS.
In 1990 the New York City Department of Consumer Affairs, responding to the growth in AIDS quackery, adopted the first-ever local regulation that requires documented scientific evidence when a product or treatment claims it can protect the immune system or somehow inhibit the onset of AIDS.


Bitwise Designs Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Air Force Academy Cadets Help in Flood-Damaged Iowa


TechKnits Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Poe &amp; Brown Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Atlas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Black Hills Corp. reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


Valero Natural Gas Ptnr. L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


High Cost for Clinton on Somalia Vote
The Senate finally endorsed President Clinton's Somalia policy at 1:15 this morning, but it was a Pyrrhic victory for the Commander in Chief, with senators on both sides of the aisle throwing sharp oratorical spears at the President and his advisers.
Cranky after five hours of debate and chilled in the drafty chamber, the senators had lost patience with the Clinton Administration and even with one another.
Opponents of the President's policy said their colleagues would have the blood of American soldiers on their hands for dawdling over one withdrawal date or another.


Fibreboard Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball American League  BOSTON RED SOX -- Sent Jeff Richardson, infielder, to Pawtucket of the International League.


Franklin Electric (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Cray Computer (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Paccar Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Paul R. Smith, 86, Artist Who Taught Celestial Navigation
Paul R. Smith, an art director whose range of other achievements included celestial navigation, the jazz guitar and watercolor painting, died in Bermuda on Oct. 3.
He was 86 and had lived in retirement in Bermuda since 1970.
He had had a series of strokes, his family said.


Cor Therapeutics Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; Long-Haired Aliens Cross The Border
THE United States is committed to entertain Iran or Iraq should they qualify for the 1994 World Cup of soccer.
And Canada was obliged to accept the Phillies for the World Series of baseball.
It says so in the contract.
"We had to be semisociable coming across the border so they'd let us all in. I didn't see anybody not get in," John Kruk said, quite proudly.


Finding Success in the Right Career, After Layoffs and a False Start
LAID OFF April 1989 -- Bill Signor of Warwick, N.Y., is laid off from his $42,000-a-year job as a human resources manager for Merrill Lynch Relocation Services.
A NEW JOB May 1989 -- Realizes he has long been unhappy in his career and decides to change directions.
Takes a job with an insurance company.


An Unfettered Milken Has Lessons to Teach
Michael Milken is back from prison and forever barred from the Wall Street world of high-risk financing where he fell from reigning master to disgraced convict.
But the tattered mogul hardly seems east of Eden these days as he buoyantly teaches his weekly class of young M.B.A. candidates much, if not all, that he has learned.
"Can you suggest when you'd use the zero-coupon bond?" he asks, endlessly animated as he moves about the classroom of 57 students who seek to enter that chastened world now forbidden to him.
They sit raptly, knowing they are being taught by a man of fabulous wealth and considerable resiliency, a man who chuckles at academic business notions and stands as the epitome of real-world experience, 22 months of prison time for securities fraud included.
Worshipful Undergraduates
Across the corridor from his class here at the University of California at Los Angeles, an overflow crowd of worshipful undergraduates, a few commuting for the night from distant campuses, audit the master's lessons.
They watch the television screen as if it were a futuristic stock ticker.


Network Computing Devices (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cuomo Accepts Mohawk Plan For a Casino
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo signed a compact yesterday to let the St.
Regis Mohawk Indians open New York State's second high-stakes gambling casino, a $10 million Las Vegas-style operation on a Canadian-border reservation where illegal gambling led to deadly clashes between factions of the tribe in 1990.
The Governor acted after Mohawk leaders agreed to stiff state regulations for running the casino and offered assurances that there would be no return to violence.
Three years ago tribe members opposed to illegal gambling blocked roads, attacked businesses and shut down the reservation for five weeks in clashes that escalated into gunfights and left two Mohawks dead.
A $6 Billion Bonanza
While some Mohawks still fear an invasion of disruptive neon-lighted businesses and criminal elements and argue that gambling undermines traditional tribal values, many others, citing a long history of poverty and official neglect, welcome a chance to get in on the $6 billion-a-year bonanza that gambling has brought to about 70 Indian tribes in 20 states under a 1988 Federal law.


The Next Times Square; The Real Deal
After city and state officials and the architect Robert A. M. Stern unveiled new guidelines for redeveloping the area west of Times Square -- a pulsating, kaleidoscopic vision of "billboard parks," loudspeakers and oversized television screens -- the Op-Ed page asked interested parties, and others, to comment.
Here are their responses.
I'm a real New Yorker: I wasn't born here; I chose to be here.
New York City is my home because of "Green Acres": I was born in Hooterville, but New York is where I'd rather stay.
I bought the closest stupid-big loft to Times Square I could find.
I wanted to live in the city.


Atalanta/Sosnoff Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Paterno's Second Brush With Michigan
The Michigan Wolverines come stalking in here Saturday for the first time in Penn State's first big Big Ten game.
The response has been enormous, with not a ticket or a hotel room to be had in the environs of Happy Valley.
Historians have noted, and Joe Paterno has confirmed, a little irony.
It was mighty Michigan that long ago came close to stealing away from the Nittany Lions their coach of such legend and durability.


Diodes Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article on Thursday about the arrests of New York City sanitation enforcement officers in an extortion case misspelled the last name of the unit commander in some copies.
The commander, who was among those arrested, is Lieut.
Rayman Rahim.


The Next Times Square; No, More Towers
After city and state officials and the architect Robert A. M. Stern unveiled new guidelines for redeveloping the area west of Times Square -- a pulsating, kaleidoscopic vision of "billboard parks," loudspeakers and oversized television screens -- the Op-Ed page asked interested parties, and others, to comment.
Here are their responses.
The Times Square development team -- the Prudential Insurance Company of America and Park Tower Realty -- are pleased that New York is moving forward in our joint endeavor to rescue the crossroads of the world.
We, the state and the city have agreed that the interim plan must be viewed as a forward-looking opportunity, leading to the final, shared goals of the project as originally conceived -- including the development of four office buildings.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
Scouting the Top Teams  Following are the scouting reports for this weekend's top high school football games in the Public Schools Athletic League and Catholic High Schools Football League as well as for Long Island, New Jersey, Connecticut, Westchester County and Rockland County.
The teams' records are in parentheses.
P.S.A.L.
Curtis (2-3) at Susan Wagner (1-4), Tomorrow Key Players: Unfortunately for Susan Wagner, Omar Darling (700 yards and 6 touchdowns) is a one-man team, averaging 22 carries a game instead of 15 rushes for the usual Wagner back.
"He's done a great job for us," said his coach, Al Paturzo.
"But because no one else is doing anything for us, it makes it difficult for him to run." Curtis Coach Fred Olivieri said that while his defensive unit, led by tackles Dewan Reeves and Martinique Matthews, would key on Darling, it also had to contend with Falcons passer Robert Morelli.
Wagner has excellent receivers in Jason Cintron, Eric Woodson and Jamal Beckum.


Interspec Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Court Forces Halt to an Unwanted Public Project
Strengthening the hand of community groups fighting City Hall, New York State's highest court yesterday let stand the first successful challenge to a New York City project under a law requiring a fair distribution of unwanted public works.
The Court of Appeals' refusal to take up the matter forced a halt to work on a $30 million municipal garage and filling station, already about two-thirds complete, on the Lower East Side waterfront.
It could also give heart to neighborhood organizations fighting city proposals as diverse as a waste incinerator in Williamsburg and housing for homeless families on the Upper West Side.


Teppco Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Eda Helen Brooks, 94, Actress and Teacher
Eda Helen Brooks, an actress and voice teacher, died yesterday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 94.
Mrs.
Brooks was in the original cast of "Chicago," which was the first show to appear at the Music Box Theater in the 1920's.
She also toured on the Keith and Pantages theater circuits and appeared in Jerome Kern's "Cat and the Fiddle."


Dun &amp; Bradstreet reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Noland Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


National Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cup Preview Features Big Names and Purses
Souplesse, the French filly, won't be there.
She was stranded in Paris by a wildcat airline strike yesterday, and was scratched from the Beldame Stakes.
But Dehere and Lure and Devil His Due and 50 other star horses from four countries will be at Belmont Park today, competing in seven stakes races worth $2.4 million and jostling for the edge in the Breeders' Cup series three weeks later.
It is billed as the Breeders' Cup Preview, the dress rehearsal for the climactic day of the racing year, which will be staged on Nov. 6 at Santa Anita.
And the horses entering the starting gate at various times this afternoon will include the leading candidates for championships in almost every division of racing, for the title Horse of the Year and even for next year's Kentucky Derby.


Imcera Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Steel Technologies Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Alternative Medicine Needs Protection of Law
To the Editor:
Protect my snake oil!
"The 1993 Snake Oil Protection Act" (editorial, Oct. 5) does not take into account four crucial problems with the increased Food and Drug Administration regulation of supplements that the legislation sponsored by Senator Orrin Hatch and Representative Bill Richardson would prevent or curtail.
First, if the F.D.A. exercised its rights to control labeling and testing of supplements, it would drain the Federal budget with more testing, enforcement and litigation costs.
In this time of downsizing, our tax money is better spent protecting us from much more serious hazards.
The agency was created when alcohol was the main ingredient in many infant colic cures.
Its function is to protect us from dangerous food and drugs and to guarantee the effectiveness of prescribed medications.


Bio-Logic Systems Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Baltimore Gas &amp; Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Public Advocate Candidates Debate on Radio


Review/Film Festival; Forceful Lessons of Love And Cinematic Language
Don't let the mountains of superlatives that have already been heaped on "The Piano" put you off: Jane Campion's 19th-century love story lives up to its advance notices.
Prepare for something very special.
"The Piano" is much like its remarkable heroine, Ada (Holly Hunter), a mute (but not deaf) young Scots widow who, with her 9-year-old daughter, travels to the New Zealand bush to marry a man she has never met.
Ada's husband-to-be calls her "stunted." The film looks deceptively small, but in character it's big and strong and complex.
Here's a severely beautiful, mysterious movie that, as if by magic, liberates the romantic imagination.


United Television Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clouds and Equipment Again Hold Up Shuttle
The flight of the space shuttle Columbia was delayed today because of bad weather and a malfunctioning communication device, but space agency controllers said they would try again on Monday.
The delay was the second in two days for the spaceship and its seven-member crew, who were ready for a 14-day flight, the longest in the 12-year-old shuttle program.
They now must wait 72 hours before another try so that technicians could replace perishable supplies and problem components.


Manning Deal Fails At the Last Moment
A trade involving Los Angeles Clippers forward DANNY MANNING fell through yesterday, shortly before he was to board a plane and join the Miami Heat, his agent said.
Miami was offering swingmen GLEN RICE and WILLIE BURTON for Manning, who is scheduled to become an unrestricted free agent when his contract expires after this season.
Burton's agent, DON CRONSON, confirmed that the deal had fallen through.


Binks Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


FPA Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Costco Wholesale Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


KELLOGG CO. (N)
The Kellogg Company reported record third-quarter earnings yesterday.
Analysts said the results came in part from the growth in cereal volume of slightly more than 2 percent in the United States, and slightly less in international markets.
However, total sales were virtually unchanged, at $1.67 billion, because of the negative impact of foreign currency exchange rates.
Kellogg, based in Battle Creek, Mich., said it was optimistic that its 1993 results would be a record.
Arnold G. Langbo, the chairman and chief executive, said per-share earnings would grow in the low double digits "over the long term."


O'Sullivan Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


McGaw Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Avemco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Scan-Optics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


FPA Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Crown Crafts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Network Computing Devices (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Archer-Daniels-Midland reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Computer Horizons reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Illinois Power Co.  reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


Dover Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Thomas Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Comsat Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


ICU Medical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Series Eve: Haircut and Other Stories
Cito Gaston, whose soft-spoken demeanor and laid-back approach to his job seem to invite criticism of his managing ability, sent a message today to anyone who might have the wrong idea about the Toronto Blue Jays, and that included the Philadelphia Phillies.
"Just because our guys are pretty much cleanshaven," Gaston said on the eve of the World Series, "don't take that as a weakness. They're tough."


American Health Properties reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Celebrity Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cincinnati Microwave (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Ford Reaches Accord on U.A.W. Pact
The Ford Motor Company and the United Automobile Workers union have settled a last-minute dispute about a holiday provision in their new labor pact, and now plan to sign the contract, officials on both sides said today.
The agreement clears the way for negotiators to wrap up industry bargaining at the General Motors Corporation, where the union has been seeking to replicate the pattern contract it negotiated at Ford last month.
G.M. appears likely to accept the basic package of wages and benefits, with some modifications.


Classical Music in Review
Hanne-Berit Hahnemann  Violinist Merkin Concert Hall
Hanne-Berit Hahnemann, a violinist who plays with several New York freelance orchestras, presented a benefit concert for the Manhattan Special Olympics on Tuesday evening.
She is an inventive programmer: familiar sonatas by Mozart and Bach surrounded a group of alluring rarities by Nielsen, Szymanowski and Cowell, and a couple of Paul Schoenfield's virtuosic blues settings closed the concert.
She also brought some color to her presentation by having dancers interpret the Szymanowski and Cowell works.
And not incidentally, she and her pianist, David Oei, gave solidly focused, colorful and at times affecting performances.


International Airline Support Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Dover Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Joan Sibley, a Designer Of Fashions, Dies at 52
Joan Sibley, a fashion designer whose work is included in the Costume Institute of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, died on Tuesday at North Shore University Hospital in Manhasset.
She was 52.
The cause was Burkitt's lymphoma, a rare form of cancer, said her husband, Peter Powell.


United Television Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Swift Transportation (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dexleigh Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Mediators Take Broader Approach to Bosnia Talks
The international mediators in the former Yugoslavia have outlined a new approach, relegating the quest for peace in Bosnia alone to the search for an accord tackling all conflicts in the region.
The mediators, Lord Owen of Britain and Thorvald Stoltenberg of Norway, wrote to Western governments about the change.
They decided on the new approach, a French Foreign Ministry official said today, because it had become clear that "the quest for a peace in Bosnia has failed."


Delta &amp; Pine Land (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Helix Technology Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Engraph Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Tredegar Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hospital Staffing Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Thomas Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Next Times Square; Let It Be Itself
After city and state officials and the architect Robert A. M. Stern unveiled new guidelines for redeveloping the area west of Times Square -- a pulsating, kaleidoscopic vision of "billboard parks," loudspeakers and oversized television screens -- the Op-Ed page asked interested parties, and others, to comment.
Here are their responses.
Broadway, the diagonal that makes a string of special places in the anonymous grid that is Manhattan.
An earlier memory: I'm 22, a grad student at Columbia.
One Saturday, a friend and I decide to structure the evening by walking from my apartment on 110th Street down Broadway to Times Square, stopping at a bar every tenth block (a decimal response, I suppose, to the urgent grid).
We make it all the way, if memory serves -- memory may not be serving too well -- and on the subway, returning in the early hours, I find myself looking over the shoulder of a woman who is composing, and printing out in pencil with delirious precision, a poem so desperate with loneliness that I am able to recite it for months afterwards.
I think of her as a character out of Joseph Mitchell or Meyer Berger, the two writers who formed my early sense of New York as an explorer's world of hidden oddballs.


The Next Times Square; No More Towers
After city and state officials and the architect Robert A. M. Stern unveiled new guidelines for redeveloping the area west of Times Square -- a pulsating, kaleidoscopic vision of "billboard parks," loudspeakers and oversized television screens -- the Op-Ed page asked interested parties, and others, to comment.
Here are their responses.
It's time to quit dawdling.
Over a decade ago, this project was sold to the public with three purposes: stimulate office development on the West Side, fix up the Times Square subway station and revive the once grand, now vacant theaters as the centerpiece of a new entertainment center in the heart of the city.
Today, the area is overbuilt with mostly empty office towers; the developers have been relieved of their obligation to pay for the subway renovation, and no plan has yet been advanced for the theaters.


Jockey Faked Record
EIBAR COA, the leading rider at Calder Race Course in Miami, was suspended for 60 days by track stewards yesterday amid charges he falsified documentation that permitted him to ride with a five-pound apprentice allowance.
Coa arrived from his native Venezuela in April.
He had told officials that he rode 11 winners in Venezuela, but when he was confronted with documentation showing he actually rode 59 winners there, "he admitted it right away," according Walter Blum, the state steward.


The Next Times Square; Street Life
After city and state officials and the architect Robert A. M. Stern unveiled new guidelines for redeveloping the area west of Times Square -- a pulsating, kaleidoscopic vision of "billboard parks," loudspeakers and oversized television screens -- the Op-Ed page asked interested parties, and others, to comment.
Here are their responses.
The new high-tech Times Square plan is fine as far as it goes, but a better plan would offer more diversity.
If a peddler on Broadway is selling fake cellular telephones, shouldn't others nearby be encouraged with tax abatements to offer, say, wind-up chattering teeth or those weird neon tubes?
And let's get more counterfeit luxury goods out there -- Eddie Bauer gun scopes, Baccarat martini glasses, Alain Mikli eyewear, Poul Jorgensen hand-tied trout flies.


Bausch &amp; Lomb reports earnings for 13wks to Sept 25


Corrections
An article in The Home Section on Thursday about Reno, a New York comedian, referred incorrectly to Oliver North.
He is campaigning for Virginia's Republican nomination for the United States Senate.
He is not the Republican candidate.


ICU Medical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cannon Express Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Illinois Power Co.  reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


O'Sullivan Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Scan-Optics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Avemco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Manugistics Group Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


U.S. Studies How Police Use Sprays
In the aftermath of well-publicized cases like the death of Eleanor Bumpurs in New York City and the beating of Rodney G. King in Los Angeles, police departments have been seeking safer ways to subdue violent suspects.
Increasingly, they have turned to aerosal pepper sprays.
But after the death of a man in Mount Vernon who was subdued with the spray, officials of the Justice Department said today that even before that incident they had been reviewing 13 cases in which people had died in arrests in which pepper spray was used.


Gentex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Eagle Precision reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Kaydon Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Ranger Special Teams Shine Again
Mike Gartner claims the Rangers do not have many special teams drills in practice.
There is a system, he says, but they don't run through it all that much.
This is hard to believe.


National Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hospital Staffing Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Three-Five Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Crossing the Threshold Of Separation Anxieties
MUCH of the time everyone in this city seems to be moving toward some higher stage of development.
Usually the process involves personal decisions, like taking courses, dieting, cutting hair or trying to live righteously.
Sometimes, though, thresholds are crossed against our will.
Consider what happened a few days ago at the Toddler Center at Barnard College, where 12 children, between 18 and 30 months old, arrived with their mothers just as they had twice a week for the previous month.
This time the mothers, following instructions of the preschool's staff, mentioned on the elevator that they would not be staying to play as before, that they would be leaving to buy cookies.


Big Rally Puts 30-Year Bond at 5.78%
Long-term interest rates fell yesterday to levels not seen since the late 1960's, pushed lower by another highly favorable report on inflation.
The Government's report that its Consumer Price Index was unchanged in September set off a flood of buy orders for 30-year Treasury bonds, quickly pushing the bond's yield down to 5.78 percent, from 5.85 percent late Thursday.


The Next Times Square; Let It Be Itself
After city and state officials and the architect Robert A. M. Stern unveiled new guidelines for redeveloping the area west of Times Square -- a pulsating, kaleidoscopic vision of "billboard parks," loudspeakers and oversized television screens -- the Op-Ed page asked interested parties, and others, to comment.
Here are their responses.
Broadway, the diagonal that makes a string of special places in the anonymous grid that is Manhattan.
An earlier memory: I'm 22, a grad student at Columbia.
One Saturday, a friend and I decide to structure the evening by walking from my apartment on 110th Street down Broadway to Times Square, stopping at a bar every tenth block (a decimal response, I suppose, to the urgent grid).
We make it all the way, if memory serves -- memory may not be serving too well -- and on the subway, returning in the early hours, I find myself looking over the shoulder of a woman who is composing, and printing out in pencil with delirious precision, a poem so desperate with loneliness that I am able to recite it for months afterwards.
I think of her as a character out of Joseph Mitchell or Meyer Berger, the two writers who formed my early sense of New York as an explorer's world of hidden oddballs.


A Trial in Canada Is Watched in U.S.
For months now, a seven-car police convoy has whipped through the placid streets of this modest city on its way to and from the courthouse.
As the police cars pull into the court's back entrance, sharpshooters and officers armed with submachine guns move into defensive positions while five men, chained together at wrist and ankle, are escorted into the courthouse.
Here in this southern Canadian city, just over the border from Buffalo, five prisoners described by prosecutors as Muslim militants are accused of plotting to bomb an Indian theater and a Hindu temple near Toronto.
No bombing took place and no explosives were found, but the plotting case has clearly hit a nerve in a nation that has long considered itself immune from terrorist attacks.


Rights Monitors Are Pulled Out of Haiti
They came to monitor violations of Haitians' rights, but like their military counterparts, human rights workers sent here by the United Nations and the Organization of American States have decided that the dangers are suddenly too great.
As their colleagues in the countryside were being recalled to the capital by the two organizations for evacuation, some of the civilian human rights monitors were busy shredding documents and erasing computer disks today to prevent reprisals against informants by the Haitian police.


Comsat Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Adviser Meets Haitian But Sees No Breakthrough
As American warships steamed toward Haiti to enforce an international embargo, President Clinton's special adviser met with with the Haitian Army commander and afterward expressed little hope of a breakthrough in the showdown with the country's military leadership.
In a brief news conference, Lawrence A. Pezzullo, the special Presidential adviser, who was accompanied by Gen.
John Sheehan of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, provided no details of his conversation with the Haitian military leader, Gen.
Raoul Cedras, and declined to say whether he had obtained a new commitment for the general's retirement.
General Cedras had agreed to resign by today as part of the agreement negotiated last summer aimed at restoring democracy to Haiti.


U.N. Quandary in Somalia: How Not to Start Fighting
The sudden shift from a state of near-war to one of uncertain peace has presented United States and United Nations commanders with a quandary: how to re-establish a military presence here without provoking a return to fighting.
After four months in which most United Nations forces in southern Mogadishu retreated behind compound walls, the commanders say more active patrols are essential to fulfill their mission to help restore security in the tense capital.
But their orders now require them to do nothing that might alarm or give offense to Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, the Somali faction leader who only two weeks ago was their prime target.


Whitman Makes Public '90 Taxes
After months of badgering by Gov.
Jim Florio, Christine Todd Whitman released her 1990 income tax returns today and confirmed again, to no surprise, that she is rich.
The returns showed that Mrs.
Whitman, the Republican candidate for governor, and her husband, John, reported gross total income of $4,047,051 in 1990 -- $3.33 million in taxable income -- on which they paid $936,670 in Federal taxes and $254,293 in New Jersey and New York State and City taxes.


Crown Crafts Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Jet Theme During Bye Is Body And Soul
The Jets didn't look anything like a team on the ropes today as they began patching their psyches and their depth chart.
Exuberantly, they returned to the practice field for the first time since a devastating loss to the Raiders in Los Angeles last Sunday.
They do not play again until they face the Buffalo Bills on Oct. 24 at Giants Stadium.


Costco Wholesale Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 29


Swift Transportation (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sterling Electronics Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Steel Technologies Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Visionary Apple Chairman Moves On
John Sculley brought an era to an end in Silicon Valley today by resigning from Apple Computer Inc., the innovative company he joined 10 years ago and built into a giant in the personal computer industry.
Mr.
Sculley, a former Pepisco Inc. executive, made his mark by bringing marketing skills and corporate discipline to Apple, a company founded in Steven P. Jobs's parents' garage.
During Mr.
Sculley's reign the company's sales grew tenfold, from $800 million a year to $8 billion, and he was credited with helping the industry push the personal computer beyond office desktops and into the homes and onto the laps of America.


Cincinnati Microwave (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Ceramics Process reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


CCAir reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Industrial Funding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Corrections
An article yesterday about a man in Mount Vernon, N.Y., who died after the police there used a pepper spray to subdue him included an erroneous report from the New York City Police Department about its practice.
The department does indeed use pepper spray.


Larizza Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Millipore Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Aspect Telecommunications (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Aspen Imaging International Inc.(NSC) reports earnings for Year to June 30


When 12 People Can't Get Along; Strife in Denny Case Bares Cracks in the Jury System
The count so far: three jurors dismissed during the testimony phase of the trial, two dismissed during deliberations, and requests for the ejection of another denied.
The prosecution of two black men charged in the beating of a white trucker at the outset of the rioting in Los Angeles last year may be lurching toward mistrial, or a verdict perishable on appeal should the jury vote to convict, legal scholars say.


Manugistics Group Inc.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Lund International Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Computer Horizons reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 28


Foothill Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Retiring Barkley?
CHARLES BARKLEY said yesterday in Phoenix that he would retire after this season regardless of whether he is able to lead the Phoenix Suns to their first championship.
Barkley, 30, said his back problem -- he collapsed after practice last Saturday night -- and a feeling that his best years are behind him had strengthened his desire to quit.
"No. 1, I think 10 years is long enough to play basketball," he said Friday.
"No. 2, I know my back's not going to get better, and the more I keep playing and playing, the more it's going to hurt me down the line."


Barker Directs; Alabama Wins
He does what his teammates need him to do.
Jay Barker directs.
There are enough members of the University of Alabama Crimson Tide capable of dazzling a crowd or overwhelming the opposition.
Barker directs.
The record says that is more than enough.
The latest quarterback at the school that produced Namath, Starr and Stabler will seek to extend Alabama's 28-game winning streak, the longest current major-college streak in the nation, when the Crimson Tide meets Tennessee this afternoon at Legion Field in Birmingham, Ala.


Classical Music in Review
'Gypsy Carmen'  Magic Circle Opera Company La Mama 74A East Fourth Street  East Village Through Sunday
Is a new perspective on "Carmen" possible at this late date?
The Magic Circle's "Gypsy Carmen" offers one such, although admirers of the opera will probably find it unacceptable.
It is "Carmen" told and remade from the perspective of the Gypsy or Romany people, who were outcasts at the time the opera was composed and victims of the Nazi genocide 70 years later.


Hornbeck Offshore Services Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Next Times Square; Now, the Movie
After city and state officials and the architect Robert A. M. Stern unveiled new guidelines for redeveloping the area west of Times Square -- a pulsating, kaleidoscopic vision of "billboard parks," loudspeakers and oversized television screens -- the Op-Ed page asked interested parties, and others, to comment.
Here are their responses.


Smokers Find Mark Against Them In Fight for Custody of Their Children
Susan Tanner and Steve Masone of Sacramento, Calif., have been fighting over the custody of their 8-year-old daughter, Elyse, ever since they were divorced in 1987.
This week, in the latest twist on custody battles, Ms.
Tanner lost temporary custody of her daughter, who has asthma, because of smoking.


Teco Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
SIEMENS A.G., Erlangen, Germany, said its KWU energy unit had formed a joint venture with the Chinese Government to sell and produce power station control technology in China.
ECO CORP., Toronto, a maker of systems and products to solve environmental problems, completed its acquisition of the assets and operating business of C. A. Turner Construction Co., Port Arthur, Tex., a provider of industrial services to oil refineries, for $3.95 million.


Ceramics Process reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Aspect Telecommunications (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stryker Corp. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sheik Asserts Innocence In Terror Conspiracy Case
Speaking in court for the first time, Sheik Omar Abdel Rahman, the blind Muslim cleric accused of being behind a vast terror conspiracy against the United States, asserted his innocence yesterday and demanded that William M. Kunstler be allowed to continue to represent him.
Mr.
Abdel Rahman dismissed warnings by Judge Michael B. Mukasey of Federal District Court that because Mr.
Kunstler is defending two other men in the case, the lawyer might face a conflict of interest in representing Mr.
Abdel Rahman.
The conflict, Judge Mukasey told the sheik, "could result in your conviction."


Man Is Shot to Death in Brooklyn Theater
A shootout erupted last night in a downtown Brooklyn movie theater, leaving one person dead and three others injured, the police said.
The police said they recovered four guns in the theater.
The incident began at 10:42 P.M. during a showing of "Judgment Night" at the Cineplex Odeon Metropolitan Theater on the Fulton Mall, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.
It was unclear what triggered the shooting, he said.


Boise Cascade Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Gilmour Scores Three  Doug Gilmour scored three goals and assisted on two others as the surging Toronto Maple Leafs ruined goaltender Chris Osgood's National Hockey League debut with a 6-3 home victory over the Detroit Red Wings.
With goalies Tim Cheveldae out with an injury, Peter Ing sent to the minors for conditioning and Vince Riendeau benched for demanding to be traded, Osgood was pressed into action against one of the four undefeated N.H.L. teams.
The Leafs are a league-best 5-0. (AP)


What's Best? More Cash For Mortgage or 401(k)?
YOU just received a raise.
Would you be better off using the extra money for a bigger contribution to your 401(k) retirement plan or a larger payment on your mortgage?
Like so many other personal finance questions, it is not a black-and-white decision.
Your choice depends not only on the interest rates in both categories, but also on your feelings about home ownership and investment risk.


Mandela Shares Nobel Accolade With De Klerk
Nelson Mandela and President F. W. de Klerk today shared the Nobel Peace Prize for negotiating the end of the apartheid state and collaborating in the quest for a nonracial democracy.
The Nobel Committee said Mr. de Klerk and Mr.
Mandela, almost universally regarded as the last white President and the first black President of South Africa, had displayed "personal integrity and great political courage" in finding a middle ground in the bitterly polarized politics of South Africa.


No Headline
"Isn't it wonderful at 68 to still be relevant?" -- EDWARD I. KOCH.  [ 26:1. ]


Bio-Logic Systems Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Phone Stocks Defying Their Blue-Chip Image
FOR millions of families, phone stock has long been like a rich, kindly uncle, dependably sending dividends on every gift-giving occasion.
Now it looks more like a wealthy nephew who stops by at odd times to pack the family into his sports car and roar off at 90 miles an hour (talking on his cellular phone all the while) to the town's flashiest restaurant.
This week, the ride became more fun but also more treacherous when Bell Atlantic agreed to buy Tele-Communications Inc., the nation's largest cable company.
The record $33 billion merger announcement sent investors storming into Bell Atlantic's stock, then into other phone issues as well.


Q &amp; A
Complaints Against Brokers Q. How can a client initiate arbitration when he has a complaint against a stockbroker?
DAN HARRISON, Briarcliff Manor, N.Y.
A.
Arbitration is the method used by member firms of the nation's major securities exchanges and the National Association of Securities Dealers for resolving disputes with their clients.
These brokerage firms require individuals to arbitrate, rather than litigate, claims or controversies -- a process that is intended to make decision-making faster and cheaper.


Jane Alexander at Center of New Stage
In her new job as chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Arts, Jane Alexander projects the fervor of Eleanor Roosevelt, whom she portrayed in an acclaimed television drama in the mid-1970's, and the efficiency of Sara Goode, the bank executive she recently played on Broadway in Wendy Wasserstein's play "The Sisters Rosensweig."
She is, as they say in theater, inhabiting the role.
And this week, her first on the job, Ms.
Alexander seemed comfortable in it.


USA Truck Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Industrial Funding Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Tredegar Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Helix Technology Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


2 Leading Men Take Game's Biggest Stage
Rickey and Lenny.
No, they are not a musical duo from the 50's.
One is the best leadoff hitter ever.
One was the best leadoff hitter this season.
Both Rickey Henderson and Lenny Dykstra will be performing in the World Series, the perfect stage for one to upstage the other.
Henderson, who had a terrible American League Championship Series with a .120 batting average, started the verbal sparring a day before Game 1.


Hornbeck Offshore Services Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dexleigh Corp. reports earnings for Year to June 30


Review/Film Festival; Technology, a Tripod, A Romantic Triangle
The emotional twists and turns of Atom Egoyan's film "Calendar" are so thoroughly intertwined with communications gadgetry that the movie might almost as well have been called "Sex, Lies, Videotape, Film, Telephone and Answering Machine."
In the movie, which has been pieced together like an elaborate jigsaw puzzle, Mr.
Egoyan portrays a Canadian photographer hired to take pictures of ancient Armenian churches for a glossy calendar.
Accompanying him on the journey, shown in flashbacks, are his wife (Arsinee Khanjian), who serves as his translator, and a driver (Ashot Adamian), who turns out to be a walking encyclopedia of the architecture being photographed.
Only gradually does it emerge that somewhere during the trip a romantic triangle has formed that will eventually lead the photographer's wife to remain in Armenia after her husband returns to Canada.


Graco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 24


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about Woody Allen's move for disciplinary action against a Connecticut prosecutor misidentified the court that heard the custody case involving the three children of Mr.
Allen and Mia Farrow.
It was State Supreme Court in Manhattan, not Family Court.


Binks Manufacturing reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Lund International Holdings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ramallah Journal; A Palestinian Version of the Judgment of Solomon
What Metri Zabhaneh was really proud of six years ago, at the beginning of the Palestinian uprising, was the enormous padlock he could put on the steel gate of his family's grocery store.
It was too big for Israeli soldiers to break with crowbars when they tried to force the stores open during a strike.
On the sidewalks outside his store now, as throughout the occupied territories, sights once unimaginable have become the new norm: T-shirts with the visage of Yasir Arafat and the slogan "peace" hung up for sale.


Classical Music in Review
Penderecki Quartet Kosciuszko Foundation
String quartets seldom take their names from living composers; more often they pay homage to established figures of the past.
So it might seem a bit presumptive for Krzysztof Penderecki to have a quartet named after himself.
Mr.
Penderecki has led a somewhat uncertain career after occupying the vanguard of the experimental Polish school of the late 1950's and 60's.
He has written sprawling quasi-Mahlerian symphonies and stylistically jumbled stage works.
He is not well known for his chamber music.


Celebrity Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Millipore Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Manufacturer Admits Selling Untested Devices for Heart
One of the world's largest medical device manufacturers has agreed to plead guilty to more than 390 counts of fraud and human experimentation for selling untested heart catheters, Food and Drug Administration officials said today.
The sales resulted in at least one death and 22 emergency heart surgeries.
The settlement, under which the company, C. R. Bard Inc., is to pay $61 million, is the largest health fraud case ever handled by the F.D.A. and the Justice Department.


Cannon Express Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Boise Cascade Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Circadian Inc. reports earnings for Year to June 30


The Next Times Square; Sin and Spectacle
After city and state officials and the architect Robert A. M. Stern unveiled new guidelines for redeveloping the area west of Times Square -- a pulsating, kaleidoscopic vision of "billboard parks," loudspeakers and oversized television screens -- the Op-Ed page asked interested parties, and others, to comment.
Here are their responses.
While billboard parks and noise towers point in the right direction, more will be needed to recapture that eccentric Times Square dazzlement.
Colorful characters, for one thing: casting agencies will have to supply Bible-toting horse players, ex-pug debutantes, fortune-telling dipso flower vendors, deposed European royalty fishing for nickels in the storm drains, etc.


Gentex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cox May Add To QVC's War Chest
Determined to maintain his financial upper hand in the bidding war for Paramount Communications Inc., Barry Diller, QVC Network Inc.'s chairman, is set to announce a $500 million infusion into his company by Cox Enterprises, an executive close to the negotiations said yesterday.
Mr.
Diller may need such backing because the commitment of one of his major investors, John C. Malone, seems to have become somewhat uncertain.
There have been indications that Mr.
Malone, president and chief executive of Tele-Communications Inc., was exploring negotiations for possible movie-studio deals with Sony and Matsushita of Japan, even as he was clinching the $33 billion merger of his cable television operations with Bell Atlantic.


Soon You Will Be Able to Get There From Here


Atlas Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Teco Energy reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wrapping Up 6-Year Inquiry, Iran-Contra Prosecutor Tells of High-Level Cover-Up
The Iran-contra prosecutor has concluded in his final report on the arms-for-hostages affair that investigators uncovered evidence of a high-level cover-up but discovered it too late to prosecute those involved, people who have read the report said today.
The document is the final word on the affair by the prosecutor, Lawrence E. Walsh, after a six-year investigation.
The inquiry ended abruptly in December 1992 when President George Bush pardoned six former Government officials, including Caspar W. Weinberger, the former Defense Secretary.


William S. Papworth, Publisher, 82
William Seabrook Papworth, publisher of The Journal of Taxation and other specialized tax journals for lawyers, accountants and estate planners, died of cancer on Oct. 6 in Southampton Hospital on Long Island.
He was 82 and lived in Hampton Bays, L.I., and Sarasota, Fla.
He began his first tax journal in 1953.
In 1964 he bought a home on Shinnecock Bay called Bamboo Bay, which over the years became a gathering place for professionals, diplomats, academics and artists from at least 16 different countries.


McGaw Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
Corey Cerovsek  Violinist The Frick Collection
Corey Cerovsek waited until he was 21 years old to play his first New York recital, but both his playing and his resume suggest that if he had done so earlier, he could probably have stolen a share of the prodigy spotlight from Midori, Sarah Chang and Leila Josefowicz.


Utah Medical Products (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Theater; When Cattiness Becomes A Way of Life for 4 Women
Misogyny reigns in Stephan Bullard's "All That Glitters," a comedy of bad manners that makes "The Women" by Clare Boothe Luce, which it seems to have been directly inspired by, look like a feminist hymn.
A portrait of four shrill, wealth-jaded women in the twilight of the 1980's, the play presents the high-society female as primordially feline, all unsheathed claws and predatory instincts.
Mr.
Bullard, who is no more subtle than his characters, even introduces a stuffed cat, frozen in mid-hiss, into the plot to serve as the evening's mascot.
The play follows the drunken progress of a cocktail party, which takes place in the Park Avenue apartment of Clayton Maguire (Dana Vance), a successful television journalist with a career-fracturing secret.
The talk roves acidly among such subjects as designer dresses, cosmetic surgery, divorce and promiscuity, as the four women fling insults like teen-agers in a food fight.


Death Benefits Become Living Benefits
Ill with cancer, Patricia North faced a heart-rending problem last year.
Her doctor had told her to go immediately to Duke University for a bone-marrow transplant.
But her health insurer was taking weeks to decide whether to pay for the $150,000 procedure.
What could she do?
Ms.
North, a 38-year-old sculptor and painter from Northern California, found a solution in her $200,000 worth of Prudential life insurance policies.
She obtained an early payout of more than $190,000 on those standard policies, with the remainder going to Prudential for interest charges and administrative fees.
The money financed her care at Duke and enabled her husband to stay with her there for six weeks.


Jury Acquits Poles in Arms-Smuggling Trial
Four men who were high-ranking officials of Poland's former Communist Government were acquitted in Brooklyn yesterday of charges that they were part of a group that plotted to smuggle MIG fighter planes and other heavy weapons to Iraq.
A jury in Federal District Court acquitted the four as well as a fifth Polish citizen after less than a day of deliberations that followed a five-week trial.
United States Government officials said when the men were arrested in a sting operation in Germany in March 1992 that the case was part of an effort to curb illicit weapons sales to third-world nations by officials from the former Soviet bloc.


An Eye for the Beautiful Can Support a Cause of Hope


Kaydon Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Receiver Charged
Washington wide receiver JASON SHELLEY, arrested after a high-speed chase, will be charged with misdemeanor charges of obstructing a police officer, the Seattle attorney's office said yesterday.
Shelley, suspended for the season by Husky coach JIM LAMBRIGHT after the incident, was arrested Oct. 3 after a high-speed chase.
He was a passenger in the car, owned by his parents. (AP)


Jennifer Weider, Ronald Allison
Jennifer Loy Weider, a daughter of Dr.
Arthur Weider and Sissie Weider of New York, was married yesterday to Ronald Allison, the son of the late Percy and Dorothy Allison.
The Rev.
Mary Speers, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at the home of the bride's parents.
The bride graduated from Manhattan Community College.
She was until recently a research nurse at the Dysautonomia Treatment and Evaluation Center, which deals with familial dysautonomia, a rare neurological disease, at the New York University Medical Center in New York.


Homey Bistro
LA MIRABELLE * (212) 496-0458; 333 West 86th Street; $$; all major credit cards accepted


Elsewhere II
To the Editor:
You left out the Jerusalem festival -- a huge happening -- although you included minuscule East Hampton.
HERBERT K. KANAREK  White Plains, N.Y.


Raised by the Aborigines
REMEMBERING BABYLON By David Malouf. 200 pp. New York:  Pantheon Books. $20.


Amazon Tours From Ecuador
Only four hours by jet from Miami, Quito is becoming an increasingly popular jumping-off point for Americans interested in exploring the Amazon jungle.
Over the last five years, nature tourism in the Ecuadorean Amazon has doubled, approaching 30,000 visitors this year.
But visitors should know that Ecuador informally limits access to its Amazon region to participants in package tours purchased here or abroad.
Other South American countries -- Brazil, Colombia, Peru and Venezuela -- offer unrestricted tourism in the region.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Tuesday
Housing starts, Sept., millions, annual rate
1.32
1.30
Housing permits, Sept., millions, annual rate
1.24
1.21
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
329
335
Tuesday
U.S.-Japanese talks on auto trade
Wednesday
Treasury to announce 2- and 5-year note auction sizes
Thursday
Bundesbank council meeting
Friday
Treasury to release monthly budget report


Elizabeth Shuchat And Jay Schwartz
Elizabeth Shayna Shuchat, a counselor and corporate trainer, was married on Monday to Rabbi Jay Yaacov Schwartz of Congregation Ohav Sholom.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Wilfred Shuchat, the father of the bride, and Rabbi Albert B. Schwartz, the father of the bridegroom, officiated at the Terrace on the Park, a catering establishment in Flushing Meadows Park, Queens.
Mrs.
Schwartz works for Corporate Counseling Associates of New York, a psychological service for businesses.
She graduated cum laude from New York University, and received an M.B.A. and a master's degree in social work from Columbia University.
Her father and her mother, Miriam Shuchat, live in Montreal.


Aristide Still Expecting To Regain Power Soon
President Jean-Bertrand Aristide of Haiti said today that he expected to return to power at the end of the month despite the continued defiance of the country's military leaders, and that he did not fear for his life.
"This date is not a personal date, it is a commitment of the entire world through the United Nations," Father Aristide said, referring to the Oct. 30 date for his return to power set under an accord brokered this year by the United Nations.


Mexico Restores Floating Gardens
Almost from the moment they arrived in 1519, the Conquistadors set about dismantling the ancient city of Tenochtitlan and building upon its ruins what was to become the modern Mexico City.
Little remains from that time, but the city has just completed a $2 million restoration of one of the last direct links to the Aztecs: the floating gardens of Xochimilco.
In the far south of the city, just off the main ring road called the Periferico, Xochimilco (pronounced so-che-MIL-co) is a remnant of the five great lakes that filled the Valley of Mexico when the Spaniards first arrived.
In 1989, the city expropriated about 2,000 surrounding acres to halt development, cleaned up the water and sewage that flowed through the area, and dredged miles of canals between raised beds where farmers still grow corn, squash and many varieties of flowers.


Employee Fitness Programs Growing
ACROSS the state, businesses large and small are learning that an ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure -- at least where health care dollars are concerned.
Over the last decade or so, a growing number of companies in the state have been providing employees with benefits packages that include on-site physical-fitness centers, health improvement seminars and "healthy life style" meal programs, in an effort to increase employee morale, enhance employees' health and provide an added recruitment incentive.


Parks Try to Clean Up Their Act
One of the attractions of Bedford Park is its parks.
There's Devoe, Poe and St.
James, Mosholu Parkway, Harris Park Fields, Williamsbridge Oval and the Aquaduct lands.
But residents have long complained about litter, poor garbage collection and illegal dumping of household refuse in park areas.
In a 1991 round of budget cuts, which resulted in heavy losses for the Parks Department throughout the city, the Parks Department's District 7, which covers Bedford Park as well as Fordham and Norwood, lost nearly half its staff of 50.
Six months ago, Frank Colella became principal park supervisor for the district.
He found a staff of 26 and "stacks of official complaints," he said.


The One Who Gave Pop Art Its 'Pop!'


Marci Chasnow, Tim Topoleski
Dr.
Marci Beth Chasnow, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Edwin Chasnow of Great Neck, L.I., was married last Monday to Dr.
Leonard Daniel-Timmie Topoleski, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Leonard Topoleski of Ithaca, N.Y.
Cantor Siegfried Rowe and the Rev.
Lloyd Aiken, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at Liriodendron, a county museum in Bel Air, Md.
Dr.
Chasnow, who is 34 and is keeping her name, is a pediatrician in Abingdon, Md.
She graduated from Boston University, from which she also received her medical degree.
Her father, who is retired, was an anesthesiologist in Great Neck.
Her mother, Maxine Chasnow, is a field representative for the Nassau County Department of Senior Affairs in Mineola, L.I.


Federal Budget Cuts Threaten to Spike War on Addictive Drugs
To the Editor:
The need for increasing the number and size of programs providing clean needles to drug addicts as a way of curbing the spread of AIDS, which you call for in "The Case for Clean Needles" (editorial, Oct. 11) is of even more critical importance given the direction the White House has taken in the war on drugs.


The Last Pill He'll Ever Take
PROCEDURA By Salvatore Mannuzzu.
Translated by John Shepley. 227 pp.
New York: Villard Books. $20.


Elsewhere
To the Editor:
I just returned from a vacation to Spain and was very much surprised that you did not give the San Sebastian Film Festival any mention.
JOEL H. COLER  Northridge, Calif.


2 Masked Men Hold Up Bridge Tollbooth
Two men wearing masks and driving a stolen car robbed a tollbooth collector at the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge on Friday night, the police said yesterday.
The robbery was the 26th at the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority's nine bridge and tunnels this year.
Ten people have been arrested.
Friday night's robbery occurred at


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen107.07
106.20
119.50
per Dollar
German Mark1.6171
1.6035
1.4814
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.3309
1.3304
1.2448
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.5208
1.5355
1.6489
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold$364.75
$359.75
$342.20
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Victoria L. Mason and Allan T. Ailey
Victoria Lynne Mason, a manager of policy development with the Metropolitan Transportation Authority in New York, was married yesterday to Allan Teddar Ailey, an architect with the engineering department of the Metro-North Commuter Railroad in New York.
The Rev.
Noah W. Reid performed the ceremony at the Janes Memorial United Methodist Church in Philadelphia.
The bride graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in urban planning from Columbia University.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Samuel L. Mason of Philadephia.
Mr.
Ailey graduated from Pratt Institute.
He is a son of Mr.
Allan A. Ailey of Brooklyn and the late Phyllis E. Ailey.


At Yaddo, It's Not All Play
To the Editor:  After reading Jean Nathan's article "Yaddo" (Sept. 19), I was left wondering whether she was trying to be as clever and witty as she imagines Yaddo writers to be, or whether she just relished the opportunity to knock those lucky enough to be accepted at the art colony.
Or maybe she was hoodwinked by a love for outrageous tales.
Whatever the reasons, her emphasis on sex and goofing off was a one-sided view.
Having been a resident at the colony last October and again this spring, I know full well that zaniness periodically explodes, that some of the guests are living on the edge, that Yaddo anecdotes and lore are a source of much hilarity.
But Yaddo is primarily about talented people -- many not yet well known in their respective fields -- facing their promise and producing.


U.N. Backs Use of Ships to Enforce Haiti Embargo
The Security Council voted unanimously today to impose a naval blockade on Haiti in an effort to remove its military junta and restore democracy.
In a bid to encourage other nations to join a United States-led blockade, the Council approved a resolution calling on United Nations members to help enforce the oil and arms embargo that the Council reimposed this week.


FLAG-WAVERING
George Packer took pains to pay appropriate lip service to various constituencies of political correctness, identifying with both antiwar protesters and combat veterans in his article.


White's Talent Is Showy, If He Isn't
Devon White modestly claimed Friday that fans do not attend games to watch him play.
They come to watch Rickey Henderson make snatch catches.
They come to watch Lenny Dykstra get dirty.
But White could not fathom someone paying $45 for a World Series ticket simply to watch him.
Although White might not be as flashy as Henderson or as scrappy as Dykstra, he was worth watching tonight because his hustle, his homer and his huge run-scoring double helped the Blue Jays overcome three early deficits and stroll to an 8-5 victory over the Phillies in Game 1 at the Skydome.


'Day of Absence' Offers Fantasy on Prejudice
THE Open Cage Theater, which has had four different homes of sorts in 19 years, has spent "the last three years floating," which is the way Tina Sattin, the company's director, puts it.
Now, performances are being given in the reopened Wildcliff Center for the Arts, and, Ms.
Sattin says, the company will put on two productions a season.
After holding staged readings of plays entrenched in the black theater repertory at the Mount Vernon Public Library last summer, Ms.
Sattin chose for her first full production at Wildcliff the one she said was most enthusiastically received by summer audiences.


The It-Wasn't-Pretty File: Battle of Bobbles Goes to Blue Jays
Ask Darren Daulton how, as a catcher, he plans to help stop the Toronto Blue Jays during the World Series, and the answer ultimately contains the word "execution."
Ask Toronto's Dave Stewart how he intends to pitch to the Phillies and again the word "execution" pops up.


Botero's Nudes Lure Tourists To Park Avenue
Those giant, bulbous nudes on parade along Park Avenue have become New York's latest tourist attraction, especially among Colombians.
On a recent weekend, scores of foreign visitors snapped pictures of the 14 statues on the median between 52d and 61st Streets.
The works, by the Colombian-born artist Fernando Botero, are on view for only one more month.


Caroline Sassower, Jonathan S. Sack
Caroline Oppenheimer Sassower, the daughter of Philip and Susan Sassower of New York, was married last evening to Jonathan Scott Sack, a son of Bernard and Judith Sack of Oceanside, L.I.
Rabbi Sol Roth officiated at the Pierre in New York.
Mrs.
Sack, 24, teaches nursery school at the Park Avenue Christian Church Day School in New York.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father, a general partner in the New York firm of S &amp; S Investments, is also the chairman of Newpark Resources Inc., a New Orleans oilfield services company, and of the B P Acquisition Corporation in Houston, owners of a chain of restaurants in the Southwest.


Wilson Cut by Suns
The Phoenix Suns released guard BYRON WILSON after their exhibition opener Friday night against Golden State.
Wilson is a 6-foot-3 rookie from Utah. (AP)


At Border, Optimism on Trade Accord
In this Texas city near the Mexican border, where the unemployment rate is more than twice the national average, Pedro Diaz is acutely aware of the promise and the perils of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Mr.
Diaz, a 24-year-old entrepreneur, owns a small but growing business along Highway 83 that sells automobile stereos and alarms.
Already, 45 percent of his customers come from Mexico.
The trade accord, he says, could be his ticket to rapid expansion into a more affluent Mexican market.
But larger retailers might sense the potential, too, he says, and move in to undercut him and drive him out of business.


The Mayor Receives an Endorsement From Pro-Choice Group


A Park That's Motion-Picture Perfect
The sweeping view of lower Manhattan from Empire-Fulton Ferry State Park is showing up in a growing number of films and videos.
Shots from this Brooklyn park have appeared in the movies "Scent of a Woman," "King of New York," "Romeo Is Bleeding" and "Freejack." Two weeks ago, the saxophonist Clarence Clemons and the rappers A Tribe Called Quest filmed videos in the park.
Last year, Midnight Oil used the views as a backdrop for a video.


Rangers Hear the Cheers But They're Not for Them
The cheers erupted seemingly without reason, unless you had a portable television or were wearing radio headphones.
In the middle of a timeout, the Spectrum crowd would howl.
With the Rangers on the attack, the Philadelphia fans would cheer.
"They were cheering for me, weren't they?" said Rangers goaltender Glenn Healy, the roll of his eyes making it clear that he already knew the answer.


THE NATION: Just Say 'Security'; One Clinton Promise Fits All Issues
A NEATLY dressed 8-year-old boy stood up at at a televised question-and-answer session in Sacramento recently to tell President Clinton that he has been scared to go to school ever since his brother got shot there.
In the White House Rose Garden days before, a young woman told Hillary Rodham Clinton that her sister is dying of AIDS while fighting for the coverage that her insurance company is threatening to cancel.


'The Morning After'
To the Editor:
What Katie Roiphe is reporting in "The Morning After" is none other than the historic struggle by women to define rape on their own terms.


RUSSIANS RESIGNED
Many Russians still measure out their lives by the price of bread, a revered staple that traditionally has been subsidized at huge cost by the collectivist state.
On Friday, however, with scarcely a flourish, the Government decided to end subsidies on bread, taking advantage of the state of emergency that President Boris N. Yeltsin declared after the disbanding of Parliament and a brief ensuing revolt.
Moscow also tripled the price of a subway ride -- to 30 rubles, still only 2.5 cents.


Browns' Jackson Stands By His Statements
Cleveland Browns wide receiver MICHAEL JACKSON says he didn't intend to aggravate the situation when he talked about a power struggle between Coach BILL BELICHICK and quarterback BERNIE KOSAR.
Jackson said he had discussed the remarks with Belichick and his teammates, but Belichick refused Friday to comment on Jackson's remarks.
Kosar was benched after last week's loss to the Miami Dolphins, the Browns' second loss in a row.
VINNY TESTAVERDE, a backup, will start today's game against the Cincinnati Bengals.
"The whole thing is a power play between Bernie and Belichick," Jackson told fans Wednesday in Ashland, Ohio.
"If you question Bill, you're out of line. Bernie will tell Bill if he doesn't like the offensive game plan, and if you question Bill, he'll write you right out of the game plan."


'The Morning After'
To the Editor:
Neither Katie Roiphe nor Wendy Kaminer adequately addresses the under lying issue that troubles so many feminists: passivity -- specifically, why American women are so passive and how such passivity can be changed. (Ms. Roiphe herself said in your interview that she would not have had the courage of one woman in her book, who poured a glass of milk over the head of a teen-age boy who had grabbed her breast.)


Congressional Memo; Many Health Plans, One Political Goal
They all say their health care plans are the most sensible approach to a pressing national problem.
They have to.
But the five major plans put forward to rival President Clinton's have other important purposes, too, chief among them being to establish the authors and supporters as players who will have a voice when a final bill is put together.
Some want to push a certain provision into the law or keep out an offensive item.


New Fund Tables: Ugh!
Sept. 19, this section introduced mutual fund tables that offer more data, but eliminated net asset values.
Many readers demanded the return of the N.A.V. figure.
In response to that demand, the Friday closing N.A.V. returns to the mutual fund tables this week.
The percentage change continues to appear, making it easier to compare different funds.
To the Editor:
If it ain't broke, don't fix it.
What a dumb move!
STANLEY WIENER Flushing, N.Y., Sept 26


Susan Silverstein And David Scott
Mr. and Mrs.
Leonard L. Silverstein of Bethesda, Md., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Susan Gail Silverstein, to David Hoyt Scott, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard H. Scott Jr. of Garland, Tex.
A March wedding is planned.
Miss Silverstein is the director of public programs at the Navy Museum in Washington.
She graduated from Chatham College and received a master's degree in museum education from George Washington University.
Her father is a partner in Silverstein &amp; Mullins, a Washington law firm, and the vice chairman of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington.


Remote Patrol
WHAT: Andros Mark V-A, a New York Police Department robot.
HOW MANY: One in the department; close to 300 in service worldwide.


Two Productions Tell 'The Buddy Holly Story'
BRIDGEPORT'S "Buddy" or Candlewood's "Buddy?" Your move.
The confluence of two productions of "Buddy: The Buddy Holly Story" -- at the Downtown Cabaret Theater in Bridgeport and Gateway's Candlewood Playhouse in New Fairfield -- proves positively that a more disposable book than the one Alan Janes wrote for the 1990 Broadway version and the London musical before that would be hard to find.


The Quiet Beauty of Beaujolais
THE heart of Burgundy is not beautiful.
Seen from the Cote d'Or hills above its capital, Beaune, the region lacks any particular charm, its indubitable attractions concealed amid a network of highways and modern wine depots that often resemble auto dealerships more than repositories for some of the world's greatest wine.
But as you head south toward Lyons and the wine becomes less extraordinary, the scenery gets better and better.
The hills of the Cote d'Or and then the Cote Chalonnaise finally assume some real stature, becoming small mountains that range up to 3,500 feet.
There are more trees, and the villages, standing like sentinels on the ridges, have a quiet, almost Italian grace.
This land of glorious vistas and charming but ultimately unprofound wines is the Beaujolais.


Mini-Cars to Race Despite Objections
When members of Manhattan Community Board 1 heard that a grand prix was coming to Battery Park City, remembering the debacle when the city tried to attract the Marlboro Grand Prix, they naturally opposed it.
Concerned about traffic jams, noise and other inconveniences to residents, the board voted unanimously against the race, the National Multiple Sclerosis Society Grand Prix, despite organizers' claim that it is more of a "petit prix" because the 40 mini-cars are powered by engines not much larger than a lawnmower's.


Museum Directors Offer Job Insights
THREE directors of museums in the county held a rare public conversation here recently about their own jobs, the changing audience for art in Westchester and the importance of keeping a fresh perspective on the ever-evolving art scene.
The setting was a television studio at Westchester Community College here, where Lucinda H. Gedeon of the Neuberger Museum of Art, George G. King of the Katonah Museum and Philip G. Verre of the Hudson River Museum took part in a videotaped panel discussion to be shown continuously during "Color Options," an exhibition at the college's Fine Arts Gallery here, which can be seen through Nov. 10.


Malls Add Services to Keep Customers
HOLD on to your credit cards.
New Jersey shopping malls, trying to cope with challenges ranging from warehouse clubs to television home-shopping channels, are scrambling to keep their status as consumer icons.
As any serious consumer can attest, the number of places to spend an allowance, a paycheck or an inheritance seems to have risen sharply.
Warehouse clubs and large specialty stores like Ikea, with its home furnishings, and Staples, which sells office supplies, are moving into existing retail space along the state's busiest corridors.
Discounters and outlet stores have taken a firm hold as well.
Easy-access strip centers are enjoying a resurgence with time-starved New Jerseyans.


Stacy E. Silverman, David C. Chaikin
Mr. and Mrs.
Harold Silverman of Oceanside, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter Stacy Ellen Silverman to Dr.
David Craig Chaikin, the son of Alfred and Elayne Chaikin of East Brunswick, N.J.
A December wedding is planned.


A Look at Safety At Station Houses
Jolted by the shooting of two officers by a suspect at the 70th Precinct station house in April, police officials toughened safety procedures and installed video cameras.
Now, a decision is nearing over whether all 75 precinct houses should do the same.
On April 20, Danny Cook, 27 years old, who had been arrested for heroin and crack possession, asked to go to the restroom.
Officer Robert Noblin, who was preparing to escort him to court, accompanied Mr.
Cook into the restroom, removing the handcuffs from one of Mr.
Cook's wrists, the police said.


Bach, Mozart and Faure, On Guitar, Violin or Flute
ANOTHER busy Sunday on the concert scene starts this afternoon at 2 P.M. when the Connecticut Classical Guitar Society presents a talent showcase, several local artists perform solos, plus some duos with violin or flute, by Bach, Mozart, Faure and others.
Tickets are available at the door (249-7041).
At 3 P.M. today the Naumburg award-winning Saturday Brass Quintet opens the Cole Auditorium Series at the Greenwich Library (622-7965), the Charleston String Quartet plays Purcell, Haydn and Britten in a free recital at the Yale Center for British Art (432-2850), and the Stamford Symphony (with Roger Nierenberg conducting and Benny Kim the guest violinist) reprise yesterday evening's Bruch-Schumann-Dvorak program at the Palace Theater (869-2664).


Will U.S. Be Healthier? Maybe Not, Experts Say
Suppose President Clinton's health plan is adopted.
Suppose every American gets a health insurance card and no one need worry again about being uninsured.
Will the nation be healthier?
The answer might seem obvious.
After all, 37 million Americans are uninsured.
How could the plan do anything but improve the overall health of the country?


The Last Freeway?


Devils Ride Semak's Hat Trick to Fifth Straight Victory
The Devils are off to the best start in their history, raising their record to 5-0 tonight with a 6-3 thrashing of the stumbling Islanders at Nassau Coliseum.
The previous best start in their 11-year history was 4-0.
Under Jacques Lemaire, their new coach, the Devils have a chance to equal their previous best winning streak of six games.
Their next two contests, both at home, are against Anaheim and Florida, this season's two expansion teams.


Screening Renters
To the Editor: Betsy Wade's article "A New Twist: Screening the Car Renter" (Sept. 12), saddened and frightened me.
Last May I was ticketed for speeding on the Taconic Parkway, accused of going 74 miles an hour in a 55-mile zone, clocked by radar.
This speeding incident automatically put four points on my driving record.
Since I would never intentionally drive at that speed, I can only claim the downhill descent to where I was stopped and the smooth, effortless overdrive on my car as excuses.


The New York Walk: Survival of the Fiercest
I KNOW better than to talk back to guys who hassle women on the street.
But on one weird August afternoon, I was caught in pedestrian gridlock in Times Square and the humidity turned my common sense to mush.
A young man so average-looking he belonged in a Nike commercial planted himself on the sidewalk in front of me, purposely blocking my path, and offered some not-poetic variation on "Hey, baby."
What I did next was something no short, slight, sane person should ever do: I stamped my little foot and snapped at him in unprintable terms to get out of my way, right now!
And while I was wondering why I had chosen a response that was both ineffectual and ridiculous, the street hassler smiled, stepped aside and said in a good-natured, singsong voice, "You're gonna learn to love me."


No One Communes Anymore
SEX, ECONOMY, FREEDOM AND COMMUNITY  Eight Essays.
By Wendell Berry. 192 pp.
New York: Pantheon. $20.


Bzzzz: Chainsaw Pleasures and Perils
A CHAINSAW can be a boon for those who have to do fall pruning or cut firewood.
Despite the brutish image, far less strength and stamina are needed to operate a chainsaw than to cut by hand.
Of all power tools, chainsaws probably are the most dangerous.
If a chainsaw can make life easier, do not let its potential hazards deter you from buying or renting one.
But learn to use it safely.


The Executive Computer; Bulky and Costly, but a Portable Succeeds
IT is too big to fit into a pocket, too expensive to buy on a whim, and at first glance it resembles the head of a robot flattened by a steamroller.
But the A.T.&amp; T. EO Personal Communicator 440 is still an intriguing device, and it provides important wireless communications and computing tools for mobile executives.
The A.T.&amp; T. EO Personal Communicator 440, until recently known as the EO Personal Communicator -- shorter, but still not as catchy as Newton or Zoomer -- is a pen-based portable computer that is finding the greatest success among workers and executives who need to fill out forms, keep data bases, send and receive faxes, check electronic mail and make telephone calls when there are no phone lines around.


On Wall Street, Love Can Soon Turn to Hate
IT was, said the utility chief executive, "the opportunity of a lifetime" and the ideal diversification.
Applauding the strategic move, eager investors leaped into the stock.
To be sure, the utility was paying a premium price, but it was getting into a growth business.
"It clearly gives them more muscle and makes them more competitive," an analyst said.
The above paragraph is not about last week's announcement that Bell Atlantic, once viewed as a safe and stodgy utility, was getting into the exciting cable television business by acquiring Tele-Communications Inc., although it might well be.
Rarely has a deal been more eagerly embraced by Wall Street.


ALSO INSIDE
MAKING IT WORK 3  Meet one of the mechanics of the Dinkins campaign, responsible not for the message but for insuring that it's heard.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  The South Street Seaport at 10: an evocation of old New York or just another high-rent shopping mall?
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 6  Wash your old clothes on Ninth Avenue; hear Los Folkloristas in Prospect Park.
MOVIE CLOCK 14  What's showing at the local movie theaters, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 15  North of 86th Street: from Cuban sandwiches on upper Broadway to foie gras high above Broadway.
SOAPBOX 17  On the streets where they live: how two artists, a writer and a painter, see the city.
Plus, letters and "Eye of the Beholder."


Conversations: Khaleda Zia; A Woman Leader for a Land That Defies Islamic Stereotypes
THE ministers and minions circling Bangladesh's Prime Minister, Khaleda Zia, on a visit to New York this month boasted that she was the first Islamic woman to address the United Nations General Assembly as an elected head of government.
The Prime Minister was less impressed by the distinction.
"Hmmm," was all the reply she could muster when asked about it in her New York hotel suite.
Born in an Asian Islamic milieu, not a Middle Eastern one, Mrs.
Zia was more eager to make the point that while Bangladeshi women still suffer great privations, as do most South Asian women, there is no longer anything unusual about women in Bangladesh taking part in public life.


Mallory Israel, Bruce Huberman
Mallory Lewis Israel, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Norman Israel of Short Hills, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
Bruce Adam Huberman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold Huberman of South Orange, N.J.
Rabbi Ely Pilchik performed the ceremony at the St.
Regis in New York.
Mrs.
Huberman, 28, is a publicity coordinator at Donna Karan New York in Manhattan.
She graduated from Arizona State University.
Her father is president of Rael Automatic Sprinkler Company in Lynbrook, L.I.


The Tangled Politics Behind Rival Plans
There are five major plans being put forward in Congress as alternatives to President Clinton's health care proposals.
The differences among the plans are prompted as much by political strategies as by vast substantive disagreements.


Meeting Mr. Right While on Jury Duty
To the Editor:
Regarding "When Jury Duty Calls" (Oct. 10): Almost two years ago, I arrived at jury duty with few expectations, Larry McMurtry's "Lonesome Dove," a box of Hanukkah cards and a brown-bag lunch.
Little did I know that Mr.
Right would walk through the door.
After deferring five times, I showed up to serve because I feared the sheriff would come after me.
After two excruciating days of sitting around, a new jury pool arrived.
George had also deferred one time too many and was forced to serve.


Wall Street; It's C.D. Maturity Time. Do the Banks Still Care?
OCTOBER is decision time for more than the usual number of bank depositors, who must decide whether to renew their maturing certificates of deposit at rates that are no higher than recent inflation, or seek a higher return.
"Four or five years ago there used to be a blip-up in rates in October as banks offered incentives to hold the deposits," said Robert Heady, publisher of the Bank Rate Monitor.
Now, however, banks are so flush with cash that they are reducing rates just as they have for the last 53 months.


F.Y.I.
Panic/Don't Panic Q. A WALK/DON'T WALK sign in the East Village lights up with Que pasa? instead of DON'T WALK.
Another one reads IN THA HOUSE and L.E.S. instead of WALK/DON'T WALK.
Que pasa?


Ms. Fincken, Mr. Mahan
Mr. and Mrs.
F.
J.
Fincken Jr. of Harwinton, Conn., have announced the engagement of their daughter Kristen Ann Fincken to Christopher Parker Mahan, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Gerald D. Mahan of Oak Ridge, Tenn.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Fincken, 24, is an account executive at Burns McClellan, a public relations agency in New York.
She is a graduate of Wheaton College.
Her father is the northwestern regional sales manager for Ascom Hasler Mailing Systems in Shelton, Conn.
Her mother, Barbara Fincken, is an elementary school teacher at the Harwinton Consolidated School.


When Smoking Is a Patriotic Duty
MEET Dr. Ei Kubota, the man with the toughest job in Japan.
As the Health and Welfare Ministry official who directs Japan's anti smoking efforts, Dr.
Kubota faces two adversaries familiar to public-health officials in the United States: the tobacco industry, whose hundreds of millions of dollars in advertising here have imbued smoking with a rakish cachet, and smokers, who find it hard to quit.


The Apartment Dilemma: Warm Outside, Cold Inside
To the Editor:
The time of squabbles between tenants and landlords about heat is upon us.
The city rule states that when the outside temperature is 55 degrees or below, the temperature inside must be at least 68 degrees.
But there are times when the temperature outside hovers between 55 and 60 degrees for several days in a row.
During that time, the inside temperature, which may have been perfectly adequate before, may drop well below 68 degrees.


Listen, Doctor, Let Sleeping Couch Potatoes Lie
To the Editor:
"Health: Make Couch Potatoes Pay More" (Viewpoints, Oct. 10) makes an excellent point, but Dr.
Uriel S. Barzel doesn't go far enough.
What about those healthy athletes who engage in rock climbing, skiing, Rollerblading or other sports likely to result in injury?
They certainly "voluntarily engage in certain unhealthy behavior."


Loan Program Aims at Asians
A loan program for small businesses on the Lower East Side and in Chinatown has been set up to help Asian owners turn to banks, rather than personal and community resources, for financial needs.
This month, two nonprofit groups, Asian Americans for Equality and Manhattan Neighborhood Renaissance, began administering $175,000 in loans for the State Urban Development Corporation.
The loans will benefit minority- and female-owned businesses in lower Manhattan, many run by Asian immigrants.


Ukrainian Work Gets American Debut Today
Richard Kapp, the Philharmonia Virtuosi's founding music director, said: "This is perhaps the most remarkable work I've shared in 30 years. It is so stunning, and its idiom so unique, it makes one wonder how the course of music might have been affected had Klebanov not been held in constraint for so long" in the former Soviet Union.


Bags, Belts and the Safety Factor
"Y'KNOW," a friend said recently, "I've been hearing bad things about air bags. I think you ought to check it out."
Uh-huh. Like what kind of things?


For the Deep of Pocket, Tailored Homes
THE grass has yet to be planted on the broad lawn of James and Eileen Farley's new house at a development called Highland Woods, off Annin Road in Basking Ridge, N.J.
The long, gravel-covered driveway has yet to be paved.
But Mrs.
Farley, who is 34 years old, nevertheless feels a sense of fulfilment.
Encountered in the driveway a few days ago, she said she and her husband had met three goals they set in 1991 when they started house shopping in the hills of northern Somerset County.
These were to find a property "in a family neighborhood, on a quiet street, with a level backyard."


Autumn in Tuscany
FANNING OUT FROM the Arno River, the Tuscan hills seem made for autumn's caprice.
The landscape can be a gentle, languid roll, or it can jut into gray, balding peaks that are as overbearing as they are regal.
In the late summer, the hills are conjugations of the color green; as the air grows cooler, the oaks and figs and balsam trees conspire to make them a morphological vista of scarlet and orange, umber, tan and rose.
For all that, Tuscany is the part of Italy that changes least.
And perhaps it is the region's abiding sense of continuity that makes it the place you consider when life elsewhere seems too complicated.


Lisa Goldfarb, Steve M. Chaiken
Dr. and Mrs.
Herbert A. Goldfarb of Short Hills, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Dr.
Lisa Michele Goldfarb, to Steve Martin Chaiken, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Nathan Chaiken of Oceanside, L.I.
A January wedding is planned.
Dr.
Goldfarb is a psychiatrist in New York.
She graduated from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology and received her medical degree from Columbia University.
Her father is the director of gynecology at Montclair (N.J.) Community Hospital.


New Fund Tables: Ugh!
Sept. 19, this section introduced mutual fund tables that offer more data, but eliminated net asset values.
Many readers demanded the return of the N.A.V. figure.
In response to that demand, the Friday closing N.A.V. returns to the mutual fund tables this week.
The percentage change continues to appear, making it easier to compare different funds.
To the Editor:
If I have 120 shares of XYZ fund, I am more interested in the fact that they were up, say, 20 cents a share last week than I am in being told that it is a GG fund up about 0.5 percent.
DAVID S. MOREY Mountain Lakes, N.J., Sept. 20


THE BAND PREENED ON
I was bemused to find Frank Rich blaming "And the Band Played On" for being five years too late (Endpaper/Public Stages: "The Band Preened On," Sept. 26).
No reporters heard the music in 1979-80 when AIDS was known as the Gay Plague.
How many people died between the time that you first mentioned GRID (gay-related immune deficiency) on your back pages and the word AIDS finally appeared on your front page?
MARK SCHUSTER New York, N.Y.


Truffaut's Ex-Wife Guards the Legacy He Left Behind
Long before his final illness forced him to make such choices, Francois Truffaut knew that he wanted to be buried in Montmartre Cemetery, in the rough-and-tumble neighborhood where he grew up.
"He loved that area," said Madeleine Morgenstern, Truffaut's former wife.
"He always joked that he wanted to see the Gaumont Palace, which was the biggest movie theater in Paris, from the cemetery."
By the time Truffaut was buried in Montmartre, nine years ago this week, the Gaumont Palace had long since disappeared.
But some of the places he treasured have remained, including the offices of Les Films du Carrosse, the company he founded to produce his work.
When he was not filming, Truffaut spent much of his time in this functional third-floor suite in a quiet cul-de-sac a block from the Champs-Elysees.
And from this same suite, scarcely changed from Truffaut's day -- bulging with neatly arranged scripts, decorated with posters of "Adele H." and "The 400 Blows" in Japanese -- Mme.
Morgenstern now runs the company.


Lenin Is Dead, Yes, but Should He Be Buried?
Vladimir Ilyich Lenin's days in the mausoleum on Red Square may be numbered, and his goose-stepping honor guard is gone.
But on a recent rainy morning a few visitors, most of them foreign tourists, still trekked across the cobblestones to catch a glimpse of his mummified remains.
"It was simply not done in this country not to pay homage to Lenin," said a Russian visitor, Yevgeny Nosov, 18, a student from Pavlovsky Posad, a suburb east of the capital.
"He must have been an intelligent man. I just wanted to see what he looked like."


A Broken Truce: Clinton vs. Bush In Global Policy
President Clinton's new policy on Somalia has fostered a cease-fire in Mogadishu, but it has ended the cease-fire in Washington between the Clinton and Bush Administration foreign policy teams.
After months of keeping their voices muted, senior members of the Bush Administration opened up this week with both barrels on President Clinton, essentially accusing him of messing up a Somalia operation that they handed off to him in sound condition, and of naively believing that a President could delegate foreign policy to subordinates while he focused on domestic affairs.


The Colt and the Filly Heading in Opposite Directions
If horse racing was searching for a monster horse in a year of unknown value, it found one yesterday at Belmont Park when the 2-year-old colt Dehere won the Champagne Stakes by four lengths and unmistakably reasserted his claim as the ranking candidate for the 1993 Kentucky Derby.
But in the swirls of racing fortune, the undefeated, and highly heralded, filly Strategic Maneuver not only was beaten but ran seventh and last in the Frizette Stakes, the starring vehicle for juvenile fillies.
Young Stars
The two young stars met their fate on the day billed as the Breeders' Cup Preview, a dress rehearsal for the Breeders' Cup three weeks from now.
Dehere will be there at Santa Anita as the dominant horse of the year, the juvenile who won his first four starts with brilliance, then lost by half a length to Holy Bull in the mud before coming back to win powerfully in the Champagne.


Winning Ways With Winter Squash
THE farm stands and markets are now overflowing with brightly colored winter squashes.
Summer squashes, mostly thin-skinned yellow ones or types of zucchini in green or gold, are more delicate than the sturdy, thick-skinned winter varieties.
Fall's crop ranges in color from nearly white to yellow, orange, green and even, in the case of some Hubbard varieties, battleship gray and blue.
They come striped and solid.
Some are round, some elongated and some are deeply ridged.
There are squashes with smooth skins and others that are warty.
They may be perfectly symmetrical or lopsided.


Peacemakers Don't Have to Be Perfect
"These are not saints," the Nobel Committee's chairman said Friday after announcing that Nelson Mandela and F. W. de Klerk had won the 1993 Peace Prize for working together to end apartheid.
Indeed, this was one of those prizes -- like Mikhail Gorbachev's in 1990, or Henry Kissinger's in 1973 -- that risked instant controversy and future embarrassment.
Many black South Africans thought Mr.
Mandela, leader of the African National Congress, should have won on his own; many whites were appalled that either man should be called a peacemaker, given the carnage still perpetrated by their unruly troops.
And there are no guarantees the new, democratic order will be any more peaceful than the old, racist one.


Coming Soon: The Inside Of Fashion
The most important player at the spring fashion shows in Paris last week was Robert Altman.
Fresh from rave reviews for his latest film, "Short Cuts," the director had come to town to do research for his next film, "Pret-a-Porter," an inside look at the hoopla surrounding the French ready-to-wear collections.
The fashion crowd, alternately enraptured by the idea of a full-length feature about their world and skeptical that anyone could do it justice, has besieged Mr.
Altman at every turn, many wanting to know how to win even the smallest cameo.
Since Oct. 8, he has attended 11 shows by well-established designers like Issey Miyake, Yohji Yamamoto, Jean-Paul Gaultier and Yves Saint Laurent.


Silent Salute, Ringing Impact
From that hard year of war, riot and murder, 1968, the most enduring image may be a silent, nonviolent gesture.
Twenty-five years ago yesterday, on the victory stand at the Mexico City Olympics, Tommie Smith and John Carlos raised their black-gloved fists in what was then known as the black power salute.
A salute!
You would have thought they had napalmed a child or burned a cross or shot a police officer.
Without a hearing, Smith and Carlos were suspended from the United States team, thrown out of the Olympic Village and forced to leave Mexico.


Ms. L'Esperance, Mr. Lostaglio
Kathleen Mary L'Esperance, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerard J. L'Esperance of Brownsville, Tex., was married yesterday to Keith Lostaglio, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Vincent J. Lostaglio of Stamford, Conn.
The Rev.
David Blanchfield officiated at the Holy Name of Jesus Christ Roman Catholic Church in Stamford.
Ms.
L'Esperance, 27, is keeping her name.
She is an assistant vice president at Chemical Bank in New York.
She graduated from Michigan State University.
Her father is the personnel director, in Matamoros, Mexico, for the General Motors Corporation.
Her mother, Mary Kay L'Esperance, is an accountant at Browning-Ferris Industries Inc., a waste-management company in Harlingen, Tex.


Anna Mastroianni, Gregory M. Shaw
Anna Catherine Mastroianni, the daughter of Drs.
Luigi Mastroianni and Elaine Pierson-Mastroianni of Haverford, Pa., was married yesterday to Gregory Mark Shaw, a son of Gary V. Shaw of Tulsa, Okla., and Sandra R. Weidman of Wichita Falls, Tex.
The Rev.
Robert M. Ross performed the Episcopal ceremony at Morrison House in Alexandria, Va.
Ms.
Mastroianni, 32, will keep her name.
She is a director of independent study projects at the National Academy of Sciences' Institute of Medicine in Washington.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania, from which she also received a law degree.


From Leftovers of Communism, a Czech Goulash
It is the kind of industrial nightmare that has undermined support for free-market economic reforms in other parts of Eastern Europe.
The state-owned Poldi Kladno steel mill, which once employed 20,000 people, has lost its customers in the former Soviet bloc, is far too inefficient to compete with Western producers and is struggling to avoid laying off the 9,000 workers who have not already been dismissed.
But the outlook in Kladno remains reasonably bright, because out of the leftovers of Communism the Czech Republic has been cooking up a rich economic stew.


BENEFITS
Honoring Lesbian Writers  MONDAY -- The National Lesbian Action Foundation will hold an awards ceremony at the Union Square Theater, 100 East 17th Street, to raise money for its grants program and to introduce the five winners of the 1993 Astraea awards for emerging writers.
The comedian Karen Williams will be the master of ceremonies of a program of readings beginning at 7:30 P.M. by the author Dorothy Allison and the poet Cheryl Clark.
A cocktail reception and book signing will follow.
Tickets, $25, from (212) 529-8021.
Evenings of Conversation  TUESDAY -- Anna Quindlen, an Op-Ed page columnist for The New York Times, will lead off a series of four evenings to benefit the St.
Luke's School scholarship fund.
Gregory Hines, the actor and dancer; Frank Rich, the chief drama critic of The Times, and Charlayne Hunter-Gault, the national correspondent for the "MacNeil/Lehrer Newshour," will speak on Dec. 7, Feb. 14 and April 26, respectively.
The events begin at 7:30 P.M. at the school, 487 Hudson Street between Christopher and Barrow streets.
A reception with refreshments for sale will follow.
Tickets, $85 for the series, from (212) 279-4200, or $30 each at the door.


On Sunday; New Rimes For Mariners Not So Ancient
OUTSIDE on the water, the city shoreline was a stretch of updated Whitman: bridges and skyscrapers soaring hither and yon, jetliners and ferries coursing past fiery glints of trees that glowed autumnally in the ragged marshes of Queens to the south and the busy parks of Co-op City to the west.
Inside the yacht club, Buddy Rice, a retired city firefighter, was having an early beer at the bar and chastising someone who asked him about sailing all his life out of City Island.
"That's a bad word, sailing," Mr.
Rice said, friendly in the special way of City Islanders, with an outerborough tinniness of tone and a heartiness worthy of New England.


U.S. Copter Pilot Returns Home
Michael Durant's journey home from Somalia ended on the tarmac here at Fort Campbell Army Air Field tonight to the accompaniment of cheers, waving flags and an Army band.
Mr.
Durant, a helicopter pilot, acknowledged the hero's welcome by raising his hand in a salute as he lay prone on a stretcher being carried to a waiting ambulance.


Mary McKenna, Mark H. Leeds
Mary McKenna, an associate at the law firm of Battle Fowler, was married yesterday to Mark H. Leeds, a senior tax associate with the law firm of Morgan, Lewis &amp; Bockius.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
James R. Covington, a Unitarian minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Lotos Club in New York.
Ms.
McKenna, who is keeping her name, graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received a law degree from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the daughter of Anna M. McKenna of Pittsburgh and the late David G. McKenna.
Her father was an editor at The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette.
Her mother is the coordinator of graduate medical education at the Western Pennsylvania Hospital in Pittsburgh.


100 Years Of Service


Is the Postal Service Down on Collecting?
OCTOBER is National Stamp Collecting Month, and on Saturday the United States Postal Service plans to issue four stamps intended to encourage new hobbyists.
In years past, the Postal Service has come out with its promotional issues on Oct. 1.
The delay this year follows budget cuts that has eliminated the Postal Service's support of the national network of Benjamin Franklin stamp clubs, school-based endeavors designed to interest children in stamp collecting.


Double Duty


TROUBLED WATER
Many of the tests required under the current Safe Drinking Water Act have nothing to do with preventing the kind of public health problems cited in Sara Terry's article "Drinking Water Comes to a Boil" (Sept. 26).
Instead, Congress has made public water suppliers spend large sums of money to search for and eliminate contaminants that present little or no public health risks.
Thus, when "violations" occur, they are often meaningless bureaucratic occurrences that cause money to be spent for no real purpose.


Public &amp; Private; America's Sleeping Sickness
Last spring in Texas Hillary Rodham Clinton gave a courageous speech about America's greatest crisis.
We suffer "from a sleeping sickness of the soul," she told her audience, the feeling "that we lack at some core level meaning in our individual lives, and meaning collectively, that sense that our lives are part of some greater effort, that we are connected to one another." The central thesis of her speech came near its conclusion: "Let us be willing to remold society by redefining what it means to be a human being."


Battle Lines Drawn in 17 Board Races
THE bottom line in the 17 County Board of Legislators races this year is this: The Republicans are attempting to hold on to the fragile majority they pieced together after the last election.
The Democrats want to win back what they say is rightfully theirs -- the unprecedented victory they saw at the polls the last time around.
In 1991, Republicans surrendered their stronghold on the Board for the first time in 83 years -- although they regained it shortly after the election when Suzanne R. Swanson, a Conservative elected on the Democratic line began voting with the Republicans on certain issues.
Also Republicans were appointed later on in the term to fill vacancies when two Democrats won seats in the State Assembly.
Having cried foul then, Democrats are now hoping to put their candidates back in those slots.
More Power for the Board
Observers of this year's contests say, however, that there is more at stake than just partisanship or predicting who will sit on which side of the aisle after Nov. 2.
They say that whoever emerges as the victor in the hotly contested county executive's race will have to face yet another opponent: a Board of Legislators that wants more say in the business of governing.
The incumbent, Andrew P. O'Rourke, is being challenged by the Democrat Richard L. Brodsky, a State Assemblyman from the 86th District.


The Taghkanic Chorale Puts A Handel Rarity on Disk
THE music was 261 years old and written by a master, but few contemporary ears had heard it.
George Frideric Handel's last Italian opera, "Sosarme," had never been recorded, so Johannes Somary, music director of the Taghkanic Chorale, undertook the project with the Yorktown-based chorus.
The group's recording of "Sosarme," conducted by Mr.
Somary and performed with the Amor Artis Orchestra playing on period instruments, is scheduled for release next spring on compact disks by Newport Classic of Rhode Island.
It was not unusual to find an unrecorded score by a prolific composer like Handel, Mr.
Somary said, speaking in his office at the Horace Mann School in Riverdale, where he leads the glee club and is chairman of the arts department.
He said he discovered "Sosarme" while studying the composer's life and work and found the opera "dramatically inspired and musically beautiful."  Concert Performance Considered
"When you study a score like this one, you think -- shouldn't that be made available to the public?" Mr.
Somary said.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 17, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
3
THE AGE OF INNOCENCE, by Edith Wharton. (Collier/Macmillan, $5.95.) The 1920 novel about New York society life in the 1870's.
2
42
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their mothers.
3
5
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
4
6
DRAGON TEARS, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) Two police detectives try to cope with a demonic serial killer in southern California.
5*
4
THE SECRET HISTORY, by Donna Tartt. (Ivy, $6.99.) Close friends at a small college must deal with the consequences of a crime.
6
35
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
7*
3
MITIGATING CIRCUMSTANCES, by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg. (Signet, $5.99.) A woman's revenge after she and a daughter are attacked.
8
79
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
9
19
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
10*
90
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
11*
1
LORD OF HAWKFELL ISLAND, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) Romantic passions and feminist feelings at play in 10th-century Britain.
12
8
THE STARS SHINE DOWN, by Sidney Sheldon. (Warner, $5.99.) A businesswoman's fortunes are imperiled by past and present secrets.
13*
42
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The investigation of a woman's death involves the American-Japanese rivalry.
14
26
SPHERE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) Four scientists explore an alien spaceship found on the ocean floor.
15
4
HIDDEN TALENTS, by Jayne Ann Krentz. (Pocket, $5.99.) The romance of a creative woman and a hard-boiled businessman.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
5
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
519
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Psychological and spiritual inspiration by a psychiatrist.
3
3
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Bantam, $6.99.) The autobiography of the general.
4
9
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces.
5
5
SAVE YOUR JOB, SAVE OUR COUNTRY, by Ross Perot with Pat Choate. (Hyperion, $6.95.) Arguments against the ratification of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
6
35
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
7*
2
THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH SECURITY PLAN. (Times Books/Random House, $8.) The draft report of the Clinton Administration's proposals for health care reform.
8
7
PRINCESS, by Jean P. Sasson. (Avon, $5.50.) Life as lived by a member of the royal family and other women in Saudi Arabia.
9
105
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
10
25
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
11*
14
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
12
126
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
13
15
A WORLD LIT ONLY BY FIRE, by William Manchester. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) A history of the Renaissance and the Reformation.
14
1
AND THE BAND PLAYED ON, by Randy Shilts. (Penguin, $15.) A journalist's account of the first half-dozen years of the AIDS epidemic.
15
137
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
3
THE DAYS ARE JUST PACKED, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A new collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
139
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
3
155
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
4
17
WHAT TO EXPECT WHEN YOU'RE EXPECTING, by Arlene Eisenberg, Heidi E. Murkoff and Sandee E. Hathaway. (Workman, $10.95.) Counsel for parents-to-be.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 2, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


No Comparison
To the Sports Editor:
In "You Should Never Think You Can Decision a House Fighter," (The Times, Sept. 26), Larry Merchant's one mistake is comparing the Whitaker-Chavez travesty to the more plausible draw between Sugar Ray Leonard and Thomas Hearns.
Merchant oversimplified that fight's synopsis by implying that Sugar Ray should have lost since "Tommy Hearns knocked him down twice." While Hearns did in fact knock Leonard down twice, scoring two 10-8 rounds, Leonard had Hearns in serious trouble in two other rounds, justifying 10-8 scores in his own favor.
The rest of the fight was close enough to reasonably earn either fighter the victory, or, as the case was, result in a draw.
CONSTANTINOS E. SCAROS  Cliffside Park, N.J.


Alisa Diamond, Stephen Lichaw
Dr. and Mrs.
Michael K. Diamond of East Hills, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Alisa Robin Diamond, to Stephen Edward Lichaw, a son of Phyllis Lichaw of Fort Lee, N.J., and Richard Lichaw of Lake Success, L.I.
A December wedding is planned.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: Hilton L. Stein; A Lawyer Dedicated to Suing Lawyers
HILTON L. STEIN, a lawyer here whose license to practice law was once suspended by the State Supreme Court for six months, is back in business with a vengeance.
Mr.
Stein, along with two associates and a staff of three, now limits his practice to suing other lawyers.
Over the last six years, he said, he has recovered more than $5 million for clients whose former lawyers committed legal malpractice.
He currently has more than $15 million in claims pending.


Deals &amp; Discounts
BUDAPEST BOUND Ibusz Travel is offering a variety of winter programs to Budapest.
A basic five-night tour starts at $699 a person, based on double occupancy, and includes air fare from Newark on Malev Hungarian Airlines, hotel and daily buffet breakfast.
A five-night Budapest a la Carte package includes flights, accommodation at the Hungaria or Erzsebet hotels, round-trip airport transfers, a half-day guided city tour, one lunch, one dinner and other extras, and starts at $839 a person.
The packages are available Nov. 1 through March 31, excluding Dec. 24 to 27 and Dec. 29 to Jan. 2.
Call (800) 367-7878 or (201) 592-8585 in New Jersey.
MEXICAN GETAWAY Presidente Hotels in Mexico have introduced a Sunbreaks program of discounted rates at six properties through Dec. 24.
The rate is $109 in Cancun and Cozumel, and $115 in Mexico City (Friday through Sunday only) and Oaxaca.
At two hotels the rate covers more than the room: in Los Cabos, $79 includes daily lunch for two, and in Ixtapa, $109 includes meals, drinks and tips.
Tax of 10 percent is extra in all cases.
Call (800) 447-6147.


Toronto 8, Philadelphia 5
The Toronto Blue Jays took the first step toward repeating as World Series champions last night when they defeated the Philadelphia Phillies, 8-5, in Game 1 in Toronto.
Blue Jays' second baseman Roberto Alomar turned in several sparkling plays in the field, and John Olerud's homer provided the go-ahead run in the sixth.


If You're Thinking of Living in/Little Silver; Life on a Peninsula Near Sandy Hook
A CENTURY ago, when Little Silver was just sprawling fields and saltwater marshes, the people who lived there were farmers and oystermen.
A nursery encompassed half the town's land, growing a wide variety of plants from raspberries to long-stemmed roses, and shellfish were plentiful in the Shrewsbury River.
These days, the river's oyster beds are depleted and backyard gardens are the only reminder of the once-extensive farmland.
But the serene, verdant setting remains and people move, or stay, there to rear their children in a quiet, comfortable environment.


How Do You Like '90210' U.?
SOME students at Occidental College are worried about their school's reputation.
The small, private liberal-arts college in the residential northeast section of Los Angeles has become a prime backdrop for the Fox television series "Beverly Hills 90210," whose characters graduated from high school at the end of the last television season.
Having filmed at the college (which is called California University on the show) all summer, the cast and crew recently returned to the 120-acre campus, where they will be shooting scenes one to three days a week for the rest of the semester.
Not everybody is happy about that:


Don't Lay the Burden of Health Care Reform on Small Business; Good for Big Business
To the Editor:
Re "Business Leaders Voice Skepticism on Health Plan" (news article, Oct. 8): Although all of us don't agree with every detail in President Clinton's plan, we believe he deserves great credit for his bold effort finally to bring health care reform to the United States.
Additionally, we believe there is much in the plan that is good for American competitiveness.


White Coats With Dirty Hands
SCIENCE ON TRIAL The Whistle-Blower, the Accused, and the Nobel Laureate.
By Judy Sarasohn. 294 pp.
New York: St.
Martin's Press. $22.95.


Victims


Karen J. Brown, Robert Sywolski
Karen Julie Brown, an executive assistant at KDI Corporation, a holding company and conglomerate, was married yesterday to Robert J. Sywolski, the chairman and chief executive of Cap Gemini America, an information-technology consulting company.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Anne C. Richards performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Heavenly Rest in New York.
Mrs.
Sywolski graduated from Smith College.
She is a daughter of Patricia Mulhern Brown of Norwalk, Conn., and the late Sheldon H. Brown Jr.


SURFACING


Clinton's Remarks on Race Upheld King Legacy; Look Deep Within
To the Editor:
It would not come as a surprise to learn that political consultants understand the English language differently from the rest of us.
Such would seem to be the case in Paul Goldman's "Race Card" (Op-Ed, Oct 6).
His strenuous condemnation of President Clinton's "playing the race card" during a speech at a campaign rally for New York's Mayor David N. Dinkins certainly sounds as if what he read was different from what I read.


Revisiting A Parisian Phenomenon
Paris this Fall has a whole slew of ambitious exhibitions, but none of them is as timely as the one, now at the Grand Palais, that is simply called "Nabi." A co-production of the Kunsthaus in Zurich and the Musee d'Orsay in Paris, it recreates for the 1990's a polyform phenomenon that made itself felt all over Paris just 100 years ago in the worlds of painting, theater, decoration and the applied arts.
With close on 300 items on view and 23 substantial essays in the 500-page catalogue, this is the one-time-only chance to straighten out a long list of confusing and sometimes bothersome matters.
Just to begin with, who were the Nabis?
And how did they get the name?
The name is based on a Hebrew word (also found in Arabic) that means a prophet or seer who is in touch with a world from which the rest of us are excluded.


THE BEAT GOES ON
I am sure you will receive a blizzard of letters from the vertically and aurally challenged.
I would like to convey my politically incorrect but heartfelt thanks to Don Montague for a warm, funny and intensely human story.
ROBERT BIERMAN North Tarrytown, N.Y.


How the Foliage Drama of Fall Unfolds
THIS is the time of year when practically everyone drives along a favorite route to see the foliage colors.
Local residents, who have to endure the traffic jams, refer to them as the leafers.
Quite often friends gather in car pools and meet at a designated location.
Then they leave their cars to hike through the woods, eager to reach that special place where they know the view of the fall foliage will be fantastic.
Each enjoys this seasonal phenomenon in his or her own way, but rare is the individual who does not respond to this natural autumn beauty.


For Warhorse Of the 32d, A Tough Race
For year after year -- 25 of them, to be exact -- the area that makes up the 32d District has been the politically stablest of places, so Democratic that its representative, 82-year-old Walter Ward, is now the longest-tenured member of the City Council.
This year, though, could be a time of change in the 32d.
Just as the district's quiet working-class streets and bustling commercial strips are seen as prime turf for the Republican-Liberal mayoral candidate, Rudolph W. Giuliani, Mr.
Ward is considered one of the most vulnerable of the 51-member Council's 45 Democrats.


Seeking Wholeness by Studying Living 'Between the Rocks'
IN the Green River Cemetery in Springs, East Hampton, there is a rugged and irregularly placed stone in the extreme back left-hand corner, rather far from the stones of Jackson Pollock and Lee Krasner and the newer grave of Elaine de Kooning, with the inscription, "A thousand birds will fly out of my mouth when I die."
I will speak of the stone, not as it now is, exposed on the top of its hill, where the ragged woods behind have been cut away, whether for the expansion of the cemetery, as some said, or for a golf course, as others seemed to think, the answer obviously available, but something in me not wanting to find out the truth about this violation.
I will speak of it as I first remember it, leaning crookedly, half enmeshed in the tangled foliage and half out.
And with the first memory of the stone, comes not a picture of Hilda Morley as she now is, or even as she was as she stood by the stone, when she first took me to see it in Springs Cemetery, but rather a picture of her from a book jacket in which she stands outdoors in profile, her long black cape blowing in the wind, and there is a sadness about her.
And then this evokes in its turn the refrains of the poems of lament for her husband, the avant-garde composer Stefan Wolpe, who died in 1972, which would teach me, almost in advance of the death of anyone that close, how to mourn.


Mechanic's Job: Keep Part of New York Culture From Disappearing
Armed with a welding torch and socket wrench, Raffaele Pepe is staving off the extinction of a cherished piece of New York culture: the lovable, lumbering Checker cab.
There are only 10 Checkers still on the road in New York City -- out of more than 11,000 yellow taxis -- and Mr.
Pepe's auto shop in Astoria, Queens, is their port of call.
The cabs now make up a fraction of his business.
But having clocked an average of 500,000 miles each on the city's pockmarked streets, they are his biggest challenge.


Hard Times for Chesapeake's Oyster Harvest
Mindree Brown balanced himself precariously on the starboard gunwale of the Estelle and lowered his oyster tongs into the James River.
Rhythmically opening and closing the spindly shafts, as though working a giant post-hole digger, he groped for the muddy treasure hidden seven feet below the river's surface.


Oct. 10-16: Harassment Case; The F.B.I. Stonewalls An Agent's Complaint
In pressing forward last week with complaints of sex harassment at the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Suzane J. Doucette could claim no immediate victory beyond casting aside the unwritten rule that female agents don't openly confront the agency over its treatment of women.
F.B.I. officials would not discuss her case, citing a lawsuit she has filed against the agency.
But they insisted the F.B.I. does not tolerate harassment of women, who now number about 1,200 of the F.B.I's 10,300 agents.


Local Debate: Glut or Not?
Residents of what is sometimes referred to as the Upper Upper West Side, the area above 96th Street and below Columbia University, are balking at plans for two buildings to house homeless people.
The West 90's/West 100's Neighborhood Coalition says there are already 80 social-service sites, some about to be opened, above 90th Street, including privately owned single-room-occupancy hotels often filled with people referred by the city.


Chairwoman Jane
As an actor Jane Alexander has been both a Supreme Court Justice ("First Monday in October") and a First Lady ("Eleanor and Franklin"), so her new role, as the real-life chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Arts, would seem a breeze.
Certainly she played it that way at her first performance, her September confirmation hearing before the Senate Committee on Labor and Human Resources.
Alexander gave a flawless reading of her prepared statement, a script mingling heartwarming autobiography ("In 1945, a man I barely knew, my father, returned from the war") with unimpeachable idealism ("The arts are life-enhancing and bring joy").
She hit the Senators' softball questions out of the park.
And what reviews!
Claiborne Pell pronounced the nominee's address the most eloquent he had heard in 33 years, citing it as "another reason why more elocution and acting should be taught in schools." The small crowd packed into the hearing room gave Alexander a standing ovation.
The committee unanimously endorsed her a few hours later.
But even before the hourlong hearing was over, some committee members fled to more grown-up endeavors; President Clinton was giving his health care address that night.
The endowment, whose minuscule annual budget ($174 million) amounts to less than the price of one defective military bomber, resides near the bottom of the capital pecking order.
Alexander's performance did not even rate coverage on C-Span, which did find time that day to air a National Press Club address by Miss Manners.


Stephen K. Woods and Robyn P. Smith
Robyn Patrice Smith, a daughter of Lois J. Hart of Cassopolis, Mich., and the late Charles R. Smith Jr., was married yesterday to Stephen Kirby Woods, a son of Phyllis Williams of Indianapolis and the late William H. Woods Sr.
The Rev.
Steven Massey, a Lutheran minister, performed the ceremony at the Trident Castle in Port Antonio, Jamaica.
Mrs.
Smith-Woods, 35, is an owner of Great Beginnings and Endings, a catering concern in New York.
She graduated from Michigan State University.
Her mother is an interior designer in Cassopolis.
The bride is a stepdaughter of Gerald E. Hart.


Corrections
The At Work column last week, discussing health coverage for AIDS patients, misstated the number of H.I.V.-related disability complaints filed under the Americans With Disabilities Act.
Since the act took effect in July 1992, complaints have totaled 14,334, of which 285 were H.I.V.-related.


Bzzzz: Chainsaw Pleasures and Perils
A CHAINSAW can be a boon for those who have to do fall pruning or cut firewood.
Despite the brutish image, far less strength and stamina are needed to operate a chainsaw than to cut by hand.
Of all power tools, chainsaws probably are the most dangerous.
If a chainsaw can make life easier, do not let its potential hazards deter you from buying or renting one.
But learn to use it safely.


Sound Bytes; Into Media's Future, Digitally
WITH the exception of a five-day career with the International Business Machines Corporation, Nicholas Negroponte has spent his adult life as a student and professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, where he is the founder and director of the Media Laboratory.
The Media Lab is a collection of researchers, backed by 75 corporate and Federal sponsors, who explore ideas like the future of television, "smart" educational toys, intelligent agents to filter electronic mail, three-dimensional holography, high-resolution displays, and advanced computer interfaces.


Taking Music to Audiences in Hospitals and Jails
MARK JANICELLO, a young operatic tenor, recently performed for a small audience of cancer patients at the Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital in New Brunswick.
"Close your eyes and your spirits start to soar," sang Mr.
Janicello, assuming the character of the tormented hero of a Broadway musical, "The Phantom of the Opera."
The audience, some of whom were receiving medication intravenously, listened with rapt attention as the singer used his vocal skills to transport them beyond the confines of the hospital.
At times, Mr.
Janicello's voice even drowned out the hospital's public-address system.


Suong-Dao Nguyen, Richard Pham
Suong-Dao Nguyen, a lawyer, was married yesterday to Richard Thang Kim Pham, the product director for Johnson &amp; Johnson in Tokyo.
The Rev.
Ephraim Vu Khiem Cung officiated at St.
Ignatius of Loyola Roman Catholic Church in Chestnut Hill, Mass.
Mrs.
Pham graduated cum laude from Harvard University and received a law degree from the University of California at Los Angeles.
She was until recently an associate in Folger &amp; Levin, a law firm in Los Angeles.
She is a daughter of Suong-Ha Truong of Chestnut Hill and the late Thang Cao Nguyen.
Her father owned O.P.V.
Pharmaceuticals, a former manufacturer and distributor in Saigon, now Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam.
Her mother is an investment consultant in Chestnut Hill.


Recreating a Classic Era for a New Generation of Strivers
In its heyday, central Harlem drew people from around the world to small, smoky clubs where they could hear the greatest jazz musicians of their day.
Now an ambitious development program seeks to recreate that era by bringing new restaurants and clubs to the area around 135th Street.
If the planners win the necessary approvals, the project, called Strivers Center after historic Striver's Row a few blocks north, will mix of middle- and moderate-income housing and upscale businesses, particularly boutiques, and restaurants and jazz clubs.
It will stretch from 134th to 136th Street and from Adam Clayton Powell Boulevard to St.
Nicholas Avenue, and be financed by public and private loans and city and state grants.


Reporter's Notebook; Bombing Trial: Hours of Tedium and Rare Moments of Drama
For those who might have visions of classic courtroom drama dancing in their heads -- perhaps old memories of Charles Laughton in "Witness for the Prosecution," or newer ones from "A Few Good Men" -- the current trial of four men accused of bombing the World Trade Center is bound to fall short of expectations.
The case so far has been largely a painstaking, often tedious, accumulation of technical detail, at times more like a reading of the phone book than an occasion for high drama or tense political confrontation.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-17 TENSIONS RISE IN HAITI  Tension rose in Haiti as police and soldiers set up roadblocks throughout the capital and United States warships moved to enforce a United Nations embargo.  1  U.N.
The other day, the couple stood in front of their home and spoke of a New York City where they say white people feel increasingly locked out.  1  AS GOES FLORIO . . .
He may fret about the daily developments in Port-au-Prince and Mogadishu, but President Clinton is also keeping a watchful eye on this capital city.
"Usually, when I see the President the first thing he says is, 'How's my friend Jim doing?' " said Paul Begala, a White House adviser who is also a strategist for Gov.
Jim Florio's re-election campaign in New Jersey.  29  IMMUNIZATIONS IN NEW YORK  It worked in Namibia.
It worked in El Salvador.
And now, a type of grass-roots immunization program designed for developing nations is being tried in New York City.  31 Obituaries 38 John J. Reynolds, the developer of the Mastercard.


Another Body, Another Show: Bravo for the Backstage Mystery
"IT always amazed Philip how the spurious glamour of his profession made even intelligent people starry-eyed," Simon Shaw writes of the English character actor featured in his backstage mysteries.
Those of us who are addicted to mystery stories about the theater flick aside such insincerity, especially from the likes of Philip Fletcher, who is, after all, described in "Bloody Instructions" (1992) as "the well-known actor and murderer." We know that the theater is where you go for glamour, adventure, danger -- and mystery.


'The Morning After'
To the Editor:
Your Sept. 19 cover is vile.
First, there is the headline, "What Is This Thing Called Rape?" -- a play on "What Is This Thing Called Love?" Then there is the graphic photo -- on which the words "Don't force it" appear -- of a square peg going into a round hole.
Is this your view of the issue of rape?  PAUL SANZENBACH  Baton Rouge, La.


An Appalachian Trail for Carolina Crafts Seekers
AT the beginning of this century, North Carolina mountain crafts were the whooping cranes of the craft world, a seriously endangered species in a changing environment with few protectors.
Even in isolated hamlets throughout the Appalachian Mountains along the state's western border, manufactured goods were gradually replacing handcrafts, the lively barter economy was declining, and the craft-dependent mountain way of life had begun to fade as families took jobs outside of their communities.
Fortunately, during the 1920's and 30's, several cultural missionaries began to organize local cottage industries, establish regional markets and found craft schools.
Besides assuring the continuation of traditional crafts -- from elaborate Cherokee basketry and hand-spun wool coverlets to whimsical folk toys -- they inspired what today is a burgeoning contemporary crafts scene.


... But a Few Did Like It
Sept. 19, this section introduced mutual fund tables that offer more data, but eliminated net asset values.
Many readers demanded the return of the N.A.V. figure.
In response to that demand, the Friday closing N.A.V. returns to the mutual fund tables this week.
The percentage change continues to appear, making it easier to compare different funds.
To the Editor:
Congratulations on a job well done. CHARLES M. ELDRIDGE North Oaks, Minn., Sept. 19


MAKING IT WORK: The Field Marshal; While the Mayor Works the Crowds, Rebecca Miller Works the Volunteers
IT is still that yawning, second-cup-of-coffee time on a Saturday morning, but already Rebecca Miller has turned a street corner on the Upper West Side into a full-fledged staging area.
She has stacked the leaflets on top of one newsstand, the posters on top of another.
And she has stapled the signs to utility poles.
Mayor Dinkins is due in 40 minutes.
Ms.
Miller, the Manhattan field coordinator for his re-election campaign against Rudolph W. Giuliani, is double-checking the arrangements for what has been planned as a leisurely, meet-and-greet stroll up Broadway, beginning a block from her makeshift outpost.
In a campaign with so many undecided voters, the candidates' neighborhood-by-neighborhood, block-by-block field operations are considered more important than ever.
And in a year when the candidates are worried about the moderately liberal Jewish vote, the Upper West Side is important territory.


PARIS NOTES
PATRONS: Anne Bass (right) wasn't just a guest at the John Galliano show on Oct. 8; she, along with Sao Schlumberger, helped pay to stage it.
The bankroll, however, wasn't unlimited.
Mr.
Galliano convinced most of his models to work for free.
HOT NEW MODEL: There isn't one, though the oddity of Lee Watson, whose look and movements mimic those of Kristen McMenamy -- a model misfit herself -- drew lots of comment.
The only woman on the runway to receive wild applause (Sharon Stone as the bride at Valentino doesn't count) was Wallis Franken, newly married to Claude Montana.


In Paris, It's a Knack
There was no cookie-cutter sameness to what women were wearing in Paris last week during the annual spring fashion collections attended by international buyers and journalists, private clients, fashion students and an army of gate crashers.
The big surprise, along with the overwhelming acceptance of long skirts, was the parallel revival of the micro-mini, worn with white ankle socks and high-heel platform shoes.
Many women dressed in Chanel from their hats down to their shoes with signature gold chains that outlined the soles.
Others favored thigh-high Robin Hood boots over their leggings.


Editors' Note
An article on page 33 of the Arts and Leisure section today about Mike Judge, the creator of the television show "Beavis and Butt-head," mentions an incident in which a 5-year-old set his family's mobile home on fire, killing his baby sister.
The children's mother said her son had learned to play with fire by watching "Beavis and Butt-head."


Loft Residents Question Plan For Piers
A plan for the redevelopment of Piers 1 to 5 in Red Hook and Sunset Park will speed the gentrification of neighboring Fulton Ferry, some residents believe, and it makes them nervous.
They are concerned that their landlords will try to evict them.
A neighborhood of tenements and warehouses between the Brooklyn and Manhattan Bridges, Fulton Ferry has been dubbed "Dumbo" (down under the Manhattan Bridge overpass) by the growing number of artists who have moved into lofts there over the last decade.


The Days and Nights of a Supermodel
While Robert Altman was talking about making a fashion movie, another director was actually shooting a film at last week's Paris shows.
Robert Leacock, the director of photography for Madonna's "Truth or Dare," was filming Christy Turlington for a documentary he's making about the life of a supermodel.
Starting in Milan two weeks ago, Mr.
Leacock, right, whose father is Richard Leacock, a pioneer of cinema verite, has followed Miss Turlington, left, from breakfast to bedtime, capturing her being made up, strutting on the runway and disengaging herself from packs of reporters and photographers.


Rules vs. Risk
BREAKING THE VICIOUS CIRCLE Toward Effective Risk Regulation.
By Stephen Breyer. 127 pp.
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. $22.95.


'The Morning After'
To the Editor:
I'm beginning to understand why Wendy Kaminer has been appointed the liberal literati's pet spokeswoman for antifeminist views.
It's not that she's misogynistic; she's just mixed up.
Apparently, Ms.
Kaminer is operating under the impression that feminists have won the war, and those of us still picketing should pack up our signs and go home.
To Ms.
Kaminer, feminists should be perky cheerleaders celebrating women's supposed sexual freedom instead of militant activists organizing against women's sexual oppression.
DORCHEN LEIDHOLDT  New York


Playing God, With Science as a Midwife
Jonathan Tolins is an earnest and courtly young Cassandra who wants to please and aggravate everybody he can.
His play "Twilight of the Golds," which opens on Thursday at the Booth Theater on Broadway, is a comic tragedy.
Set in the not too distant future, it is about a couple who discover through a prenatal test that their baby boy is destined to be a homosexual and then wrestle with themselves and their families over whether to abort the fetus.
Directed by Arvin Brown, the cast includes Jennifer Grey, David Groh, Raphael Sbarge, Judith Scarpone and Michael Spound.
The biomedical wherewithal to make such a forecast does not yet exist and may never, despite recent news stories about scientists closing in on a gene associated with male homosexuality.
Nevertheless, Mr.
Tolins, who turns 27 this week, believes that even the possibility of science possessing the power to predict character traits like sexual orientation is an astonishing thought, one about which we had all better start thinking.


... But a Few Did Like It
Sept. 19, this section introduced mutual fund tables that offer more data, but eliminated net asset values.
Many readers demanded the return of the N.A.V. figure.
In response to that demand, the Friday closing N.A.V. returns to the mutual fund tables this week.
The percentage change continues to appear, making it easier to compare different funds.
To the Editor:
Thank you so much for the information on the new mutual fund pages.
At least one reader thinks the new format is splendid, saving money on subscriptions and hours in time spent reading.
ELISE SIMON GOODMAN New York City, Sept. 22


Sports of The Times; Stupid Rule Still Mars World Series
THERE is no hope for baseball.
I realize this every October.
The owners are going to botch up their search for a commissioner.
They are going to insult post-season play by putting it on regional television.
And they are going to ruin pitchers' arms by extending the playoffs next year.
This gloomy assessment of baseball comes after the Blue Jays beat the Phillies, 8-5, in the opening game of the World Series last night.
Because the dunderheads who run baseball are still bungling the designated-hitter rule, one of these hand-picked Toronto players must sit down on Tuesday in Philadelphia.


Forget Border Wars, Think Globally
According to "Business Border Wars Heat Up" (Aug. 22), Westchester's leaders apparently believe that we should match the kinds of financial incentives offered by competing states so that we can lure companies to our county.
This kind of "vestigial thinking" fails to address the major cause of our economic downturn -- global competition.
Westchester's real challenge over the next few years is not to win border wars but to reposition the county and its businesses as world-class competitors.


How the Foliage Drama of Fall Unfolds
THIS is the time of year when practically everyone drives along a favorite route to see the foliage colors.
Local residents, who have to endure the traffic jams, refer to them as the leafers.
Quite often friends gather in car pools and meet at a designated location.
Then they leave their cars to hike through the woods, eager to reach that special place where they know the view of the fall foliage will be fantastic.
Each enjoys this seasonal phenomenon in his or her own way, but rare is the individual who does not respond to this natural autumn beauty.


Judge Disqualified
The chief justice of the Indiana Supreme Court said Friday that he acted ethically in disqualifying himself from considering the appeal of MIKE TYSON's rape conviction.
Chief Justice RANDALL SHEPARD denied a request to reverse his disqualification, saying it came about because his wife had a brief conversation about the case with ALAN DERSHOWITZ, Tyson's appeals lawyer.
Shepard said he would not cast a vote on whether the state's high court should hear the boxer's appeal.
The court split, 2-2, last month on whether to review Tyson's 1992 conviction.
It takes a majority vote to hear a case.
Shepard's action denied Tyson a fair chance to have his case heard, "particularly since there appears to be no vehicle for vouching in a fifth Justice to replace Your Honor and vote on transfer," Dershowitz wrote in documents made public Friday.


The Doyenne at the Heart Of 'The Age of Innocence'
Miriam Margolyes, it says in the press material she wrote herself, is "very open about being fat and middle-aged."
"I see absolutely no point in being closed about it," says the 52-year-old English actress.
"Both of those attributes are clear to the naked eye."


Luggage Thefts Rise Sharply At Kennedy
Luggage thefts are up sharply at Kennedy International Airport, according to the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
Reported thefts of luggage through July totaled 1,569, an increase of 43 percent over the same period last year, said John Kampfe, a Port Authority spokesman.
Thefts are also up at Newark, 52.3 percent, but the figures are much lower: 332 through July this year.
Mr.
Kampfe said the Port Authority police were studying where the thefts took place and whether they were random or tended to occur in particular areas.
Undercover officers have been put in place, and uniformed patrols have been shifted.
Rental luggage carts that are pulled by a passenger were involved in 469 of this year's thefts, Mr.
Kampfe said; bags can be taken off without the victim's being aware, and sometimes bags fall off unnoticed.
Carts are not available at Newark.


Coastal Trail Opens In a New Effort To Draw Tourists
NEW JERSEY officials want visitors to the state to take the road less traveled.
Two projects aimed at promoting tourism, the state's second largest industry after chemicals and pharmaceuticals, have just been unveiled.
Tourism generated $18 billion in revenue in 1992, half of which came from the Shore region.


Rhetorical Questions?
To the Editor:
Re: "Pages Of Their Own?"
You folks are raising the issue of mainstreaming women's news in the Styles of the Times?
Seems to me that the medium is the message.
You've answered your own questions.
KAREN PERLMAN  Huntington Station, L.I.


Christiana Allaire, Paul D. Marran
Christiana Allaire, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Allaire of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday to Paul Demarre Marran, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William Marran of Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.
The Rev.
Jeffrey Rider performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church.
The bride, 26, is a senior associate at Ogilvy Adams &amp; Rinehart, a public relations firm in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Hamilton College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of the Xerox Corporation in Stamford, Conn.


Keeping Beavis and Butt-head Just Stupid Enough
Mike Judge is demanding, but in a relaxed, zero-affect kind of way.
He is doing the final check on an episode of "Beavis and Butt-head" that is scheduled to run the next week.
The sound mix is bad, and an important bit of dialogue can't be heard over the track of a music video.
" 'Shut up, Beavis!' isn't loud enough," Mr.
Judge complains to the show's producer, John Andrews, in a voice that is too disengaged to sound really disturbed.
Mr.
Andrews immediately agrees to have the show remixed, and that, too, produces no appreciable response.
But then Mr.
Judge sees Beavis and Butt-head reappear on the screen and do something profoundly stupid.
Their creator gives a long, low-pitched chuckle, and in it one can hear echoes of the now-famous rhythm:


FLAG-WAVERING
Packer talks about patriotism as if we all should be able to selectively decide what we'll choose to do, and when, to be patriotic.
He states that the Peace Corps, in the 1960's, "was a way for young men to avoid going to Vietnam, but it also made them feel as though they'd endured Vietnams of their own."
When the Peace Corps began, in 1961, rules were established to prevent it from being used as a place to evade the draft.
But that all changed sometime in 1965-66.
Peace Corps volunteers were allowed to re-enlist for the remaining years of the draft, protected from service in the military for four, even six years.


Cougars Fill Seats, Irish Fill Scoreboard
Notre Dame's offensive line simply breathed and opened holes tonight.
If Coach Lou Holtz complains next week, it will be about time of possession: The Fighting Irish hardly had any.
Notre Dame scored tonight as if it had a plane to catch.
The Irish brushed off Brigham Young like lint, led by 31-0 after 28 minutes and then called off its running backs.
The Cougars managed a late first-half touchdown, madly celebrated their aversion of the shutout and then settled for this semi-massacre, 45-20.


In 'Marvin's Room'
BY the time "Marvin's Room" opened Off Broadway in December 1991, it was widely known that Scott McPherson, the playwright, had AIDS.
Inevitably, the play, which confronts terminal illnesses with dark humor, was perceived in a new context.
"Marvin's Room," being produced by the Logodaedaly Company in association with the Schoolhouse here, has nothing to do with AIDS, but it has everything to do with caring and unconditional love.


At Work; Reforming the Talk on Labor Reform
THERE was a revival of sorts on Thursday in the basement of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, where more than 300 members of the labor-feminist-liberal policymaker diaspora gathered to hear papers and talk about labor law reform, a topic that for at least 12 years dared not speak its name in Washington.
Or when it did speak, it tended to be a fairly narrow conversation between business interests and the labor movement, both of which have fairly narrow and dated views of labor-capital relations, conceived in the fierce struggles of the past.
The Clinton Administration has made it clear it wants the conversation opened.
Earlier this year, Labor Secretary Robert Reich established a labor law reform commission and called it the Commission on the Future of Worker-Management Relations, signaling that he wanted the group to explore terrain beyond big labor's traditional agenda.


Sports of The Times; They Punched the Sky, and Ran Into a Nation's Consciousness
Somehow it seemed earlier than October. More like August.
That's when it was in the replays of my mind, replays that become more heroic with each new year: Tommie Smith and John Carlos take that curve in the sweltering heat of an August night.
Smith is heading for the gold, Carlos the bronze.
On the victory stand after they accept their medals, the national anthem blares.
Smith thrusts his right arm into the sky with clenched fist wearing a black glove.
Carlos: left fist, black glove.
Both are wearing black socks.


Hotel Tenants Win An Eviction Battle
Tenants have won the first round in their legal battle with the Leo House, a private residence at 332 West 23d Street that has been trying to evict its long-term renters.
Late last month, Judge Louise Gruner-Gans of Civil Court ruled that there was insufficient evidence to prove that the Leo House, which is affiliated with the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, was "operated exclusively for charitable purposes" and was thereby exempt from the city's rent-protection laws.


Elisabeth Kuhns, E. L. Babington Jr.
Elisabeth Ann Kuhns, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William G. Kuhns of Tenafly, N.J., was married yesterday to Edward Lawrence Babington Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Babington, also of Tenafly.
The Rev.
Craig W. Rule officiated at the Presbyterian Church at Tenafly.
Mrs.
Babington, 27, was until recently a promotion coordinator at Vogue magazine in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.
Her father retired as the chairman and chief executive of General Public Utilities in Parsippany, N.J.


Child Maltreatment Affects the Poor More
Myths die hard, and few myths seem to have as much staying power as the myth that "child abuse cuts across all social and economic lines" but, as the District Attorney candidate Jeanine Pirro puts it, "we see it more in poorer families only because they have more contact with government services"  [ "Child Abuse Drawing Closer Public Scrutiny," Sept. 12 ] .
Of course, there are some middle-class child abusers, but the evidence is overwhelming that poverty is by far the most important cause of child maltreatment.
The Federal Government's second Study of National Incidence and Prevalence of Child Abuse and Neglect found that physical abuse was at least five times more common among poor families and neglect was nearly 12 times more common among the poor.
Many other studies have produced similar results.


Apples And Oranges
To the Editor:
Ann Hornaday is off the mark in her evaluation of Telluride  [ "An Insider's Guide to the World of Film Festivals," Sept. 26 ] .
If Telluride is "fading gracefully," as she claims, it would be news to anyone who was there in either of the last two years, which were vintage by any standard.


The Pillar Of The Post
HERBLOCK: A CARTOONIST'S LIFE By Herbert Block.
Illustrated. 372 pp.
New York: A Lisa Drew Book/ Macmillan Publishing Company. $24.


Judaica Show At Emanu-El
The Judaica collection of Congregation Emanu-El will be on view from Oct. 20 to Nov. 21 at Temple Emanu-El, on Fifth Avenue at 65th Street.
Established on the Lower East Side in 1845, the Emanu-El congregation is the oldest Reform congregation in New York City.
Seventy-six objects will be on display in two large cases, one devoted to objects used in the temple, the other to those used at home.
Most of the temple's collection was donated by members of its congregation.


New Jersey Is Bellwether To Politicians Across U.S.
He may fret about the daily developments in Port-au-Prince and Mogadishu, but President Clinton is also keeping a watchful eye on this capital city.
"Usually, when I see the President the first thing he says is, 'How's my friend Jim doing?' " said Paul Begala, a White House adviser who is also a strategist for Gov.
Jim Florio's re-election campaign in New Jersey.
Although Mr.
Begala may have overstated the President's immersion in New Jersey politics, the outcome of the contest between Mr.
Florio and Christine Todd Whitman, his Republican challenger, is being watched intently by Republican and Democratic politicians nationally.
They are hoping to find signs of the viability of President Clinton's programs, as well as implications for statewide campaigns in 1994 and for Mr.
Clinton himself in 1996.


More Liquid Helps In Making Meatloaf
The article on meatloaf by Florence Fabricant  [ Food column: "Meatloaf, for the Back-to-Basics Crowd," Oct.3 ]  mentions her failure at her first attempt at it.
In my opinion the lack of sufficient liquid was the cause.
I use one egg to a pound of meat, plus seasoning, and about one tablespoon of bread crumbs.
For one-and-a-half pounds of meat, I use an additional half egg.
Just stir the egg slightly in a jar and then pour about half into the meat.
Seal the jar and refrigerate for another use.


THE NATION: Wanted: Hot Leads on Cold Cases; Now Bounty Hunters Can Make Out Like Bandits
THE prices on the "Wanted" posters are going up.
Earlier this month, the Federal Government offered $1 million to anyone who helps crack the 15-year-old "Unabom" case -- the hunt for the bomber whose parcels have maimed and killed executives and professors.


Ripe For Satire
To the Editor:
Like most of Martin Scorsese's films, "The Age of Innocence" has apparently generated considerable controversy  [ "In 'Age of Innocence,' Eternal Questions," Sept. 12 ] .
On the day I happened to watch the movie, PBS broadcast "The Great Waltz," a fictionalized version of the life of Johann Strauss II.
The films have the same plot and many of the same production values.


A Deluge of Foreign Assistance Fails To Revive Egypt's Stricken Economy
For nearly two decades, Egypt has been the beneficiary of one of the world's most ambitious assistance program, a multibillion-dollar rescue mission involving the United States' largest overseas aid operation since Vietnam, wealthy Arab neighbors, European creditors and international bankers.
All are committed to securing Cairo's political stability.
By any measure, these huge infusions of cash -- more than $35 billion in United States economic and military aid alone since 1975 -- have done much to reshape the Egyptian landscape.
The money has provided better roads and telephones, cleaner water and wider access to consumer goods.
Birth rates have declined, and life expectancy has risen.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
Long Island  DOING IT ALL: Jeff Compas carried the ball 21 times for 145 yards, 2 touchdowns and a 2-point conversion as GREAT NECK SOUTH (2-2) tripped up CALHOUN, 21-6. . . .
Lloyd Harrison had 282 total yards, including a 65-yard punt return and a 91-yard kickoff return, as SEWANHAKA (3-1) toppled KENNEDY BELLMORE (1-3), 24-7.
Harrison, who rushed for 114 yards, was one of nine players who combined for a total of 297 ground yards. . . .
Quarterback Peter Nazario (7 carries for 127 yards) rushed for 3 touchdowns as FARMINGDALE (3-1) outscored EAST MEADOW (1-3), 49-22. . . .
John Marcano had 21 carries for 140 yards and 4 touchdowns as PLAINEDGE (4-0) rocked ROSLYN (0-4), 52-30. . . .
Richard Cooper rushed for 2 touchdowns, of 68 and 23 yards, and threw a 12-yard scoring strike to Peter Rittenhouse as COPAIGUE (3-1) pounded NEWFIELD (0-4), 42-12.


Results Are Mixed In Fight Against Theft
The 19th Precinct has added extra police officers on the beat and new crime-prevention programs to battle theft, but with mixed success.
"Crimes of property" have always been the top offenses in the precinct, which runs from East 59th Street to 96th Street.
And though burglaries have declined by some 15 percent since the beginning of the year, car thefts have risen by 5 percent.
"Criminals know it's a prosperous neighborhood," said Deputy Inspector Peter J. Buccino, who heads the precinct.


No Violence at Supremacist March in Texas
A march and rally by a white supremacist group today drew about 300 supporters and protesters, but no violence.
A group from Mississippi, the Nationalist Movement, received a permit to hold the march after the last two black men living in a Federal housing complex moved from the all-white town because of racial taunts and harassment.
A Federal housing project here is one of 170 in East Texas under a Federal court desegregation order.


A Hotel Reopens In Key Biscayne
When Hurricane Andrew surged through south Florida last fall, Key Biscayne, Miami's island neighbor, was among the hardest hit communities.
Its three hotels, which drew around 200,000 visitors a year, sustained substantial damage, and were all closed.
On Oct. 1, Key Biscayne's 300-room Sonesta Beach Resort reopened after a $10 million renovation.
The hotel, whose grounds and interior had been devastated by the storm, now has sliding glass doors and balcony railings built to withstand winds up to 200 miles an hour.
The grounds have been replanted with salt-tolerant, wind-resistant native trees and shrubs.


Stepping into the Czardas A folk-dance tour in Budapest and Prague
ONLY hours after arriving in Budapest last March, I discovered what was unique about a folk-dance tour.
No sooner had we ordered dinner at Kalocsa Pince Csarda, a small restaurant on Baross Street, than our leader, Jim Gold, had us up and circling the minuscule dance floor, to the accompaniment of a gypsy orchestra.
An instructor from my local folk-dance classes in Westport, Conn., Jim had coached us earlier that evening in the basic steps: the czardas, a slide-together-slide side-step, and the rida, a circling step resembling the movement of a crippled stork.
"Don't worry if you do it wrong," he advised us.
"Hungarians love improvisation."


In a Politician's Eyes, Some Jobs Are Worthier
HERE is a case where economists and politicians part ways.
Economists say it should make no difference whether a worker was laid off by General Dynamics or by Woolworth -- whether a plant closed because of a specific change in Government policy like cuts in the defense budget or because of corporate mismanagement or the vagaries of the marketplace.
All laid-off workers, they say, deserve equal treatment.


Buses on a Roll
To the Editor: Having just returned from a three-week cross-country trip with my son during which we journeyed primarily by train, although we took one bus trip, I read with interest your article, "By Bus to the Berkshires" (Aug. 15).
We took the bus because we could not stand the thought of reboarding the Amtrak Zephyr after a scheduled 17-hour ride from Chicago to Denver took 30 hours.
It was not so much the delay, but the rudeness of the Amtrak personnel, the fact that the train was not cleaned and the lack of enforcement of the no-smoking areas.


Theater Shooting Raises Security Concerns
Standing in his jewelry store yesterday, across the street from a movie theater where a 19-year-old man was shot to death Friday night, Andy Daswani lamented what he sees as the decline of security along Brooklyn's bustling Fulton Mall.
"It's gotten worse," said Mr.
Daswani, who opened his store on the mall, Nu Castle Jewelers, 11 years ago.
"We are always on the lookout. People are being robbed every day -- in broad daylight. You have to have eyes in the back of your head."


Clinton's Remarks on Race Upheld King Legacy
To the Editor:
Paul Goldman accuses President Clinton of using racial "code-word politics," thereby betraying the legacy of the Rev.
Martin Luther King Jr. in the President's remarks in support of New York Mayor David N. Dinkins's re-election campaign (Op-Ed, Oct. 6).
In so doing, Mr.
Goldman seriously misconstrues both President Clinton's remarks and Dr.
King's legacy.


Indian Troops Surround Mosque in Kashmir
Heavily armed Indian troops surrounded the main mosque in the capital of the state of Jammu and Kashmir today, saying the mosque was filled with weapons and separatist Muslim guerrillas.
About 100 guerrillas were taking refuge in the Hazratbal Mosque in Srinagar, an army spokesman said.
About 1,000 soldiers were at the scene.


FLAG-WAVERING
The thesis that George Packer's generation can right the wrongs of the world by rediscovering patriotism does not even begin to identify the malaise to which he and they have succumbed (About Men: "Flag-Wavering," Sept. 12).
It is interesting that he chose to raise the shibboleth of Oliver North, who, in fact, put his finger on the problem when he stated that he lost his "moral compass," which is exactly what the members of this entire generation have lost.


At Last, Maybe, a New Beginning
City officials have agreed to begin talks with Community Board 4 on the long-stalled development of what is known as the Clinton Urban Renewal Area, a six-block section of tenements west of midtown Manhattan.
Some 2,000 people live or work in buildings on month-to-month leases in this rundown stretch (from 50th to 56th Streets between 10th and 11th Avenues), which was designated for renewal in 1969, nearly a quarter century ago.


Blaming the Bundesbank
All morning, the Mercedes and BMW limousines sweep up to the century-old hall of ceremonies in the Palmengarten, a park and botanical garden in Frankfurt not far from the Bundesbank.
The high and mighty of Europe's political and financial world climb out briskly, on their way to a changing of the guard.
Hans Tietmeyer is moving up from deputy to president of an institution that, for better or for worse, has been dominating European money matters for more than a decade.
Just as its decisions have electrified the politics of one country after another, its policies will ultimately determine whether European economic and monetary union happens at all.
Chancellor Helmut Kohl and Finance Minister Theo Waigel of Germany are on hand to pay tribute to Tietmeyer and to his predecessor, Helmut Schlesinger, during more than two hours of speeches interspersed with renditions of Schumann and Beethoven.
On this day, Oct. 1, Tietmeyer and his colleagues are in a convivial but somewhat defensive mood.
The British, the French, the Danes, the Belgians and other aggrieved Europeans have been blaming the Bundesbank, and its obsessive concern with curbing inflation, for wreaking havoc with the European Monetary System.
The Germans insist that one day the other Europeans will thank the Bundesbank for keeping the the German mark strong even though the high German interest rates that have kept it that way have also held Europe deep in recession.


Preserve, Protect
To the Sports Editor:
Pete Bodo's ("Historic Neversink River: A Legal Dispute Runs Through It" The Times, Oct. 3) suggests that Theodore Gordon Flyfishers advocates the use of eminent domain to acquire public fishing areas.
T.G.F. does not as a rule endorse the use of eminent domain for this or any other purpose; TGF does accept the courts' determination that the use of eminent domain to acquire both the hunting and fishing rights to the land already purchased by the State and the 1,067 acres on the west bank of the river is a legitimate exercise of state authority in this exceptional instance.


Esiason Turnaround at Key Turn
As his support system in Cincinnati slowly disintegrated around him in his last two years there, Boomer Esiason sometimes found his only solace over the telephone lines.
Many times the most reassuring voice belonged to Bruce Coslet.
"I talked to Bruce a lot," Esiason recalled.
"I said: 'Bruce I have to get out of here. I'm going to die if I don't get out of here.' "


TOPICAL FRUIT
Joan and Lydia Wilen are ecstatic.
The sister act behind "Live and Be Well," a book of food-filled folk cures for whatever ails you, have just discovered a prepackaged version of the sort of thing they've been cooking up for years: a sugar-and-lemon depilatory called Mim Natural Hair Remover.
And here's the beauty of it, Lydia says: "If all else fails, we could use it for the tea."
Not exactly appetizing, but right on target with the beauty industry's current menu.
Fueled by interest from the Snapple set, who crave exotic juices the way another generation once craved quiche, food is moving out of the kitchen and into the bathroom.
It's not the first time.
Soaking and steeping in carrot, avocado, papaya and mango is reminiscent of that 60's mantra "If it feels good, do it" -- which, back then, could mean anything, from the Wilen sisters' recipe for an avocado facial to sex, drugs and rock-and-roll.


Bookshelf
PERSEUS.
Retold and illustrated by Warwick Hutton.
McElderry/Macmillan. $14.95. (Ages 7 and up) This well-told version of the Greek myth is complemented by elegantly subtle watercolor illustrations.
MAKE LEMONADE.
By Virginia Euwer Wolff.
Holt. $15.95. (Ages 12 and up) Jolly, a single mother, tells the improbable story of her life with two young children and LaVaughn, the 14-year-old who becomes their baby sitter.
It's a fine novel that supports the old saying about having lemons and making lemonade.


Warm and Wet


Streetscapes/The Blum Apartment Houses; Deft, Nonconformist Touches, Many Since Vanished
GEORGE AND EDWARD BLUM formed one of the city's great nonconformist architectural firms, producing some of our most unusual apartment houses.
Now a new book by Andrew S. Dolkart and Susan Tunick, "George &amp; Edward Blum: Texture and Design in New York Apartment House Architecture," calls attention to their terra-cotta-and-tile buildings even as they are jeopardized by their own fragility and idiosyncrasy.
The Blum brothers put their studies at the Ecole des Beaux-Arts in Paris to unusual use: the nitty gritty field of speculative apartment house design.
This was -- and still is -- an industry that prizes economy and imitation rather than innovation and reflection: filing "dummy plans," the same set used over and over at the Department of Buildings, was a common practice.


Buses on a Roll
To the Editor: Lest your article on bus travel, "The Bus on a Roll Again," (Aug. 15) lure the guileless, I hasten to remind your readers that not all bus lines are the same; Greyhound is no Bonanza.
To begin with, the Greyhound number in the Boston directory leads to a recording saying the number is no longer in service.
If I were a foreign tourist instead of a native New Englander, would I know to dial 411?
Not that it would help much.
A busy signal is the usual response.
The person who answered was not much more helpful.
I did get some schedule information, but not a word about a discount for a three-day advance purchase.


Don't Lay the Burden of Health Care Reform on Small Business; Luckier With H.I.P.
To the Editor:
As an H.I.P. subscriber during my employment with New York City, and having belonged to four different H.I.P. groups during that time from 1950 to the present, I feel Vince Passaro's unfortunate experience is hardly typical of H.I.P. ("Better Try Not to Get Sick," Op-Ed, Oct. 11).
Mr.
Passaro reports that when he called H.I.P.'s emergency line during the Labor Day weekend, he didn't get a call back from a doctor until two hours later.


Lushly Russian


THE BAND PREENED ON
Frank Rich sums up the disappointment and anger many felt when they saw that HBO's "And the Band Played On" fell short of the powerful film it had the potential to be.


New Democracies for Old Europe
Why should the post-Communist countries of Europe seek membership in NATO?
Speaking for my country, I would say there are three main reasons.
First, the Czech Republic lies in the very center of Europe, which has traditionally been a crossroads for different spiritual trends and geopolitical interests.
Not a single major European conflict has left this area untouched in its thousand-year history.
Wars have started or ended on our territory, and the main threads of history have sometimes been wound together or unraveled here.
Our experience has taught us that we must take an interest in what goes on in the rest of Europe, for, like it or not, such matters always affect us more than they do many other countries.


Two Visions of Paint, Applied With Abandon
ESSENTIALLY, the subject of this review is paint -- as it is handled by two artists in their early 50's, Darryl Hughto and Stuart Shedletsky.
Mr.
Hughto's canvases -- 26 of them -- are at CS.
Schulte, a gallery that stands cheek by jowl with a Haagen-Dazs ice-cream parlor, at 340 Millburn Avenue, in Millburn.
On this occasion, the juxtaposition is apt for, as John Russell once remarked in a review, a Hughto show is like a meal consisting of desserts.
That was a decade ago, but little has changed.
In the present show, Mr.
Hughto is consistently figural -- not that it matters much, since he is clearly less concerned with content than with the surface effects obtainable with substances called iridescent and interference media.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
RIVERDALE The Autumn, First Hand, At Wave Hill Festival
For some city dwellers, the only evidence of the changing season is the sight of lonely brown leaves floating past apartment windows.
But the Wave Hill nature preserve has an alternative -- its annual Fall Festival of Leaves, including a foliage tour, a demonstration of herb uses and a performance by dancers emulating swirling leaves.


Jacobs Memorial Service
A memorial service for Melvin Jacobs, former chairman of Saks Fifth Avenue, who died on Oct. 6, will be held on Friday at 11 A.M. at Temple Emanu-El at Fifth Avenue and 65th Street in Manhattan.


Hideko Udagawa and Harvey Dzodin
Hideko Udagawa, a concert violinist, and Harvey Cary Dzodin, the vice president for commercial standards at Capital Cities/ABC Inc. in New York, are planning a December wedding.
Ms.
Udagawa is a daughter of Masako Udagawa of Toyko and the late Dr.
Kanehisa Udagawa.
She graduated from Tokyo University and studied at the Juilliard School.
Her father was an electronics professor at Nagoya University in Nagoya, Japan, and the author of 26 books on the subject.


Beyond Issues in County Executive Contest
IT was 1 P.M. on a recent Friday and Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky, a candidate for county executive, was on the steps of the County Office Building, demanding that state and Federal officials look into alleged misuse of a County Medical Center fund used for miscellaneous expenses.
Those who were alleged to have misused the fund were officials appointed by County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke, who is seeking re-election.
Mr.
Brodsky was doing what he hopes will win the election for him -- challenging.
Challenging and Governing
Mr.
O'Rourke, who has held the county's highest office for 11 years, was not in the building, however.
He was several miles away, sitting under a sugar maple tree at Muscoot Farm in Somers, a county-run working farm, flanked by supervisors and other officials from several towns in northern Westchester, issuing a warning that impending actions by New York City on its reservoirs in the county could have a devastating impact on local communities.


Changes Loom for a Corner of Greenwich Village
CHANGE is coming for one of Greenwich Village's most tranquil and historic enclaves, which includes the Village's oldest house, its narrowest house and the Cherry Lane Theater.
Four buildings, which border a private garden mews, have offers from young architects and other professionals that have been accepted by a family that has owned them for decades.
The Cherry Lane Theater itself -- a property that includes the last two buildings in New York City owned by the family -- was put on the market earlier this month.


Elena Kugler, Geoffrey Sands
Elena Kugler, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard C. Kugler of New Bedford, Mass., was married there yesterday to Geoffrey Keating Sands, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James Sands of Wawa, Pa.
The Rev.
G.
David Deppen performed the ceremony at Grace Episcopal Church.


Big Bets on Roasted Chicken
JOHN Y. BROWN JR. has seen this once before: in 1965, when he bought Kentucky Fried Chicken from Col.
Harland Sanders.
Two decades after selling it, Mr.
Brown is still enthusiastic about chicken -- but now it's roasted.
Two years after he co-founded Kenny Rogers Roasters with his friend, the country crooner, the privately held chain has 87 outlets in 25 states, and agreements to develop 300 more within three years.
The restaurants grossed more than $1 million each in 1992, compared with $684,000 at KFC's domestic company-owned stores.


The Mayoral Campaign -- At Issue: Fiscal Crisis; Needed: Honesty on the Budget
Crushing budget deficits await the winner of New York City's mayoral election, because city spending will continue to grow faster than revenue until someone makes painful cutbacks -- or pushes through painful tax increases.
The budget this year is $31 billion.
Projected deficits in the next few years rise to $2 billion a year, not counting new or expanded programs.
Band-Aids won't do.
Mayor David Dinkins and Rudolph Giuliani, his principal challenger, share an aversion to talking about cuts, so much so that neither says much about the need for radical surgery.
The Mayor stands on his record -- four balanced budgets in four difficult recession years.
Mr.
Giuliani stands on a wishful platform of spending cuts and tax cuts.


What Parson Rather Left Out of His Sermon
Courtesy demands that in musing over Dan Rather's recent criticisms of television news, one resist the conclusion that he had Connie Chung in mind.
After all, Mr.
Rather greeted his new partner with gallant affection when she arrived a few months ago to help him do a job that anchors down the years have managed to do single-handedly without visible strain.
So when he says now of the unnamed masters of his fate, "They've got us putting more and more fuzz and wuzz on the air," he cannot have in mind the undeniably decorative Ms.
Chung.
And when he accuses market researchers of subverting the judgment of professional journalists, he cannot be implying that she owes her new status to her popularity and the prospect that she may lift the "CBS Evening News" ratings.
By no means.


Winning Ways With Winter Squash
THE farm stands and markets are now overflowing with brightly colored winter squashes.
Summer squashes, mostly thin-skinned yellow ones or types of zucchini in green or gold, are more delicate than the sturdy, thick-skinned winter varieties.
Fall's crop ranges in color from nearly white to yellow, orange, green and even, in the case of some Hubbard varieties, battleship gray and blue.
They come striped and solid.
Some are round, some elongated and some are deeply ridged.
There are squashes with smooth skins and others that are warty.
They may be perfectly symmetrical or lopsided.


For New York Haitians, Hopes Are Deflated
Luc G. Olivier slumped glumly in the back of his cramped Brooklyn pharmacy, which like nearly every other Haitian-owned business in Flatbush displays a poster of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide in the window.
"This embargo is nothing," he said, referring to President Clinton's plan for economic pressure to force the Haitian military to restore Father Aristide as the President of Haiti.


Truth Wasn't Sexy Enough
ANAIS The Erotic Life of Anais Nin.
By Noel Riley Fitch.
Illustrated. 525 pp.
Boston: Little, Brown &amp; Company. $24.95.


Technology; New Respect for an Old Bell Vision
EVEN as mega-deals like last week's merger announcement by Bell Atlantic and Tele-Communications inspire futuristic visions of an information superhighway, the Bell companies are suddenly getting extra mileage from a technology that has been around since Jimmy Carter was in the White House.
The technology, known as I.S.D.N. and invented at A.T.&amp; T. Bell Laboratories in 1978, was once heralded as a modern digital replacement for conventional telephone service.
It would allow simultaneous voice and data services over a standard telephone line and be expandable to offer much higher data speeds for video in the future of optical fibers.
But for years, most consumers saw no need for I.S.D.N. -- short for Integrated Services Digital Network -- and the phone companies couldn't figure out how to sell it.


Buckeyes Score Late To Defeat Spartans
Ohio State 28, Michigan State 21
Raymont Harris scored on a 7-yard run with 1 minute 6 seconds left in the game as Ohio State overcame five turnovers to hold off Michigan State, 28-21, yesterday in Columbus, Ohio.


Caroline Sullivan, John M. Cathey
Caroline Harper Sullivan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William W. Sullivan 3d of Columbia, S.C., was married there yesterday to John Murray Cathey, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Sterling E. Cathey of Locust Valley, L.I.
The Rev.
Alan Avery performed the ceremony at St.
John's Episcopal Church.
Mrs.
Cathey is a fashion designer for the Carlisle Collection, a line of women's clothing, in New York.
She graduated from Hollins College.
Her father is the founder, president and chief executive of the Sullivan Agency, an advertising and public relations firm in Columbia.


THE WORLD: Haiti's Curse; Power Means Brutality; Practice Makes Perfect
FOR most of Haiti's history, the formula insuring its misery has been depressingly simple: a mulatto elite leaves politics to a professional class of brutal demagogues free to do what they will with the country as long as the elite's monopolies are untouched by the hand of government.
"Leave the rich alone to do what they've always done," says a disgruntled army officer in the recent novel of Haiti, "No Other Life," by Brian Moore, explaining the system perfected by the bloody, 29-year Duvalier family dictatorship.
"In turn, they're grateful for being spared and so they render unto Caesar."


Farrakhan Agrees to Postpone Rally Until After Election
The Rev.
Louis H. Farrakhan, the leader of the Nation of Islam, whose preachings have attracted support among some blacks but have infuriated many Jews, has postponed a large rally he had scheduled at Yankee Stadium on Oct. 30, three days before the New York City mayoral election, an aide announced yesterday.
The decision to postpone the rally by Mr.
Farrakhan, who once referred to Judaism as "a gutter religion" and who has made other anti-Semitic remarks, appeared to relieve Mayor David N. Dinkins of a politically awkward and possibly harmful situation on the eve of the election.


Quakers Perform According To Script
It is still too early to tell whether Pennsylvania is a legitimate contender to Princeton's claim on the Ivy League throne.
But after yesterday, one thing is certain: the Quakers are leagues above Columbia.
In front of a homecoming crowd of 8,605 at Wien Stadium, on an almost balmy October afternoon, the Lions played out an all-too-familiar script that featured the same story line and, of course, the same ending.
In the end, it all added up to yet another loss, this time by a score of 36-7.


Michigan Spoils Penn State Festivities
The scene was ripe: it was the 1,000th game in Penn State football history, played before the largest crowd in Beaver Stadium history (96,719), against the titan of a new conference, Michigan of the Big Ten, on a beautiful autumn afternoon.
But there was no pleasure in Happy Valley. The result: Wolverines 21, Nittany Lions 13.


Slava Hazin and Karen E. Field
Karen Ellen Field, the daughter of Doris and Arthur Field of New York, was married yesterday to Slava Hazin, a son of Milia and Asia Hazin of Singer Island, Fla.
Cantor Richard Botton performed the ceremony at the Harmonie Club in New York.
Mrs.
Hazin, 27, is a law student at Yeshiva University.
She graduated from Vassar College, as did her husband.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Shearman &amp; Sterling.


A FEW VERDICTS IN BEATING CASE
The jury in the trial of two black men accused of beating a white trucker during last year's riots here told the judge today that it had reached verdicts on some counts but was deadlocked on others, including some of the most serious.
The judge, John W. Ouderkirk of Superior Court, dismissed the jury until Monday, when he said he would read the verdicts in the racially charged trial.
He said he would also ask the jury to try to reach agreement on the charges on which it had deadlocked.


Wannstedt's Magic Changing Bears Into Gazelles
It happened Thursday during a Chicago Bears practice.
Quarterback Jim Harbaugh scrambled toward the sideline.
Trace Armstrong, the quick defensive end, raced after him and hit him, and both of them crashed into a cyclone fence.
Dave Wannstedt, the Bears' new coach, held his breath for a moment.
Then, when he saw no one was hurt, he smiled.
Here were two key players going all out in practice during a bye week.
His team was playing the way he had been preaching -- with enthusiasm, emotion and aggressiveness.


Even in Fall, It's Easy to Love a Crab
EVERYBODY gets all soft and squishy over crab apple trees in May, and no wonder.
Those clouds of fragrant pink, white and rose-red blossoms go straight to your heart -- and then, in one short week, fall like velvet snow.
"I always tell people this is the most romantic spot in New York," said Sarah Price, the curator of the Conservatory Garden in Central Park, on Fifth Avenue at 105th Street.
"The petals fall in your hair, and you listen to the bird songs."


Oct. 10-16: A Breather in Tokyo; Yeltsin Gets a Chance To Travel and Do Little
Boris N. Yeltsin visited Tokyo last week, a trip less notable for what was negotiated than for the fact that it happened.
Only a week after troops had shelled Russia's parliament to keep him in charge of the country's fitful journey toward democracy, he felt secure enough to keep a long-standing date.
Russia, under a state of emergency, stayed quiet.
Not that anything much was accomplished.
The basic obstacle was that Japan and Russia still haven't signed a peace treaty concluding World War II, having been stymied by a dispute over four sparsely inhabited islands seized by Soviet troops at war's end.


POSTINGS: Marketing Target: Foreign Missions; A 23-Story Office Tower To Go Up Opposite the U.N.
Who says there's no new commercial construction in New York?
Come April, the developers Anthony and Vincent Albanese are going to start building 871 United Nations Plaza, a 23-story, 100,000-square-foot office tower across the street from the United Nations.
And, displaying an optimism that is certainly uncharacteristic -- some might even say unrealistic -- in this glutted real estate environment, they expect it to be fully occupied by the time the building is up, probably in late 1995.


Time to Change Farmland Assessment
Given the documented statewide abuse of the New Jersey Farmland Assessment Act ("Farm or Fake? State Is Checking Up," Sept. 19), it is obvious that local, country and state officials have little capacity and/or the ethical fortitude to enforce this 1964 state constitutional amendment.
Illegal farmland assessment has become an important political perk offered under New Jersey's "justice and democracy for a select few" home rule system.
Farmland assessment is held by less than 2 percent of New Jersey's population but accounts for nearly 25 percent of the state's land mass.


Don't Lay the Burden of Health Care Reform on Small Business
To the Editor;
We are a "small" company in business for 40 years employing 80 people.
We have listened to President Clinton's health care reform proposal and agree that a plan covering all Americans is overdue.
However, the President is misguided if he plans to have small business pay the cost.


Clinton's Remarks on Race Upheld King Legacy; Dealing the Other Way
To the Editor:
President Clinton's claim that "too many of us are still too unwilling to vote for people who are different than we are" is more revealing than the President or Paul Goldman ought to be comfortable with: How many black people voted against New York's Mayor David N. Dinkins ("The Race Card," Op-Ed, Oct. 6)?
If we compare that figure with the percentage of white people who voted for him, Mr.
Clinton's assertion becomes an interesting faux pas.


Bonner Muscling His Way Into the Knicks' Picture
When Anthony Bonner left practice recently with a cut lip and a bloodshot eye, Doc Rivers couldn't resist making a comment.
"Welcome, Anthony," Rivers said with a smile. And Bonner, cut lip and all, smiled back.


Ms. Reifler, Capt. Schaefer
Dana Reifler, a lawyer, was married last evening to Capt.
Lawrence Schaefer, an assistant staff judge advocate with the Air Force.
Judge Howard Levine of the New York State Court of Appeals in Albany officiated at the Saratoga Sheraton Hotel in Saratoga Springs, N.Y.
Mrs.
Schaefer is an associate in Parkowski, Nobel &amp; Guerke in Dover, Del.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y., and she and her husband received a law degrees from Syracuse University.


Simms at 38: Unbroken And Also Unchanged
He is a quarterback who doubles as a walking piece of history, a player who has outlasted several presidents and countless pro football coaches.
Phil Simms is on a grand voyage that began as a first-round draft pick in 1979 and continues in 1993.
He is a slightly weathered piece of granite on a ride that has casually escaped the erosion of time.
Simms, 38, is currently in The Zone: His 94.9 quarterback rating is fourth in the National Football Conference and his eight touchdown passes are first.
Today, the Giants play the Philadelphia Eagles for first place in the the N.F.C.
East, with the Eagles being a team that Simms has not played well against.
Philadelphia will give this Simms rebirth its biggest test.


TENSION IS RISING AS HAITI MILITARY TIGHTENS ITS GRIP
Tension rose in Haiti today as the police and soldiers set up roadblocks throughout the capital and United States warships moved into position to enforce a United Nations embargo.
The moves by the Haitian military came one day after the deadline for the Army commander and the Port-au-Prince police chief to resign under a settlement intended to restore the deposed President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Forget the Butler; the Medical Industry Did It
"THE FUGITIVE" is one of the year's biggest hit movies, drawing rave reviews and, more important, crowds week after week.
Yet one central aspect of the movie seems to have eluded comment.
The movie's premise -- why the fugitive is a fugitive -- involves a drug company so evil that it distorts its research findings in an attempt to get a deadly drug on the market and will stop at nothing, even murder, to do so.
In "Jurassic Park," another blockbuster, the culprits are scientists: one who steals dinosaur embryos to sell them to a bioengineering rival, one who builds the theme park and another, an arrogant molecular geneticist, who not only creates dinosaurs but tries to make the species incapable of reproducing -- and fails.


Auteur


Ethnic Dishes in a Traditional Setting
AS a restaurant town, Danbury frequently surprises us, both for its ethnic range and its modest prices, among the lowest in Fairfield County.
New to the Danbury scene (since June) is David's Cafe, which follows the local pattern of moderate prices.
In its menu, David's Cafe follows no single ethnic theme, but offers Italian, French, Cajun and Asian dishes, as well as several cross-cultural combinations.
Descriptions of some dishes sounded curious, but turned out to be more conventional (and often far better) in reality.


J. M. Berberich, S. T. Murray
Jennifer Marie Berberich, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Dennis E. Berberich of Pelham, N.Y., was married yesterday to Stephen Thomas Murray, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph T. Murray of Wilmington, Del.
The Roman Catholic ceremony was officiated by the Rev.
Dr.
Dennis Keane at St.
Ignatius Loyola church in New York.
Mrs.
Murray is a development officer at the Metro West Medical Center in Natick, Mass.
She graduated from Villanova University.
Her father is the president and chief executive of the Coors Distributing Company of New York and the Canada Dry Bottling Company of New York, both in College Point, Queens.


Catherine B. Fay, John P. McCarthy
Mr. and Mrs.
Francis R. Fay Jr. of Mamaroneck, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Catherine Butler Fay to John Patrick McCarthy, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
J.
Thomas McCarthy of Los Angeles.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Fay, 27, is an associate promotions manager at Lever Brothers, in New York.
She and her fiance graduated from Georgetown University.
Her father is a vice president of the fixed-income department at Prudential Securities in New York.
Her mother, Carole Fay, teaches religion at the Ursuline School in New Rochelle, N.Y.


New Hamptons Film Series Aims High
A SNOB thing.
Rich people's sport.
Political self-promotion.
A tourist attraction.
Yes, it must be yet another film festival.
Darryl Macdonald concedes that there are such skeptical reactions -- "Just what the world needs, one more!" was his -- when asked to be artistic director of the first Hamptons International Film Festival, which begins on Wednesday and lasts through Sunday.


Susan E. Edgar, John Michaelson
Dr.
Susan Elizabeth Edgar, the executive director of the New York City School Volunteer Program Inc., a literacy program, was married yesterday to John Charles Michaelson, a managing director at Needham &amp; Company, an investment bank in New York.
The Rev.
Henry Shepherd, a Presbyterian minister, officiated at Christ Church in Warwick, Bermuda.
The bride graduated from Oberlin College and received a doctorate in education from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Robert T. Edgar of Brevard, N.C. and the late Katherine D. Edgar.
Mr.
Michaelson graduated from Oxford University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard University.
He is the son of Vera Michaelson of Bridgewater, Conn., and the late Benjamin Michaelson.


The New York Walk: Survival of the Fiercest
I KNOW better than to talk back to guys who hassle women on the street.
But on one weird August afternoon, I was caught in pedestrian gridlock in Times Square and the humidity turned my common sense to mush.
A young man so average-looking he belonged in a Nike commercial planted himself on the sidewalk in front of me, purposely blocking my path, and offered some not-poetic variation on "Hey, baby."
What I did next was something no short, slight, sane person should ever do: I stamped my little foot and snapped at him in unprintable terms to get out of my way, right now!
And while I was wondering why I had chosen a response that was both ineffectual and ridiculous, the street hassler smiled, stepped aside and said in a good-natured, singsong voice, "You're gonna learn to love me."


Palermo Watches, and Hopes
Two years, three months and nine days ago, Steve Palermo was shot in the back as he tried to foil a holdup in Arlington, Tex.
He hasn't umpired since, but he has counted the days since the incident.
The former American League umpire was here for the first game of the World Series tonight, walking with the help of two canes but fervently hoping for more in the near future.


3-Year-Old Is Hit by Buckshot in Brooklyn
Two people, including a 3-year-old boy playing on the street, were wounded yesterday after a man began shooting during a dispute in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, the police said.
They said the bullets were unusual: casings for a .357 revolver were apparently emptied of their lead slugs and filled with buckshot.
The police arrested Dejuma Campbell, 21, of 415 Lafayette Street, said Sgt.
Frances Haimeck, a police spokeswoman.


In Fashion, What's a Bit of Inconvenience?
NAME: Vivienne Westwood. IDENTITY: British fashion designer, 52.


Going the Extra Mile To Find Used LP's
To the Editor:
I guess I must have been one of the two women your writer spotted at Academy Books ("Single-Minded Shopping," Oct. 3).
However, as an avid collector of unusual opera recordings, I'm more often in that store for their excellent secondhand LP's.
The records are cheap, in good condition and are almost always accompanied by their original liner notes.
I like to think that their previous owners played them often, with care.


Auburn's Defense Stops Florida When It Counts
Auburn 38, Florida 35
Scott Etheridge kicked a 41-yard field goal with 1 minute 21 seconds left and Auburn's defense stopped Florida when it mattered most as the Tigers beat the previously unbeaten Gators, 38-35, in Auburn, Ala.


It's a Blue Jay Day, Technically and Tactically
Canada's premier baseball team won last year's World Series in a foreign land, depriving its fans of the immediate and up-close thrill.
But tonight the Toronto Blue Jays provided home-field ecstasy by taking a successful first step toward a second successive championship.
With timely and hefty hitting from Devon White, brilliant fielding from Roberto Alomar and stingy relief pitching from Al Leiter, the Blue Jays overcame Juan Guzman's shaky start and downed the Philadelphia Phillies, 8-5, in the first game of this year's World Series.
Toronto won last year's Series with a victory in Game 6 in Atlanta.


Paper and Children's Masks
SAMPLES of paper made from artichokes, day lilies and yuccas are marked "please touch" in an exhibition called "Papermade: N.J." at the New Jersey Designer Craftsmen Gallery in New Brunswick.
These plants were boiled, chopped in a blender and then spread on a framed screen to drip dry as paper pulp.
Paper, a big portion of the disposable litter of modern life, is turned into a valued craft medium in this exhibition and another current show.
The New Jersey Designer Craftsmen display includes flat and dimensional designs created of handmade paper by 29 artists.
"Face to Face," at the Monmouth Museum in Lincroft, is a fantasy show of masks made by schoolchildren, using paper and innovative materials not normally found among classroom art supplies.
Both shows are part of the statewide celebration of the Year of American Crafts.


Anger by the Numbers
Here it is: a list of some of the more common annoyances of life in New York, and who in city, state and Federal government to call when they happen to you.
AIRLINES  Delays, overbooking, rudeness U.S.
Department of Transportation, Office of Intergovernmental Affairs  . . . (202) 366-4000 Lost luggage  Federal Aviation Administration Public Affairs . . . (718) 553-2692
ANIMALS, BIRDS, INSECTS  Bites Animal Affairs Bureau . . . (212) 334-2618 Dead animals on the street Department of Sanitation  . . . (212) 219-8090 Pest-control problems City Department of Health  . . . (212) 442-1999 Pet-store animal deaths City Department of Health  . . . (212) 442-1999 DATING SERVICES  Department of Consumer Affairs  . . . (212) 487-4398 DRY CLEANERS  Damaged or lost items, sex discrimination in pricing, other problems: Neighborhood Cleaners Association
. . . (212) 967-3002 FOOD  Rotten, unwholesome or unsavory food sold in supermarkets State Department of Agriculture and Markets . . . (718) 260-2977 In restaurants or bakeries City Department of Health  . . . (212) 442-1999 Pricing violations Department of Consumer Affairs  . . . (212) 487-4398 Tampering or poisoning U.S.
Food and Drug Administration, Inspector General's line  . . . (800) 368-5779 F.B.I. . . . (212) 335-2700  GARBAGE  Non-pickup and other complaints City Sanitation Department  . . . (212) 219-8090 HOSPITALS  Complaints about municipal hospitals City Health and Hospitals Corporation . . . (212) 556-8100 Complaints about private hospitals City Department of Health, Hospital Unit . . . (212) 502-0855 MAIL  Mail fraud, obscene mail, service complaints U.S.
Postal Inspector . . . (212) 330-3844 Late delivery or nondelivery Postmaster, New York . . . (212) 330-3668 MOVING AND STORAGE  Overcharging, late delivery, damage, other problems Department of Consumer Affairs  . . . (212) 487-4398 SIDEWALKS  Cracked sidewalks, holes, etc.


Past Imperfect


SISTERS UNDER THE SKIN
I hope that in the 25 years that Audrey Edwards and Jo have maintained their cross-racial friendship they have also dispelled their own apparent prejudice toward lesbians (Hers: "Sisters Under the Skin," Sept. 19).
I grant that a straight woman might be forgiven for having had difficulty adjusting to a lesbian roommate when she was 18, in the 1960's.
But how come Edwards's essay still implies that there is some sort of moral equivalency between a minority sexual orientation and a minority-bashing Ku Klux Klan?
GLENN GORDON New York, N.Y.


An Appeal To Shoppers Is Rewarded
Adriana's Bazaar, an international cooking store on Broadway between 75th and 76th Streets, has been struggling to survive ever since Rochelle Zabarkes opened it two and a half years ago.
The store, big and airy behind a high teal awning, sells condiments, pottery and spices from around the world, like lemon grass, curries and dried peppers.


New Fund Tables: Ugh!
Sept. 19, this section introduced mutual fund tables that offer more data, but eliminated net asset values.
Many readers demanded the return of the N.A.V. figure.
In response to that demand, the Friday closing N.A.V. returns to the mutual fund tables this week.
The percentage change continues to appear, making it easier to compare different funds.
To the Editor:
Your new mutual fund historical performance data is interesting but of no value whatsover.
Give me back my prices!
WILLIAM J.C.
HUGHSON St.
Michaels, Md., Sept. 26


Jacqueline Lewis and Kirk Peters
Jacqueline Amanda Lewis, the daughter of Dr.
Sherwood C. Lewis and Gwendolyn Lewis of Bloomfield, Conn., was married yesterday to Kirk Winston Peters, the son of Chief Master Sgt.
William C. Peters and Arlene Peters of Springfield, Mass.
The Rev.
Dr.
Thomas Hoyt officiated at the Congregational ceremony at the Trinity College chapel in Hartford.
Mrs.
Peters is a doctoral student in communication at the University of Massachusetts.
She graduated from Spelman College and received a master's degree in communication from the University of Hartford.
Her father is the director of chemistry and toxicology at St.
Francis Hospital in Hartford.
Her mother is the coordinator of the AIDS Resource Center for the Connecticut Department of Public Health and Addiction Services in Hartford.


THE BUFFALO RETURNS, AS DINNER
People can be buffaloed into eating just about anything, if they can be sold a bill of goods about how ingesting that food may lower their cholesterol or reduce their fat-and-calorie intake ("The Buffalo Returns, This Time as Dinner," by Clifford D. May, Sept. 26).
The multimillionaire Will McFarlane's venture is just one more example of this.
NELL JANIK Hudson, Ohio


New Fund Tables: Ugh!
Sept. 19, this section introduced mutual fund tables that offer more data, but eliminated net asset values.
Many readers demanded the return of the N.A.V. figure.
In response to that demand, the Friday closing N.A.V. returns to the mutual fund tables this week.
The percentage change continues to appear, making it easier to compare different funds.
To the Editor:
This must be a high-ranking candidate for Worst Idea of the Year (if not decade) Award.
ULO L. SINBERG Barton, Vt., Sept.22


Towns Object to New Water Proposals
ALARMED by the extent to which New York City's proposed watershed-protection regulations would affect local municipalities' rights of self-determination, town supervisors from Bedford, Lewisboro, North Castle, North Salem, Somers and Yorktown met recently with County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke at Muscoot Farm in Somers to sign a letter of complaint to the city's commissioner of environmental protection.
Among other requests, the county and those municipalities have asked the city to provide financial support for the watershed towns' efforts at compliance, reasonable review deadlines and an appeals process, environmental standards that would be in line with state and Federal requirements and local enforcement protocols.


Christina Villante, Joseph Lunny Jr.
Christina Jennifer Villante, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Carmelo J. Villante of Harrison, N.Y., was married yesterday to Joseph Leonard Lunny Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Lunny of Ballwin, Mo.
The Rev.
Denis Mathews performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Lunny, 28, is an account supervisor at BBDO, the advertising agency, in New York.
She and her husband graduated from the College of the Holy Cross.
Her father, the former executive director of marketing and broadcasting for Major League Baseball, owns a sports marketing company in New York that bears his name.
Her mother, Marilyn Villante, is a watercolor artist.


Commercial Property: Downtown Manhattan; At Last, Prime Office Space Shows Signs of Demand
THESE last few years, the three words have been an almost obligatory codicil to any market comment.
Leasing activity is picking up except for downtown.
Rents are firming except for downtown.
Big blocks of space are scarce except for downtown.
Well, add another sentence to the list.
No one has a clue about whether the real estate market is really improving -- except for downtown.
While brokers and owners continue to waffle over whether midtown is doing better or worse or staying about the same, all seem to agree that prime space in downtown is enjoying a renaissance of sorts.


A Culinary Climb Up the West Side
BELLA LUNA (Diner's Journal)  (212) 877-2267; 584 Columbus Avenue, at 89th Street; $; AE


Corrections
A picture caption on the front page of The Metro Section, referring to the article, misstated the timing of the broadcast debate.
It was taped on Friday for broadcast tonight (on WCBS Radio at 8 P.M.); it was not broadcast live.


Wendy Marder, Milton Lewin
Wendy Jill Marder, a daughter of Ellen R. Marder of Tenafly, N.J., and Jerome M. Marder of New York, was married on Friday to Milton Ira Lewin, a son of Phillip S. Lewin of Tucson, Ariz., and the late Bernyce R. Lewin.
Rabbi Martin Pasternak performed the service in New York at the Box Tree, a restaurant.
The bride, 32, is keeping her name.
She is the national sales manager in New York for the sportswear division of Louis Feraud Inc. in Paris.
She graduated from Boston University.


Pages for Them, Pages for Us
To the Editor:
Betsy Israel sneered at the appearance of Her New York ("Pages Of Their Own?").
She suggested that it was demeaning for New York women to want their own newspaper.
She quoted Betsy Carter as saying, "If you announced a newspaper for men there'd be a terrible reaction."


Correction
An article on Sept. 26 about film festivals misstated the length of the Cannes festival.
It lasts 12 days, not a week.


Martha K. Ritter, Warren S. Chase
Martha Kingsley Ritter, a director of public affairs and communications for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, was married yesterday to Warren Stockbridge Chase, the New York director of International Energy Finance, an energy development and financing concern.
The Rev.
James L. Kidd performed the ceremony at the Asylum Hill Congregational Church in Hartford.
Ms.
Ritter, who is keeping her name, is also a writer and actress.
She and her husband graduated from Harvard University.


Corrections
The What's Doing column on Aug. 15, about Seattle, gave an outdated listing for one of two Gravity Bars.
A reader's letter dated Sept. 22 pointed out that in addition to a location on Broadway East, there is a Gravity Bar at 113 Virginia Street, not on Pine Street; its telephone number is (206) 448-8826.
The reader also pointed out that the column located the Pike Place Market imprecisely.
It covers about seven acres, bounded by Virginia and Pike Streets and First and Western Avenues; it is not simply at the north end of First Avenue.


Quebec Opens First Casino
Casino gambling has arrived in Quebec.
The first of two casinos in the province opened this month in Montreal in the Palais de la Civilisation, built for Expo '67 on Ile Ste.-Helene in the St.
Lawrence River.
Previously the building, which served as the French pavilion during the international exposition, housed visiting art exhibitions.
It has now been refurbished as a casino designed to accommodate 5,000 people, including 1,500 players.
Unlike casinos in Las Vegas and Atlantic City, the one in Montreal, managed by the provincial government under Loto-Quebec, the agency that has been offering daily and weekly lottery games since 1970, is not operating around the clock, a spokesman said, but is open every day from 11 A.M. to 3 A.M.
Among games being played at 65 tables are roulette, blackjack and baccarat.
There are also 1,200 slot machines.
Craps, however, will be absent, the spokesman said, because dice games are forbidden by law in Canada.


Life May Be a Madness, but It's Also a Poem
You can tell that Noel Pearson became a theatrical producer and not the priest he once thought he'd be by his two favorite words.
The first is madness, which he uses to describe everything from talent to the weather.
The second is delivered so often in his Irish brogue that it's almost a chant.
It rhymes with hooking, except when it rhymes with hook.
Actually, Mr.
Pearson inspired great choruses of this favorite word from the crew of the 1992 Tony Awards broadcast when he accepted the best play award for Brian Friel's "Dancing at Lughnasa." Mr.
Pearson had produced the play about five Irish sisters in the summer of 1937 first at the Abbey Theater here, where he had been the artistic director.
With the Tony show almost 15 minutes past its scheduled end, he pulled a book from his pocket and announced he would read "a wee short poem by William Butler Yeats, who founded the Abbey nearly 100 years ago."


Call That a 'Good' Job, Do You?
To the Editor:
I laughed out loud after calculating the annual before-tax income of the holders of the so-called good jobs as described in " 'Good' Jobs in Hard Times" (Oct. 3).


After Raid, Somalis Struggle With Anger and a Weariness
Halima Farah Mohammed, a 38-year-old policewoman who has worked with the United Nations mission here, was walking home on a Sunday afternoon when she heard the dull thumping sound of approaching helicopters.
At first she stared, she said, then started running when gunfire tore through the sky and hit the houses around her.
Her thought was to race first to her blind, elderly father's house to make sure that he was indoors, then next door to her own house to tell her four children to stay under cover.


Janet Watson, Eric Schwartz
Janet Lynn Watson, a daughter of Nancy Watson of Plano, Tex., and Wallis Watson of Denver, was married yesterday to Eric Allen Schwartz, a son of Alice Schwartz of Needham, Mass., and Edward Schwartz of Lincoln, Mass.
The Rev.
Charles Van Ausdall, a Congregational minister, officiated at the New Marlboro (Mass.) Meeting House.
Mrs.
Schwartz, 28, is a corporate finance associate at Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company, the investment bank in New York.
She graduated from Southern Methodist University.
Her father is an investment adviser at Stephenson &amp; Company in Denver.
Her mother is a broker for Ebby Halliday Realtors in Dallas.


Jennifer Weiss And Alan Wolf
Stephen Weiss of Port Jefferson, L.I., and Dr.
Rachelle Weiss of Chicago have announced the engagement of their daughter Jennifer Amy Weiss to Alan Neil Wolf, the son of Irwin Wolf of Great Neck, L.I., and the late Rosalyn Wolf.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Weiss is a grant writer for the American Civil Liberties Union Foundation in Manhattan.
She graduated from Lafayette College and received a law degree from the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law.
Her father is the chief executive of the S. B. Merit Company, a construction company in Yaphank, L.I.
Her mother is a research scientist for TAP Pharmaceuticals Inc., in Deerfield, Ill.


Homework Changes Timidity to Bravado
GO home and study was the alternative that Anatoly Karpov took when Jan Timman confronted him with the adventurous Vienna Variation of the Queen's Gambit in Game 4 of their version of the world championship.
Karpov, the former titleholder, would not risk a real fight; though he had White and the advantage of the first move, he played a toothless 20-move draw.
Ready after three days, Karpov took up the challenge and surprised Timman with a rarely played move that led to his victory in Game 6 in Arnhem, the Netherlands.
Then Timman countered with his own Vienna homework and made a draw in Game 8, but, of course, that could not wipe out his earlier zero.


SOAPBOX: On the Streets Where They Live; A Writer Finds A Way to Heal A Sore Heart
I WAS walking down Seventh Avenue into the garment district one summer afternoon, thinking, Any minute I'm going to lose my balance.
Heat had become haze, haze had become glare, the glare felt threatening.
I always imagine the city as impervious to weather, but whenever it's really hot or really cold the atmosphere becomes desperate.
Trucks grind their gears in panic; people look as though they can't remember whether to cross on the red or the green.


'The Big City Newcomer Blues'
I never thought that at the ripe old age of 28, I'd be shaking my head at "these kids today," but I was appalled at the young college graduates who voiced their views in your Sept. 26 article, headed "The Big City Newcomer Housing Blues," about finding their first apartments in New York City.
In particular, I was shocked at one woman's statement that $30,000 is "nothing here." When I moved to the city from Ohio in 1987, fresh from college with a degree in English Literature, I felt lucky to find a job as an administrative assistant paying $19,500.
I've managed to survive, living in and around Manhattan, even though it took me years to achieve a salary of $30,000.


Spit and Polish Is the Day's Agenda


Sports of The Times; King's Prescription Just Doesn't Add Up
TWO weeks ago, Don King, the promoter whose conflicts of interest are beyond the Marquis of Queensberry rules, offered in the Backtalk section of The New York Times what he described as a "pugilistic prescription" to help cure boxing's real ailments ("A Seven-Point Plan to Help Get Boxing Off the Canvas," The Times, Oct. 3).
Nowhere did the prescription suggest a remedy for one of boxing's most acute ailments: Don King himself.


Seeking Help and Enthusiasm in His Home Base, Dinkins Returns to Black Churches
Mayor David N. Dinkins has gone home to the black churches in this campaign, wooing the pastors and congregants who have sometimes felt taken for granted by the man they helped elect as New York City's first black Mayor.
In folksy stump speeches and closed-door meetings with hundreds of ministers, Mr.
Dinkins is working to convince black churchgoers that he has delivered for them on issues varying from health care to housing to the prevention of police brutality, and they are responding warmly.


Too Much Popularity Could Hurt Top Schools To the Editor:   Your Sept. 26 article, "For Schools, Best Isn't Always Best Known," offered a new performance scale to judge public schools, one that rules out the advantage of affluence.


Unmasking Roots of Washington Heights Violence; Residents Point to Overcrowding, Distrust of Police, Poverty and Thriving Drug Trade
After last summer's disturbances, a firebombing that injured two firefighters and the recent killing of a housing police officer, Moises Perez has a blunt reply to those who wonder just what is happening in Washington Heights.
"You think they're getting the message?" said Mr.
Perez, the executive director of Alianza Dominicana, a social service group in Washington Heights.
"They can't ignore us anymore. We need people to come here with real responses to these problems."


A Few Artless Minutes on '60 Minutes'
WATCHING MORLEY Safer's broadside against the contemporary art world on "60 Minutes" a few weeks ago, I felt transported in time.
To 1913, to be precise, the year the Armory Show introduced European modernism to a largely baffled American public.
When Mr.
Safer spoke about "worthless junk" and "the trash heap of art history" and, standing in front of a painting by Jean-Michel Basquiat, asked a group of teen-agers the familiar question -- couldn't they do better than that? -- I thought of one of the Armory Show's more vituperative critics.
He called it "stupefying in its vulgarity" and singled out Matisse for creating "patterns unworthy of the mere ignorance of little children and benighted savages . . . patterns insanely, repulsively depraved."
The Armory Show critic was, of course, Duncan Phillips, who in the years just after that exhibition became one of the most serious converts to modernism and one of the most perspicacious collectors of Matisse; in 1921 he founded the first museum in the United States dedicated to modern art, in Washington.
Phillips developed discrimination, precisely what Mr.
Safer's report lacked -- while at the same time it decried that lack in contemporary art circles.


From Book Collecting to Publishing
THERE are those who fantasize about turning a hobby into a business, and then there is David Siegel, who turned his lifelong interest in collecting books into a successful business.
A year and a half ago, David and Susan Siegel, doing all the research, writing and marketing themselves from an office in their Yorktown Heights house, started Book Hunter Press, which publishes regional guides to used, rare and antiquarian book dealers.


THE BEAT GOES ON
In a 1,000-word piece, Don Montague manages to describe his wife as a "dejected stranger" and a "bogus mate" and her pregnancy as "nine months of fevered anguish." I laughed, but uncomfortably, because he ridicules what is a sacred and profound process.
JONATHAN RUNNING WIND Brooklyn


New Fund Tables: Ugh!
Sept. 19, this section introduced mutual fund tables that offer more data, but eliminated net asset values.
Many readers demanded the return of the N.A.V. figure.
In response to that demand, the Friday closing N.A.V. returns to the mutual fund tables this week.
The percentage change continues to appear, making it easier to compare different funds.
To the Editor:
You insult the intelligence of your readers if you think that we cannot compute the change in net asset value from week to week and express this as a percent.
ROBERT C. PAULICK Durham, N.C., Sept. 22


And to Think That People Once Mocked the Victorians
Twenty-five years ago, Victorian was a term of disdain.
But with today's tastes running to the opulent, the Victorian proclivity for enrichment seems right in step.
In fact, as is evidenced by some of the more lavishly embellished items in "Toward Modern Design: Revival and Reform in Applied Arts 1850-1920" at the Cooper-Hewitt Museum, Victorian style is now viewed by some experts as the precursor of modern.
"Our concepts of the 19th century and of modern have changed," says David Revere McFadden, the museum's curator of decorative arts, who organized the show.
"Modern means design of the recent past and is no longer restricted to just pure form. Today the term also includes what seems like the entire history of ornament."


Autumn in Tuscany
FANNING OUT FROM the Arno River, the Tuscan hills seem made for autumn's caprice.
The landscape can be a gentle, languid roll, or it can jut into gray, balding peaks that are as overbearing as they are regal.
In the late summer, the hills are conjugations of the color green; as the air grows cooler, the oaks and figs and balsam trees conspire to make them a morphological vista of scarlet and orange, umber, tan and rose.
For all that, Tuscany is the part of Italy that changes least.
And perhaps it is the region's abiding sense of continuity that makes it the place you consider when life elsewhere seems too complicated.


Ms. Meirowitz and Mr. Nederlander
Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Meirowitz of Glen Cove, L.I., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Suzanne Beth Meirowitz, and Robert Elliott Nederlander Jr., a son of Caren Nederlander of Bloomfield Hills, Mich., and Mr.
Nederlander of New York.
A February wedding is planned.
Ms.
Meirowitz is a producer for the "CBS Evening News" in New York.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College.
Her father is president of Martin Meirowitz &amp; Company, a textile manufacturer in New York.


Train Buffs Have a Field Day at Harmon Shop


Illness as Metaphor


Military Principle Was Violated in Somalia
To the Editor:
The tragic U.S. losses in Somalia occurred because the United States Quick Reaction Forces there were under independent U.S. command.
They acted without notification to or coordination with the United Nations command.
This violation of the military requirement for command unity was the primary reason the Rangers were isolated for 12 hours and suffered extraordinary casualties.


Quebec Party Now Pursues Ottawa Role
Lucien Bouchard, a truck driver's son with a gift for oratory and the populist appeal of Ross Perot, is rattling federal politicians as he rolls up support in Quebec for a party aiming to prepare Canada for sovereignty for the province.
His Bloc Quebecois, competing in a federal election for the first time, gets the vote of Claude Labrie, age 33, a shipyard worker and union delegate at the wind-swept MIL Davie yard at Levis-Lauzon, on the south bank of the St.
Lawrence.
MIL Davie, with its payroll of 3,500, is not only one of Quebec's biggest employers but also its last shipbuilder.


Who Makes the Rules in Chinese Movies?
Chen Kaige, the director of the acclaimed film "Farewell My Concubine," shakes his head incredulously at the most bizarre episode of Chinese censorship in recent memory.
As one of the most important of China's so-called Fifth Generation directors, he understands what it is to push the limits of state censorship under Communist Party rule.
But "Concubine," his fifth film in 10 years, has set a record of sorts.
It was banned and unbanned twice as China was seeking international support to play host to the Olympic games in 2000.
It was also banned in democratic Taiwan, the home of Tomson Films, its producer, and a lucrative market for any Mandarin Chinese language film.
"This is not good for me," says Mr.
Chen.


Travels in Song


Editorial Notebook; The Perils of 'Nation Building'
Sending U.S. soldiers to poor and turbulent countries for "humanitarian" purposes is an old American story.
Equally familiar are years of frustrating debates on how the Marines can restore order, nurture civil society and protect U.S. interests without taking sides in the host country's internal quarrels.
The problem all along, of course, has been that soldiers are neither suited nor trained for these tasks.


Doubts About Dinkins in Canarsie Keep Area a Citadel for Giuliani
Like many people in Canarsie, Rose and Anthony Gardini feel downtrodden this election year.
The other day, the couple stood in front of their home, guarded by two pink flamingos and two big dogs named Muffin and Brandy, and spoke of a New York City where they say white people are increasingly locked out.
Of course, the Gardinis say, they are voting for Rudolph W. Giuliani.


83 Yards in 83 Seconds: Alabama Salvages a Tie
Throughout the stands in Legion Field, the joy at the climax of a last-minute Alabama comeback was suddenly replaced by the numbing realization that while the Crimson Tide had somehow found a way to survive the Tennessee Volunteers, they had not beaten them.
Jay Barker dived 1 yard at the end of an 83-yard drive he commanded with Alabama's undefeated streak in danger and then David Palmer replaced him at quarterback to sweep in for a 2-point conversion that tied the Volunteers, 17-17, today with just 21 seconds to go.


Wall Street; A Deal That Truly Was a Surprise
CALL it the stealth merger.
On Wall Street, where word of unannounced deals used to leak faster than a morning diaper, some news is suddenly, well, news.
Almost as noteworthy as the announcement Wednesday morning that Bell Atlantic and Tele-Communications Inc. would be engaging in the nation's biggest-ever merger was the fact that the parties to the transaction had managed to keep it quiet.


World Markets; OPEC Sits Atop Shaky Barrels
THE good news for OPEC is that oil prices stand about $2 per barrel higher since the oil cartel struck a deal in Geneva last month to rein in the runaway production of oil by some of its 12 member countries.
The bad news is that these higher oil prices are still roughly $3 a barrel below where they were a year ago.


Hunt for Volunteers Grows Harder in a Changing World
EVELYN M. STOCK has been volunteering for more than 25 years, but things have got out of hand.
Now the Scarsdale resident serves as president of the Westchester-Putnam School Boards Association, chairwoman of the county's Women's Advisory Committee and chairwoman of the Committee on Fair Campaign Practices.
She is also on the Board of Cooperative Educational Services of Southern Westchester and serves as first vice president of development for the New York State League of Women Voters.
"No one would have expected this of anybody 20 years ago," Mrs.
Stock said.
"Normally, you could do any one of these jobs and consider yourself very busy. I'm doing lots and lots of things that in other times would have been covered by five or six people. But the pool of people available to do volunteer work -- especially to take on big jobs -- has shrunk. There are days I feel like a dinosaur." A Decline in Active Membership
In fact, Mrs.
Stock represents an increasingly rare breed: the full-time female volunteer.
And volunteer organizations ranging from Junior Leagues to hospital auxiliaries are struggling to adapt themselves to the changing profile of their membership: working women who may not be willing or able to give large amounts of time to volunteering.


Shula Gets Married
Miami Dolphin Coach DON SHULA wed MARY ANNE STEPHENS on Friday night in a small, private ceremony at St.
Joseph's Catholic Church in Miami Beach.
Dorothy Shula, Shula's wife of 32 years, died in 1991.
Shula, 63, met Stephens, 48, a year later at a New Year's Day party at the golfer RAYMOND FLOYD's house. (AP)


Port-au-Prince: City of Many Divides
The hilltop suburbs of Petionville are dotted with gleaming white concrete two- and three-story houses, and the streets are dotted with art galleries, continental restaurants and discotheques.
At the bottom of that hill is Cite Soleil, a cluster of one-room houses built of cardboard and tin.
There, art is the multicolored murals on the streets, and a woman selling deep-fried pork and plantains in the street is the restaurants.
Loud music from cars provides a makeshift nightclub.


New Fund Tables: Ugh!
Sept. 19, this section introduced mutual fund tables that offer more data, but eliminated net asset values.
Many readers demanded the return of the N.A.V. figure.
In response to that demand, the Friday closing N.A.V. returns to the mutual fund tables this week.
The percentage change continues to appear, making it easier to compare different funds.
To the Editor:
Unacceptable. PROF. G. ERNEST ANDERSON Amherst, Mass., Sept. 19


Can Schools Curb Rising Bias Incidents?
"HOW many of you have ever witnessed a racial, ethnic, religious or sexual slur?" the speaker asked the students.
"If you have, stand up."
One by one, students rose, until every student filling the auditorium at Commack High School was standing.


Ann P. Scully, Rodney Malcolm
Ann P. Scully, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Brian J. Scully of Villanova, Pa., was married there yesterday to Rodney D. Malcolm, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Archibald D. Malcolm of Toronto.
The Rev.
Anthony M. Genovese performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Thomas of Villanova Chapel.


Have A #%!&amp;$@$! Day
IT'S rude out there.
Rude all over the place.
In the country that invented "Have a Nice Day," citizens now wear sweatshirts that scream "Back Off," or worse.
On the football field and on the basketball court, the old ideal of sportsmanlike conduct has degenerated into a fiesta of trash talk and aggressive taunting.
Since the 1940's, the Salvation Army has put out drop-off bins so that kindhearted citizens could donate old clothes and furniture.
Last month, it announced that it would retire the bins in eight Midwestern states because people were using them as Dumpsters.


Kerry Bohan, James Morton
Catherine Quinn Bohan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph P. Bohan Jr. of Larchmont, N.Y., was married yesterday to James Richard Morton, the foster son of Philip McSwiggin of Salem, Mass.
The Rev.
John Flynn officiated at Our Lady Star of the Sea Roman Catholic Church in Marblehead, Mass.
Mrs.
Morton, 32, is known as Kerry.
She is a manager for Olympia Sports, a sporting goods store in Peabody, Mass.
She graduated from Norwich University.


Workers Turn to Retraining as Military Cuts Jobs
Ever since he graduated from high school, Kevin M. McGowan has been welding huge steel plates on the hulls and decks of warships at the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard.
Now at the age of 38, he has to find something else to do with his life: the shipyard will be closing in two years.
But what can Mr.
McGowan do now that his highly technical skills are of little value because so few ships are built in this country?


A Culinary Victory at a World Equestrian Championship
WHILE Austria's equestrian team was outpointing competitors from 23 nations in the World Pair Driving Championship at the Hamilton Farm here, a winning performance by a 250-member culinary team from a hotel in Convent Station was going on behind the scenes.
Led by the unflappable Wolfgang Weichert, the executive chef of the Madison Hotel, the off-premises catering staff served thousands of meals during the five-day event, which was being held in this country for the first time.
The meals ranged from simple Continental breakfasts to elegant feasts attended by Prince Philip, the Duke of Edinburgh.


When a Big Brother's Reputation Helps
PICCOLO SOUTH has taken Atlantic Beach by storm.
At 10 P.M. on a recent Saturday diners were stacked three deep in the bar waiting for tables.
One weary woman asked, "Is this the only restaurant in town?" Just about.
In addition to its scant competition, the new Italian restaurant is benefiting from the reputation of its big brother, Piccolo of Huntington, a six-year veteran with a loyal following.


Q and A
Fear of Flying
Q.
Can you tell me if there are any fear-of-flying programs offered in the New York area? -- Alan Schlesinger, New York, N.Y.


THE WORLD: Somalia Interlude; A Prisoner's Release, A Moment's Peace
A FREED American helicopter pilot, held captive by a Somali militia since a big firefight two weeks ago, arrived home in the United States yesterday as thousands of fresh American troops moved into place in Mogadishu.
Their mission, however, is not yet clear.
The release of Chief Warrant Officer Michael Durant by the forces of Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid was a sign that tensions were easing.
His ordeal ended after a visit to Somalia by President Clinton's new envoy, Robert B. Oakley, who negotiated with General Aidid's associates but not directly with the fugitive general.


An Artist Who Spoke For the People
Perhaps more than anyone, Agnes de Mille, who died on Oct. 7 at the age of 88, made ballet a household word in America: she was the art form's chief populist and popularizer.
Anyone acquainted with the personal heritage she described so vividly in her many autobiographical books would realize how naturally she expressed these traits in her life and work.
The democratic streak that ran admirably through de Mille's ballets -- from "Rodeo," the masterpiece she created in 1942, to "The Informer" of 1988 -- came down from the principles of her maternal grandfather, the economist and social reformer Henry George.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York Senate
1.
Confirmation: Vote to confirm Walter E. Dellinger 3d as Assistant Attorney General for the office of legal counsel.
Approved 65 to 34, Oct. 13.
2.
Somalia: Vote to kill a resolution that would have forced the immediate withdrawal of American forces from Somalia.
Approved 61 to 38, Oct. 15.
3.
Somalia: Vote on passage of a resolution that would cut off funds for further U.S. operations in Somalia after March 31, essentially endorsing President Clinton's timetable.
Approved 76 to 23, Oct. 15.
Connecticut  Dodd (D) . . . .Y. . .Y. . .Y  Lieberman (D) . . . .Y. . .Y. . .Y  New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . . .Y. . .N. . .N  Lautenberg (D) . . . .Y. . .N. . .Y  New York  D'Amato (R) . . . .N. . .N. . .N  Moynihan (D) . . . .Y. . .Y. . .Y  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York House
1.
Arts: Vote on an amendment to a bill authorizing funds for Federal cultural agencies that would have abolished the National Endowment for the Arts.
Rejected 326 to 103, Oct. 14.
2.
Arts: Vote on passage of a bill authorizing funds for Federal cultural agencies including the National Endowment for the Arts.
Approved 304 to 119, Oct. 14.
3.
Unemployment Benefits: Vote on passage of a bill offering up to 13 weeks of additional payments to people who exhaust the basic six months of jobless benefits.
Approved 302 to 95, Oct. 15.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
2. Gejdenson (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
3. DeLauro (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
4. Shays (R) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
5. Franks (R) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
6. Johnson (R) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
2. Hughes (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
3. Saxton (R) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
4. Smith (R) . . . .Y. . .N. . .Y
5. Roukema (R) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
6. Pallone (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
7. Franks (R) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
8. Klein (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
9.
Torricelli (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  10.
Payne (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  11.
Gallo (R) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  12.
Zimmer (R) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  13.
Menendez (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
2. Lazio (R) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
3. King (R) . . . .Y. . .N. . .Y
4. Levy (R) . . . .Y. . .N. . .Y
5. Ackerman (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .A
6. Flake (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
7. Manton (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
8. Nadler (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y
9.
Schumer (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  10.
Towns (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .A  11.
Owens (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  12.
Velazquez (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  13.
Molinari (R) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  14.
Maloney (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  15.
Rangel (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  16.
Serrano (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  17.
Engel (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  18.
Lowey (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  19.
Fish (R) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  20.
Gilman (R) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  21.
McNulty (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  22.
Solomon (R) . . . .Y. . .N. . .Y  23.
Boehlert (R) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  24.
McHugh (R) . . . .Y. . .N. . .Y  25.
Walsh (R) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  26.
Hinchey (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  27.
Paxon (R) . . . .Y. . .N. . .Y  28.
Slaughter (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  29.
LaFalce (D) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  30.
Quinn (R) . . . .Y. . .N. . .Y  31.
Houghton (R) . . . .N. . .Y. . .Y  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Janet Wickenhaver and Tom Allon
FOUR years ago, Janet Wickenhaver was working as a freelance crime reporter and living alone in a railroad flat in Hoboken, N.J.
She jokingly called her apartment "the penthouse exercise suite" because you had to climb four flights of stairs to get to it.
When she wasn't covering murders or drug busts, her night life consisted mainly of playing poker with a close-knit group of other female journalists.
"I was militantly pursuing my singlehood," Ms.
Wickenhaver said.
"But it was beginning to crack."


The View From: Yale School of Music; A Season of Concerts Celebrates 100 Years of Musical Life
ONLY real pros could have pulled it off.
During the recent Norfolk Chamber Music Festival, held in conjunction with the Yale Summer School of Music, the cellist of the Cleveland String Quartet was led on stage by Joan Panetti and shakily announced to the audience that he was too ill to continue the concert and was leaving immediately for the hospital.
Professor Panetti, who is director of the festival and the summer school, did not let the audience down.
She pulled Yale School of Music faculty members out of their seats in the music shed, culled music scores and within minutes had put together a new program that incorporated faculty, the remaining members of the Cleveland String Quartet, current students and even an alumnus.


Clinton's Remarks on Race Upheld King Legacy; Dealing the Other Way
To the Editor:
President Clinton's claim that "too many of us are still too unwilling to vote for people who are different than we are" is more revealing than the President or Paul Goldman ought to be comfortable with: How many black people voted against New York's Mayor David N. Dinkins ("The Race Card," Op-Ed, Oct. 6)?
If we compare that figure with the percentage of white people who voted for him, Mr.
Clinton's assertion becomes an interesting faux pas.


Woe Is Not Me
WEARY NEWS clerks humming "Ol' Man River" have been hauling into my office great bales of mail containing reader protests about a piece in this space on predicate nominatives.
Most people manage to get through life without bothering their heads about the predicate nominative, which is the noun or pronoun embedded in a sentence's action section after a linking verb, like mail-puller in "You are a mail-puller." But there is a breed of language lover that clasps this grammatical category to its bosom, and insists with purist fervor on the nominative "I am he" rather than the sloppily objective "I am him," which is the choice of easygoing Norma Loquendi and me.


Oct. 10-16: 'Her or Us'; A Juror Is Removed In L.A.'s Riot Trial
The trial of two men accused of beating a truck driver during last year's riots in Los Angeles took a turn last week that surprised legal scholars and offered a glimpse into the role that personality can play in the privacy of a jury room.
In the midst of deliberations, the forewoman told the judge that she and 10 other jurors found it impossible to work with the 12th.
"It's her or us," the forewoman told Judge John Ouderkirk of Superior Court.


Elizabeth Vitton And Jeffrey Kelly
Elizabeth Ann Vitton, a senior editor at the Children's Television Workshop, was married yesterday to Jeffrey Paul Kelly, a vice president at C S First Boston.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
James C. L. Arimond performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Vassar College Chapel in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
Mrs.
Kelly graduated from Vassar.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John J. Vitton Jr. of Omaha.


After 20 Years, America's Foot Is Still On the Gas
TWENTY years after the Arab oil embargo, after the gas lines, after the fist fights, after the nation's promise to itself to do better, some things have changed.
Mostly they've gotten worse.
The United States today uses almost as much oil as it did then, but imports 44.6 percent of it, up from 37.2 percent in 1973.
At the time of the embargo, 5.3 percent of the oil used here came from Arab members of Opec; now it is 11.6 percent.
Then our largest supplier was Venezuela, which is geographically and culturally close to the United States; now it is Saudi Arabia, which is neither.


IN SHORT: FICTION
SON OF FLETCH By Gregory McDonald. Putnam, $19.95.


Who Are You Calling a Drunk?
To the Editor:
To this 20-year resident of Corofin, in County Clare, Ireland, Peter Finn's review of Rosemary Maho ney's "Whoredom in Kimmage" (Aug. 29) ignores the obvious.
This book is an ethnic and sexist assault on our highly respected village and its decent people.
Her "research," limited largely to just one pub and one family, extrapolates venomously to a community composed predominantly of superstitious, obscene and unemployed drunkards with repellent physical features, seedy clothing and illegitimate babies.
She conveys an image of rural Ireland that is grossly inaccurate.


Tech Notes; Computerizing the Clunker
COMPUTERS work well in new cars to reduce air pollution, but what can be done with old ones, especially in third world countries where old models predominate?
In those lands, where often the only gasoline is leaded, catalytic converters are not practical.
A start-up company in Maryland won a patent last week for a device that cleans car exhaust and reduces fuel consumption by harnessing a computerized sensor to an old-fashioned carburetor.
The system can continually adjust the air-fuel mixture, making it as lean as possible at any given instant without hindering the engine's performance.
It can also work with fuel-injected cars.


The Numbers Prove That Ward Is Healthy
It was a well-kept secret this week that Charlie Ward, Florida State's Heisman-candidate quarterback, did no passing in practice, the result of a mild case of tendinitis.
So much for any concerns the Seminoles may have had about Ward's sharpness today against Virginia.
Ward produced 322 passing yards and 3 touchdowns and even ran for a score in Florida State's rollicking 40-14 victory before 76,607 at Doak Campbell Stadium.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
MAGIC LANTERN
An authentic re-creation of a raucous Victorian magic lantern Halloween show will be presented next weekend at the Ivoryton Playhouse by Terry Borton and his American Magic Lantern Theater, based in East Haddam.


Seesaw Game Tips Scarlet Knights' Way
A particular victory or defeat midway through the schedule can direct a team for the rest of the season.
Add the intensity of two hungry schools, each trying to bolster its program, and you have all the drama of college football even without the television cameras and national rankings.
It was that kind of afternoon at West Point.


Corrections
The On Sunday column last week misspelled the name of a brand of imported olive oil used by Patsy Grimaldi, the owner of a Brooklyn pizzeria.
It is Filippo Berio.


The Celebration of Passion
MARGUERITE YOURCENAR Inventing a Life.
By Josyane Savigneau.
Translated by Joan E. Howard.
Illustrated. 527 pp.
Chicago: The University of Chicago Press. $25.


Jerome Sill, Radio Executive, 88
Jerome Sill, a former radio executive and later publisher of The Scarsdale (N.Y.) Inquirer, a weekly newspaper, died on Tuesday at the Boca Raton Community Hospital in Boca Raton, Fla.
He was 88.
Mr. Sill died of complications of a lung infection, said his son, Peter.


'20 Bucks,' A Film 58 Years Aborning
The movie "20 Bucks" is unusual not just because of its premise -- the plot follows a $20 bill as it passes through the hands of wildly disparate individuals -- but because the film has been nearly 60 years in the making.
The original screenplay was written in 1935 by a producer named Endre Bohem (pronounced BO-heem), but when it did not sell he put it on the shelf.
Not until 1981 did he dust it off and show it to his son, Les, a full-time musician and part-time screenwriter whose credits include "A Nightmare on Elm Street 5: The Dream Child."


The Reservation Is His Beat
SACRED CLOWNS  By Tony Hillerman. 305 pp. New York: HarperCollins Publishers. $23.


THE BUFFALO RETURNS, AS DINNER
Buffalo may be a good source of protein and iron, but you don't have to kill to obtain these nutrients: a dish of beans, a whole-grain roll and a green salad will give you the same protein and iron as a piece of buffalo meat does, but without the saturated fat or cholesterol, without salmonella or E. coli and without the cruelty inherent in animal "farming."


South Street Seaport: Just Another Mall?
CAPTAIN HOOK'S has a smidgen of everything: a ship in a bottle goes for $9.99.
Some wooden ship models fetch in excess of $2,000.
A fish scale marketed as a nail file is one way to spend 59 cents.
Resembling nothing so much as a dusty, cluttered attic, this old-salt emporium in South Street Seaport is fighting for its life.
Captain Hook's monthly rent has been increased from $2,000 to $19,780.62, and its owner, a lifelong maritime hobbyist turned mall merchant named Joe Hill, is hopping mad, fuming that he can't pay nearly that much.
Moreover, he insists that he shouldn't.
He is suing the Rouse Company, developer of South Street Seaport Marketplace, claiming that his eviction would violate Rouse's promise to maintain a maritime flavor.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Penguins Beat Whalers Kevin Stevens scored his first goal of the season and Martin Straka got his league-leading eighth last night as the Penguins beat Hartford, 5-3, in Pittsburgh.
Goaltender Tom Barrasso, who hadn't played since Oct. 7 because of a strained groin muscle, got his first victory.
His counterpart, Frank Pietrangelo, gave up goals on three of the first five shots he faced. (AP)


Reflecting Pools
LAST Tuesday, at the new Asphalt Green Aquacenter on East 90th Street, Esther Williams emerged from a sea-blue limousine in an electric-blue pants suit and sequin vest.
"I was at Barneys today," she said as she was escorted to the Olympic-size pool at the nonprofit sports complex.
"And I saw seven floors of nothing but black. I like a little color."
Miss Williams, 70, is a Beverly Hills-style Auntie Mame, a come-on-in-the-water's-fine kind of person, who has sparkling green eyes clear enough to swim in.


SONGS OF A WIRED CAVE'
We appreciated Richard B. Woodward's article "Songs of a Wired 'Cave' " (Sept. 12), which described the four-year journey of Steve Reich and Beryl Korot in the creation of their music-video theater work.
It is important to note that "The Cave" received financing early on from the National Endowment for the Arts.
The N.E.A. came through for us when assistance and recognition were sorely needed.
RENEE LEVINE Producer, "The Cave" Baltimore


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a question in the Wall Street column last Sunday, about mutual fund regulation, referred incorrectly to the status of wrap accounts, in which large investors pay a percentage fee for money management.
Barry P. Barbash, the new director of the Division of Investment Management of the Securities and Exchange Commission, said such accounts are not regulated as heavily as mutual funds.


Ms. Olmsted, Mr. Grossman
Mrs.
Jonathan M. Wainwright and Robert M. Olmsted, both of New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter Katharine Harvey Olmsted to John Andrew Grossman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Allen Grossman of Falls Village, Conn.
A May wedding is planned.
Ms.
Olmsted, 22, graduated from Princeton University.
She is a lecturer at the Cloisters museum in Manhattan.
Her father is an adviser for Auchincloss &amp; Lawrence, investment advisers in New York.
Her mother, Candy Wainwright, and the prospective bridegroom's mother, Jane Grossman, are the founders and former owners of the Travellers Bookstore in New York.


A la Carte; It's Time Once Again for Those Mouth-Watering Oktoberfests
THIS is the season of spatzel, schnitzel, sauerkraut, special beers, accordion music and merriment at the handful of German restaurants on Long Island.
It is Oktoberfest time, and at the Smithtown Haus, the Pine Grove Inn in Patchogue, Koenig's in Floral Park and a half-dozen or so other German enclaves, once-a-year dishes and beer are again available.


My Dog, My Self
Andrea Grill gets reminded often enough that there are less maddening places to raise Curry (and Midnight before her) than a sparse 15th-floor apartment in Murray Hill.
Dizzy with a raging fever and flu, she had to go walk her.
When she fractured her pelvis last fall, she had to hire a walker at $5 a walk twice a day.
The walker did not do nights, so she had to pay another service $15 for a night walk.
The Fourth of July fireworks mean a trip to the vet for tranquilizers.
When it snows, the salt sprinkled on sidewalks burns the paws, and so she has to swaddle Curry's feet in plastic bags.
Don't ask about the elevator operator's strike.
Midnight had worms every summer for thee years and had to visit the vet every few weeks.
Curry has worms right now.
"Yes, it would really be nice if we all lived on farms with trees," said Ms.
Grill, an advertising copywriter.
"But some of us have to live in crummy studio apartments with no view. I really love her, and I couldn't live without her. For me, not having a dog is like not having a refrigerator."


Bassett Hall in Virginia Reopens
Bassett Hall, the 18th-century house that once belonged to the Rockefeller family, reopened this month in Williamsburg, Va., after being closed since January 1992 for renovations.
The project added a new reception area and a theater, where a videotaped presentation on the house is shown.
Set in 585 acres of woodlands, the house was bought in the late 1920's by the philanthropist John D. Rockefeller Jr., who financed the restoration of the old Colonial capital, Williamsburg, and his wife, Abby Aldrich.
After moving into Bassett Hall in 1936, the Rockefellers furnished the house with an eclectic collection of Asian, American and English antiques.
Mrs.
Rockefeller collected American folk art, including weather vanes, chalkware and pottery, which can be seen both at Bassett Hall and the Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Folk Art Center in Williamsburg.
Visitors, guided by portable audio tape players, can tour the house and the grounds, where they will see the Rockefellers' tea house, their gardens and a 300-year-old giant oak.


Princeton Defense Holds Its Own, and Lehigh as Well
Keith Elias ran for more than 100 yards for the 10th consecutive game today, but the defense turned in the most important heroics as Princeton beat Lehigh, 31-23, to remain undefeated.
The Tiger defensive unit, ranked fourth nationally in Division I-AA, stopped Lehigh at the 25, 7 and 10 in the first half, twice on fourth-and-1 and once on a fumble.
That may well have made the difference as Lehigh (4-2) rallied from a 17-0 deficit to pull within 17-14 early in the fourth quarter.
The rally was led by the Engineers' outstanding quarterback, Scott Semptimphelter, who connected on 25 of 45 passes for 403 yards and 3 touchdowns.
The passing yardage was the most Princeton has given up in its 124-year football history.


'The Morning After'
To the Editor:
Wendy Kaminer calls Katie Roiphe's book "brave" and speaks of Ms.
Roiphe's "nerve" as an author.


A Message That's Wicked But Fun
The archetypal witch's hat is made of nylon satin, costs $3.99 with or without acrylic hair attached and would make an excellent anonymous Halloween gift for unpleasant acquaintances, co-workers or bosses.


THE BAND PREENED ON
Yes, it is discouraging that much of the power of Randy Shilts's book was diluted by Hollywood's usual underestimation of what the American public will tolerate.
But the real power of the movie was its validation (however late) for people like me.
There is a community of survivors within this epidemic.
Before the age of the red ribbon, there was a small but active army of people caring for those we knew and loved, as well as volunteering to care for those we had never met before.
For years, it seemed as if AIDS was something that existed only in our world.


Trade You Two Robert Solows for a J.K. Galbraith
JERRY HAUSMAN.
Didn't he play third base for the Padres in the early 80's?
Great glove man, but never learned to hit a screwball?
No way.
He's an economist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Invented something called the Hausman specification test that propelled him into the big leagues of number-crunching.
More important, it got him into the elite group of 29 "Economist Greats" whose trading cards are sold by the economics club at the University of Michigan at Flint.
The price: $5 a set.


Strangled by Gaslight
A SUDDEN, FEARFUL DEATH By Anne Perry. 383 pp. New York:  Fawcett Columbine. $20.


The Yuppies Come Out To Paint Up And Fix Up
John Kelly spends most of his time in a Manhattan skyscraper, dressed in a suit, his ear fused to a phone, his eyes fixed on computer screens as he tracks fixed-income bonds from Chile and stocks in Taiwan for Citibank.
Yesterday, he wore an oversized red sweatshirt and old jeans to give a school fence in Brooklyn its first coat of paint in 30 years.
"I volunteered to come here today because I think if enough people try to make a small difference, together we can make a big difference," he said.
Then he paused, and, watching a big glob of paint slide off the fence and onto the sidewalk, remarked, "Of course, it's really the thought that counts."


Teaching Teachers To Inspire Students
For the first time in 27 years, Kay Toliver did not introduce herself to a new class of youngsters when school started last month.
Ms.
Toliver, who has taught at Public School 72 in East Harlem since she was a student teacher, was instead installed in an undecorated classroom on the fifth floor, waiting for her new charges: teachers.
Ms.
Toliver, who has won several local and national teaching awards, is the new staff developer at P.S. 72 and at East Harlem Tech, a small junior high school in P.S. 72's building on East 104th Street.


Qatar Makes a Move To Be a 'Sports Capital'
Qatar has free medical care, free education and free electricity.
It has minarets, plenty of oil and an enormous natural gas field to the north that should guarantee its affluence well into the next century.
What Qatar lacks is name recognition, and that is exactly why six of the best soccer teams in Asia are gathered here until Oct. 28 to decide the continent's two participants in the World Cup next year.


Winning Ways With Winter Squash
THE farm stands and markets are now overflowing with brightly colored winter squashes.
Summer squashes, mostly thin-skinned yellow ones or types of zucchini in green or gold, are more delicate than the sturdy, thick-skinned winter varieties.
Fall's crop ranges in color from nearly white to yellow, orange, green and even, in the case of some Hubbard varieties, battleship gray and blue.
They come striped and solid.
Some are round, some elongated and some are deeply ridged.
There are squashes with smooth skins and others that are warty.
They may be perfectly symmetrical or lopsided.


Manager's Profile
Gary L. Pilgrim Fund: PBHG Growth, $35 million in assets; manager since 1985 inception; (Sponsor: Pilgrim, Baxter &amp; Associates, Wayne, Pa.).


Sasha Badanjak, W. R. McGleughlin 3d
Aleksandra Badanjak, a film student in Zurich, was married yesterday to William Robert McGleughlin 3d, a film maker there.
They were married in a civil ceremony in Zurich's city hall.
Mrs.
McGleughlin, who is known as Sasha, graduated from the Schauspielakademie drama school in Zurich and from the University of Zurich, where she is a doctoral candidate in film studies.
She is the daughter of Jelena Schmid-Tomasevic of Walchwil, Switzerland, and Aleksander Badanjak of Belgrade, Yugoslavia.
Her parents are retired journalists.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Anne Gorman, David Randell Jr.
Mrs.
William B. Gorman Jr. of White Plains has announced the engagement of her daughter Anne Kiley Gorman and David MacDougall Randell Jr., the son of Toinette Tucker of New York and Mr.
Randell Sr. of Portsmouth, N.H.
A November wedding is planned.


The Anxieties of Childbirth in 'Da Da'
"YOU'RE still not sure, are you?" Karen asks David as he times her contractions in the delivery room while maneuvering ice cubes and sourballs, the familiar aids for fumbling fathers-to-be who were trained in the Lamaze method of natural childbirth.
Now, a playwright can structure a play any way he wants as long as the play works.
When the play does not work, as "Da Da" at the American Stage Company does not, one tends to disbelieve its premise and question its raison d'etre.


PACT CALLED KEY TO LOWER IMPORTS
President Clinton, in his most vigorous promotion of the North American Free Trade Agreement since the formal signing of labor and environmental safeguards in mid-September, warned today that failure to ratify the deal could isolate the United States and flood it with imported goods.
"Without Nafta, one of our best markets, Mexico, could turn to Japan and Europe to make a sweetheart deal for trade," the President said in his weekly radio address.
"Without Nafta, Mexico could well become an export platform, allowing more products from Japan and Europe into America. Why would we want that to happen?"


D. L. DePasquale, Dana T. Milbank
Donna Lynn DePasquale, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony J. DePasquale of North Haven, Conn., was married yesterday to Dana Timothy Milbank, a son of Ann C. Milbank of Merrick, L.I., and Mark A. Milbank of Greenwich, Conn.
The Rev.
David Baranowski, a Roman Catholic priest, and Rabbi Steven Mason performed the ceremony at the Battell Chapel in New Haven.
Mrs.
Milbank and her husband, both 25, graduated cum laude from Yale University.
She was until recently a marketing manager with Citibank in New York and is to become a product manager with the bank's London office later this month.
Her father is a model maker at O. F. Mossberg &amp; Sons, a gun manufacturer in North Haven.


Habitats/S.R.O.; New Deal for Old Hotel
THERE is the unmistakable bustle of a construction site as carpenters coated with plaster dust hop over electrical cables running along the floor in the lobby of the Narragansett, a single-room-occupancy hotel at 93d Street and Broadway in Manhattan.
Within a few months, the lobby, with its austere glass-partitioned front desk, will become much more elegant, with a concierge's desk in the corner inside the front door.
Burgundy carpet salvaged from the Russian Tea Room will be used to redecorate the rooms.
Kitchens are being installed on each of the 11 upper floors.


A Man Who Lives in Two Glass Houses
Glass, the early German modernists believed, would launch a cultural revolution.
Glass walls would not only change the look of buildings.
They would transform the lives of those who lived inside them.
Stripped of the opaque, protective cover afforded by old-fashioned masonry buildings, civilization would advance toward a light-filled realm of freedom and candor.
Philip Johnson lives in two glass houses.
One is the landmark residence in New Canaan, Conn., he designed for himself in 1949.
The other is the fishbowl of fame that he has inhabited most of his life.
And in Johnson's case, at least, it turns out that the early modernists may have had a point.
Even those who detest Johnson and his architecture will grant his disarming candor.
Always quicker than his critics to concede his faults, Johnson long ago perfected the art of self-deprecation as a shield against attacks by others.
When an architect routinely belittles his own work, calls himself a whore and makes no secret of the fascist sympathies that overtook him in the 1930's, where's the fun in trying to take him down a peg or two?


Bibb Bailey, Shawn Coyne
Bibb Bailey, the daughter of Peyton Budinger of Provincetown, Mass., and Lynn G. Bailey of La Canada, Calif., was married yesterday to Shawn Coyne, a son of Mary Jo and Patrick Coyne of Pittsburgh.
The Rev.
James R. Covington, a Unitarian minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony in the Conservatory Garden in Central Park.
The bride, an actress in New York, graduated from New York University.
Her mother is a journalist, textbook author and former editor at Bride's and Glamour magazines in New York.
The bride's father, who retired as a senior executive and director at the New York investment bank of Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, now teaches at La Canada High School.


Late at Night, The 'Watchers' Patrol Streets
At 10:30 on a crisp fall night Chaim Deutch slid behind the wheel of his run-down brown Cutlass to begin patrolling the residential streets of Flatbush.
He usually drives alone, but on this night he had a partner, Nathan Szpilzinger.
The two are the leaders of a growing civilian patrol in Flatbush.
Three years old, with 500 volunteers, mostly Orthodox Jews, the group five months ago added a team of about 20 people who patrol the streets alone in cars, on a rotating basis, until 4 or 5 A.M.
There are as many as six cars on the streets almost every night, five marked with white reflective signs and flashing yellow lights, one unmarked.


Teresa Muench, H. E. Russell
Mr. and Mrs.
Robert Muench of Carefree, Ariz., have announced the engagement of their daughter Teresa Louis Muench to H. Edward Russell, a son of Harris E. Russell and Stephanie S. DeForest, both of Southport, Conn.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Muench is an account supervisor at Lintas Worldwide, the advertising agency in New York.
She graduated from the University of Hartford.
Her father, now retired, was an engineering manager with Saudi Aramco, the oil company in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia.


How the Foliage Drama of Fall Unfolds
THIS is the time of year when practically everyone drives along a favorite route to see the foliage colors.
Local residents, who have to endure the traffic jams, refer to them as the leafers.
Quite often friends gather in car pools and meet at a designated location.
Then they leave their cars to hike through the woods, eager to reach that special place where they know the view of the fall foliage will be fantastic.
Each enjoys this seasonal phenomenon in his or her own way, but rare is the individual who does not respond to this natural autumn beauty.


When We Build It, Will They Come?
OVER the last decade, a little-known company called C.U.C.
International has built a big business in "shopping clubs" that give members information and discounts on everything from new cars to Caribbean cruises.
It has done this mostly the old-fashioned way -- using direct mail and toll-free "800" telephone numbers.
But now, the Stamford, Conn., company is moving onto the electronic superhighway.
Teaming up with Time Warner Inc. and Viacom Inc., C.U.C. is about to offer interactive-video shopping services.


Arnold. Sly. Kevin. Jeff?: THE RELUCTANT STAR
Amid the charred rubble that litters Copley Square in Boston, Jeff Bridges scrambles to his feet.
Playing a bomb-squad officer who has been knocked flat by an explosion, he is rehearsing a scene in which he rises up, horrified, to survey the damage.
As he figures out how he will move during the sequence, he also worries about the other matters that usually concern actors: how he will look and how he will sound.
His makeup man holds a mirror, and Bridges periodically gives himself an appraising stare.
What interests him about his reflection is dirt.
He studies the soot on his face with the utmost interest.
Earlier, while the makeup was being applied, Bridges feigned the exact grimace he would use on camera, cowering at the sight of an imaginary fireball.
When he relaxes his face now, it is lined with white streaks, places where the grime didn't go.
The effect is hardly flattering, but is authentic, so it passes muster.


Helena Palmer, Stefan Gatterburg
Helena Isabel Palmer, the director of the child development center at the Mark Twain Village European Headquarters of the United States Army in Heidelberg, Germany, was married yesterday to Count Stefan Gatterburg, a consultant in computer software support and training at OCR Datensystem, a computer consulting company in Mannheim, Germany.
The Rev.
Joachim von Kerssenbrock performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Francis Church in South Lee, Mass.
Countess Gatterburg, 30, graduated cum laude from Harvard University, from which she also received a master's degree in education.
She is the daughter of Walter deKay Palmer of Tyringham, Mass., and Elisabeth G. Palmer of New York.
Her father is a financial adviser in Tyringham.
Her mother is a senior vice president and the head of the Latin American art department of Christie's in New York.


Terri Coppersmith and Ned Brown
Terri Coppersmith, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Coppersmith of Coconut Grove, Fla., was married yesterday to Ned Brown, a son of Mrs.
Richard Cragg of Winnetka, Ill., and Edmund Brown of Bellaire, Mich.
Rabbi Jerry Heller performed the ceremony at the Pratt Mansions in New York.
Ms.
Coppersmith is keeping her name.
She is an account supervisor with Wunderman Cato Johnson, a direct-marketing and promotion agency in New York.
She graduated summa cum laude from Boston University.
Her father recently retired as executive vice president and chief financial officer of DWG Corporation, a holding company and conglomerate in Miami Beach.
Her mother is a social worker in Miami with the Children's Home Society of Florida.


BEST SELLERS: October 17, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
62
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
3
LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching Hour."
3
1
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.) Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
4
3
3
SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $23.) Two Navajo tribal policemen undertake to unravel a web of politics and murder.
5
4
8
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
6
5
6
THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) A sequel to "Griffin &amp; Sabine."
7
6
27
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
8
7
31
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
9
9
6
STRIP TEASE, by Carl Hiaasen. (Knopf, $21.) The problems, political and sexual, of a Florida Congressman.
10
13
3
POT OF GOLD, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon, $23.) A single mother and her teen-age daughter go on a spree after winning $60 million in a lottery.
11
8
10
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and woman and for the woman's first lover.
12
10
11
STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a train robber and killer.
13
11
39
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through illustrated cards and letters.
14
12
17
PIGS IN HEAVEN, by Barbara Kingsolver. (HarperCollins, $22.) The stresses and strains that befall a mother and her adopted Cherokee daughter.
15
1
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) A woman's effort to solve the mystery of a child's death takes her from Copenhagen to Greenland.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
6
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
2
2
23
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
3
3
8
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior by a novelist and anthropologist.
4
7
2
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
5
4
62
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
6
6
14
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their effects on a person's self.
7
5
9
MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Essays suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected ways and places.
8
8
19
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
9
11
3
THE FOUNTAIN OF AGE, by Betty Friedan. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A call for men and women to regard life after age 60 as an exciting adventure.
10*
14
2
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Reflections on 43 years of marriage.
11
10
3
MORE MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Putnam, $21.95.) Stories about country music stars from the host of the "Nashville Now" television show.
12
9
44
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
13
13
5
CASE CLOSED, by Gerald Posner. (Random House, $25.) A reassessment of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy.
14
12
2
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
15
1
OLD FRIENDS, by Tracy Kidder. (Todd/Houghton Mifflin, $22.95.) Life in a Massachusetts nursing home.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
2
22
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Ways to improve communication and relationships between the sexes.
2
1
12
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
3
1
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
4
4
16
EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Counsel about diet.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 2, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
ACROSS THE BRIDGE: Stories, by Mavis Gallant. (Random House, $19.) In these 11 lucid urban stories, most of which are set in Paris or Montreal, Mrs.
Gallant's wit and exactitude subvert the antiquity of her material.
THE CULTURE OF DISBELIEF: How American Law and Politics Trivialize Religious Devotion, by Stephen L. Carter. (Basic Books, $25.) A professor of law at Yale examines what he calls a 20-year-old tendency to ban religion from public discourse, and argues that a just balance of mutually respectful forces should be restored.
THE DEBATE ON THE CONSTITUTION: Federalist and Antifederalist Speeches, Articles, and Letters During the Struggle Over Ratification, edited by Bernard Bailyn. (Library of America, 2 vols., $70.) Proof that our founding document came by debate, not divine revelation; we owe much to its opponents, who were no fools.
THE ENDANGERED AMERICAN DREAM: How to Stop the United States From Becoming a Third World Country and How to Win the Geo-Economic Struggle for Industrial Supremacy, by Edward N. Luttwak. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24.) A plea, or more accurately a demand, for an economic diplomacy red in tooth and claw.
THE GIRL WHO TROD ON A LOAF, by Kathryn Davis. (Knopf, $23.) A heated, dramatic novel narrated by Francie, an underachieving composer who finds redemption by completing an inherited unfinished opera.
THE HOLDER OF THE WORLD, by Bharati Mukherjee. (Knopf, $22.) A woman of today celebrates the life of a woman who lived three centuries ago and across two cultures in this brilliantly conceived and executed novel.
LIFE WORK, by Donald Hall. (Beacon, $15.) Donald Hall, a poet and writer who has done many things well and who now, at 65, faces a mortal illness, tells us what he thinks matters about himself in this sort-of-autobiography.
THE PEACEABLE KINGDOM: Stories, by Francine Prose. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $20.) Eleven stories, smartly observed and deftly written, present the weird jungle of modern life through the eyes of a wry and mordant writer.
TRAVELS WITH LIZBETH, by Lars Eighner. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) A writer who until very recently made homelessness his full-time job has found a strikingly unconventional voice and form to deal with life as the literate don't normally live it.
THE WARBURGS: The Twentieth-Century Odyssey of a Remarkable Jewish Family, by Ron Chernow. (Random House, $30.) Mr.
Chernow's vast Warburg saga follows the fates of a rich, thoroughly secularized German Jewish family betrayed by the nation and culture they loved.
WORKERS: An Archaeology of the Industrial Age, by Sebastiao Salgado. (Aperture, $100.) Pictures by a Brazilian photojournalist of the labors of humanity around the world, especially where hands and backs still do the work; many are beautiful, many appalling, many both.


THE BAND PREENED ON
I watched "Band" with a friend who had never been associated on a personal level with anyone who was gay, let alone understood the anguish of watching a vital human being deteriorate with AIDS.
At the end of the movie, she turned to me in tears and said, "I never knew." The conversation that followed was a kaleidoscope of fear, anger and futility, but, most of all, compassion and understanding.
My hope is that the discussion I shared with my friend took place in homes all over the country.
That was the point of the film.
TRACY A. BURTON New York, N.Y.


Deborah Rasin, David Jacobson
Deborah Sue Rasin, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Carl Rasin of Delray Beach, Fla., was married on Monday to David Ira Jacobson, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Charles H. Jacobson of Edison, N.J.
Rabbi Shoshana Perry officiated at Le Chateau in South Salem, N.Y.
The bride is a senior vice president of the Bank of New York.
She graduated from the University of Virginia and received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
Her father retired as the head of obstetrics and gynecology at the Passaic (N.J.) General Hospital.


Oct. 10-16: Talking Peace; Israel and the P.L.O. Pass Another Milestone On a Tortuous Road
The meter was running last week for Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Their Sept. 13 agreement in principle to create Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank and Gaza Strip went into effect Wednesday, and with that came the start of complex talks on how Israel will carry out a troop withdrawal to begin by Dec. 13 in Gaza and Jericho.
Handshakes on the White House lawn may be fine, but success or failure now lies in nailing down thousands of details.
How big is the Jericho district?
Will Israeli soldiers patrol surrounding roads?
Will Palestinian police officers work with the Israeli Army against terrorists?


Driving Out Prostitution, With a Law to Seize Cars
On a back street in Connecticut's largest city, potential customers are gazing out the windows of their cars, trying to decide whether to make a deal for sex with the women standing provocatively on opposite corners.
It doesn't take long for the driver of a long, silver vehicle to offer one woman $10 for sex.
But within seconds, vice unit police officers, sitting in unmarked cars a short distance away, descend on the scene to arrest the man and confiscate his car.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about deposed Haitian officials in Washington watching President Clinton's televised announcement of the dispatch of warships to Haiti misidentified Michael Barnes.
He is a Washington lawyer who advises the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, not an aide to President Clinton.
In some copies, the caption also failed to identify the man seated in the center of the picture.
He was President Aristide.


Hunt for Volunteers Grows Harder in a Changing World
EVELYN M. STOCK has been volunteering for more than 25 years, but things have got out of hand.
Now the Scarsdale resident serves as president of the Westchester-Putnam School Boards Association, chairwoman of the county's Women's Advisory Committee and chairwoman of the Committee on Fair Campaign Practices.
She is also on the Board of Cooperative Educational Services of Southern Westchester and serves as first vice president of development for the New York State League of Women Voters.
"No one would have expected this of anybody 20 years ago," Mrs.
Stock said.
"Normally, you could do any one of these jobs and consider yourself very busy. I'm doing lots and lots of things that in other times would have been covered by five or six people. But the pool of people available to do volunteer work -- especially to take on big jobs -- has shrunk. There are days I feel like a dinosaur." A Decline in Active Membership
In fact, Mrs.
Stock represents an increasingly rare breed: the full-time female volunteer.
And volunteer organizations ranging from Junior Leagues to hospital auxiliaries are struggling to adapt themselves to the changing profile of their membership: working women who may not be willing or able to give large amounts of time to volunteering.


Lilian Manger, Porter Fleming
Lilian Wade Manger, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
William M. Manger of New York, was married yesterday to Porter Farrar Fleming, the son of Mrs.
S.
Robert Weltz Jr. of Santa Barbara, Calif., and the late David W. Fleming.
The Rev.
Dr.
Mark S. Anschutz officiated at St.
James' Episcopal Church in New York.
The Rev.
Dr.
R.
Maurice Boyd, a Presbyterian minister, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Fleming teaches reading at the Buckley School in New York.
She graduated from Hollins College.
Her father, an internist and the chairman of National Hypertension Association, is a professor of clinical medicine at the New York University Medical Center.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Sunday Driving
TO take a spin in Barry Bienstock's car, you have to share the front seat with a fire extinguisher.
And buckling up for safety means being strapped into a harness with so many clasps that it is as if you are in a fighter jet.
But then for those who drive four-cylinder cars, Mr.
Bienstock's Ferrari is like a jet.
In seconds it was going more than 100 miles an hour.


Municipalities Are Pushing a 90-Mile Trail
WITH some of the year's best hiking weather occurring now, and cross-country-skiing time approaching, the county has announced its latest effort to link pieces of a continuous recreational trail system in Westchester, which when completed will begin in Yonkers and continue to the Putnam County line.
The newest link, the fifth phase of the North County Trailway, will be more than three miles long and will go from Route 134 near the Kitchawan Preserve in Yorktown to Railroad Station Park in Yorktown Heights.
It is being paid for with $2.2 million in Federal and state money and is scheduled to open to hikers by August 1995, County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke said.


THE WORLD: Roll Over, Ho Chi Minh; Vietnam Moves From Clenched Fists to Greased Palms
FOR an increasingly corrupt city, Hanoi retains an innocent charm.
A request to meet with a government functionary in virtually any other capital in Southeast Asia -- from Bangkok to Jakarta to Phnom Penh -- commonly produces a fellow who, on a pittance of a government salary, somehow manages to drive a Mercedes and to vacation in the south of France.
In the streets of the Vietnamese capital, there are almost no fancy cars.
And when Government officials agree to be interviewed they often as not arrive for the meeting out of breath, having pedaled a rickety bicycle across town.


Eine Kleine Kopfmusik
No one doubts that music hath charms, and now scientists at U.C.L.A. have found evidence of it: indications that at least some music can make a listener temporarily smarter.
In a report published last week by the British scientific journal Nature, a group headed by Dr.
Frances H. Rauscher, a psychologist, described tests administered to 36 volunteer students that suggested this provocative (and probably controversial) conclusion.
A nonverbal I.Q. test was given immediately after three listening sessions: ten minutes of Mozart's Sonata for Two Pianos in D Major (K. 448), ten minutes of a "relaxation tape" with a soothing male voice, and ten minutes of silence.


POSTINGS: Interest Drops to 5.9%; Sonyma Raises Income Limits
The State of New York Mortgage Agency has renovated its Low Interest Rate Mortgage Program, raising income-eligibility ceilings in all 62 counties and lowering the interest floor.
The income limits, based on statistics on median income in each area supplied by the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development, vary county by county and according to family size.
They are also are higher for people purchasing homes in what are called target areas, neighborhoods targeted for economic development, than they are elsewhere.


Finishing Off Edith Wharton
THE BUCCANEERS By Edith Wharton.
Completed by Marion Mainwaring. 406 pp.
New York: Viking. $22.
FAST AND LOOSE and THE BUCCANEERS By Edith Wharton.
Edited by Viola Hopkins Winner. 514 pp.
Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia.
Cloth, $49.50.
Paper, $14.95.


One Man's Meat
To the Editor:
"N.Y.P.D. Blue"  [ "A Splash of Red for 'N.Y.P.D. Blue,' " Sept. 19 ]  is one of the most offensive television programs I have ever watched.
But the offense it causes me stems only in part from its nudity and language.
Rather, it is the misogynistic, woman-bashing attitude that permeated the show that disturbed me profoundly.
This show offers the implicit message that women are untrustworthy, that they are good for only one thing (sex), that true love and trust can exist only between two stalwart, brave men, and that sexual intimacy with women leads to the downfall of courageous men.
STEVEN KAPLAN  Sarasota, Fla.


How the Foliage Drama of Fall Unfolds
THIS is the time of year when practically everyone drives along a favorite route to see the foliage colors.
Local residents, who have to endure the traffic jams, refer to them as the leafers.
Quite often friends gather in car pools and meet at a designated location.
Then they leave their cars to hike through the woods, eager to reach that special place where they know the view of the fall foliage will be fantastic.
Each enjoys this seasonal phenomenon in his or her own way, but rare is the individual who does not respond to this natural autumn beauty.


Going Gentle Toward 2000
The European collections have answered fashion's unspoken question, Where do we go from spare?
On a blank background, designers are beginning to scribble the silhouette of the end of the century: fragile shoulders; long, fluid lines; graceful drapes; airy fabrics; a wash of dusty pastel colors.
It is more like a sketch than a final image -- a misty Polaroid on its way to definition.
Something had to change.
Minimalism, that powerful process of cleansing and purifying fashion's excess, just had no place to go.
In the hands of the avant-garde it had turned negative, nihilistic and sour.
And even if one needs a hangover cure for an overstuffed wardrobe, there has to be more to dressing than a rack of black pants suits and plain white T-shirts.
As Mies van der Rohe would not have put it: less is a bore.


Jacob Mishler, Old-Fashioned Judge 'Who Understands Real Life'
PEOPLE tell him that he resembles George Burns. But he says he thinks he looks better.
At 82, Judge Jacob J. Mishler of Federal District Court is as sharp as judges half his age, and he says he has no plans to step down from the bench soon.
"I suppose some lawyers feel a judge shouldn't sit on the bench after age 76," he said.
"But I haven't heard any complaints. I think Justice Holmes was in his 90's when he stepped down, and no one thought he lacked a judicial mind or judicial capacity."


Nona Balaban and Spencer Kroll
Dr. and Mrs.
Philip Balaban of Fair Haven, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Nona Balaban, to Dr.
Spencer Daniel Kroll, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Kroll of East Hills, L.I.
A December wedding is planned.
Miss Balaban, 26, graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and is a third-year law student at American University.
Her father is a senior research scientist at A.T.&amp; T. Bell Laboratories in Holmdel, N.J.


Southern California Approves 'Smog Market' Plan
In the most ambitious effort yet to use free-market forces to clean up urban smog, regulators here have approved a long-awaited plan to allow companies to buy and sell the rights to pollute in the same way baseball cards and pork bellies are traded.
The new regulatory approach, approved on Friday by the South Coast Air Quality Management District, establishes pollution allowances for 390 of the region's largest polluters, which each emit more than four tons a year of either nitrogen oxides or sulfur oxides, the two main ingredients of Southern California's brown haze.


Business Diary: October 10 - 15
COMPANIES On the Fabled Data Highway, One Paving Crew Is All Set  This is big.
This, like it or not, is the "information superhighway" about to be made real.
When Bell Atlantic and Tele-Communications announced their merger -- a tangled affair, as you can see -- superlatives abounded.
At $33 billion, it may (depending on the math) be the biggest merger ever, bigger even than the mythic RJR Nabisco deal.
And to hear John Malone of T.C.I. tell it, this grand-scale marriage of cable and telephone wizardry will change people's lives, making possible a single device "to control all the communications needs of a household," from making a phone call to renting a movie to getting the news.
But let's not take off for the future just yet; not everyone's aboard.
A "mega-monster" that will be costly to consumers, Senator Howard Metzenbaum said of the deal.
"A regulatory nightmare," one analyst said.
Just one hurdle: Baby Bells are barred from going into long distance, and the deal would poise Bell Atlantic to do just that.
So don't hold your breath.


Video Refinements Come at a Price
Ever since the economic clouds settled in, a paradoxical pattern of consumer spending has been emerging.
Sales of Jaguar cars have more than doubled.
And in video luxury items sell briskly while economy models languish.
Whatever conclusions can be drawn from this, the point is not lost on the video industry, which lately has concentrated on clever but often costly refinements.
Symptomatic of this trend is the growing number of camcorders equipped with viewfinders that show the image in color.Their utility is questionable.
After all, it is just as easy and much cheaper to compose a picture in black and white in the viewfinder as long as the result shows up in color on the tape.


In America; Murder Redux
I will never forget walking into the courtyard of the school where the voting was to have taken place and seeing the freshly murdered bodies strewn about, and hearing the moans, the last few minutes of suffering, of those who had not quite died but soon would.
That was in November 1987, at the Ecole Nationale Argentine Bellegarde in Port-au-Prince.
I was with about a dozen reporters and photographers covering one of Haiti's periodic attempts at democracy.
We had planned to interview some of the desperately poor Haitians who were thrilled to be lining up early on a Sunday morning, dressed in their finest, for the right to vote in a real election.


No Headline
You go to a doctor when you're born, when you have babies, when you get really sick, and just before you die.
Otherwise, if you're lucky, you stay out of the medical system. - DR.
DONALD PATRICK, professor of health services at the University of Washington.  [ 22:3. ]


Edible Souvenirs
To the Editor: We read with delight Susan Allen Toth's "On English Supermarket Shelves, Edible Souvenirs" (Aug. 22).
Our own travels have led us to these observations about English comestibles as souvenirs.
Terry's Tap and Unwrap Chocolate Oranges (milk or dark chocolate) are not only easily packed, but also easily procured, available at almost any corner store or train station.
Prices are lower outside of London.
Another favorite, and winner of the dry humor in marketing award, is McVitie's Rich Tea Biscuits, the wrapper of which contends, "A drink's too wet without one."


New Jordan Rules
To the Sports Editor:
Robert Lipsyte appears to miss the greater symbolism of Michael Jordan's retirement.
First, he focuses obsessively on Jordan's little "you guys" slight toward reporters.
Then in "Jordan's Retirement Puts the Reality in Our Court," (The Times, Oct. 10), Lipsyte makes a largely irrelevant comparison between athletes and other media icons.
The enormity of Michael Jordan's retirement, and its meaning for most of the rest of us, lies in the fact that a 30-year-old man can declare his career goals accomplished and move on to a life of golf tournaments and business ventures.
Meanwhile, the rest of us struggle to keep our jobs, pay our bills and, if we are lucky, derive a sense of accomplishment from our work.
In comparison to Michael, our achievements, and ourselves, seem small, yet he is able to leave his glory behind him.


Forever Harley
"VROOM, vroom," said Jed Srybnik, sneering dismissively from a perch atop the leather seat of his customized cobalt blue Harley-Davidson Softail motorcycle.
"Look at those bad boys on their bikes."
Just a moment before, Mr.
Srybnik had been gauging the effect his motorcycling had on the opposite sex: "What the women see in you is the danger," he said.
But then a tooth-rattling roar split the air like a thunderclap on what was an otherwise sunny Saturday afternoon.
Past where Mr.
Srybnik sat -- in a line of bikes parked in front of the restaurant I Tre Merli on West Broadway, just below Houston Street -- two leather-clad bikers cruised by on their Harleys, looking as if they had come to SoHo to pillage, not brunch.
As they passed, forks froze in transit at the restaurant's sidewalk tables.
On the crowded streets, strollers stood still and gawked.


In the Region/Westchester; North Tarrytown Acts to Preserve Its Waterfront
EVER since General Motors announced in February 1992 that it would close its minivan-assembly plant in North Tarrytown in 1995, the village has been working furiously to gain some measure of control over the industrial site so that it might redefine its waterfront.
The sprawling plant has dominated the village's waterfront for 75 years, occupying 98 acres along the Hudson River.
Aside from the loss of jobs and tax revenue represented by the plant's closing, the village is even more concerned about what will happen to the site once the industrial giant leaves.


Visitor From Another Planet


Oct. 10-16: Selling Weaponry; Israel's Trade With China Draws American Fire
However much Israel's diplomacy with its Arab neighbors has drawn praise in Washington, American officials are decidedly unenthusiastic about Israel's continuing trade in armaments with China.
A blunt assessment by the Central Intelligence Agency, made public by the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee last week, says: "Building on a long history of close defense industrial relations, China and Israel appear to be moving toward formalizing and broadening their military technical cooperation."
While Israel sees economic and perhaps political benefits in helping China arm itself, American officials worry that it is helping Beijing develop better weapons like missiles for export.
Just this month, China angered the United States by resuming nuclear testing.


Data Bank/October 17, 1993


Correction
An entry in the Benefits column last Sunday about a fund-raising event tomorrow for the Kathryn and Gilbert Miller Health Care Institute for Performing Artists, misidentified a performer.
Harolyn Blackwell is a soprano, not a mezzo.


Who's Doing The Bashing?
To the Editor:  In your story on gay rodeo ("Bustin' Stereotypes," Sept. 26) Clark Tylee says participants like himself want to "show the general public that we're not stereotypical sissies."
Apparently they aren't concerned about being stereotypical animal abusers.


IN SHORT: FICTION
THE SHARK-INFESTED CUSTARD By Charles Willeford. Underwood-Miller, $20.95.


Toronto
Walt Whitman, visiting Toronto in 1880, called the city "a lively, dashing place." In 1993, it is infinitely more so, pulsing with theaters, jazz and comedy clubs, restaurants and flea markets.
Unesco recently counted more than 100 languages and dialects spoken here.
One-third of the city's residents identify a language other than English or French as their mother tongue.
Chinese, Greeks, Portuguese, Ukrainians, Russians, Koreans, Indians and West Indians all have their own neighborhoods.
In fact, there are three Chinatowns, reflecting different periods of immigration, starting with last century's railroad builders.


Casting One's Fate to the (High) Winds
IT'S difficult to explain, but everyone has probably experienced it at least once.
You -- a person who crosses at the green, washes fruit before eating it and wears sunscreen daily -- find yourself saying something like "Why not? We're on vacation." The next thing you know, you're standing in line waiting to drop 50 feet with a bungee cord wrapped around your ankle, or you've ordered a local dish made from some poisonous fish that can be prepared only by 1 of 12 specially licensed chefs.
The more exotic or strange the locale, the more likely you are to step off the edge of practicality and common sense.
I suppose part of it is the sense of immortality that comes from being in a strange place, the belief that the standard rules of real life don't apply.
You won't die, get sick or get injured because, after all, you are on vacation.


On TV, Mayoral Campaign Is Barely Skin Deep
If New Yorkers who form their political views from television were required to drop their remote controls and report directly to the polls, they would be hard-pressed right now to evaluate the candidates for Mayor on anything beyond their wardrobes, their diction and their contrasting sparring styles.
For the majority of voters who never shake the candidates' hands or attend hotel banquets in their honor, television coverage provides the primary access to the mayoral campaign.
And reflecting the slugfest that this campaign has become, TV news shows last week presented a whiplash-inducing back-and-forth between the testy candidates.


The Playground of the Future
It looks like a giant Lego maze of red, blue and yellow cubicles.
Arches interlock with tubes, bars with ladders.
In many ways, it is a prototype of the urban playground of the future.
After six years of planning and delay for lack of funds, the $500,000 Asser Levy Playground opened on Thursday in a 1.7-acre park at 23d Street, a block from the East River.
It is the first public playground in Manhattan built specifically with the needs of disabled children in mind.
Another experimental playground, All Children, was constructed in 1985 in Flushing Meadows, Queens, but it requires more maintenance and adult supervision.


Winning Ways With Winter Squash
THE farm stands and markets are now overflowing with brightly colored winter squashes.
Summer squashes, mostly thin-skinned yellow ones or types of zucchini in green or gold, are more delicate than the sturdy, thick-skinned winter varieties.
Fall's crop ranges in color from nearly white to yellow, orange, green and even, in the case of some Hubbard varieties, battleship gray and blue.
They come striped and solid.
Some are round, some elongated and some are deeply ridged.
There are squashes with smooth skins and others that are warty.
They may be perfectly symmetrical or lopsided.


Serbs Resume Shelling of Sarajevo, Increasing Fears
After a lull of several weeks, Serbian nationalist forces resumed their heavy artillery bombardment of Sarajevo today, setting off panic on the city's streets and raising fear that the siege could take a sharp turn for the worse just as winter approaches.
The Serbian forces on the slopes of mountains overlooking the Bosnian capital began their barrage before dawn, hitting the city center with at least 30 152-millimeter tank shells, the most destructive weapon in the their arsenal.
Thousands of tank, artillery and mortar shells were fired next in a bombardment that continued until the late afternoon before relenting.


Tribal Rights: Refining The Law of Recognition
DONALD TRUMP, testifying this month at a congressional hearing on how Indian casinos are policed and regulated, touched a raw nerve when he complained that certain American Indians, who he said, "don't look like Indians to me," enjoyed unfair advantages in the gambling business by virtue of the Federal laws governing tribal autonomy.
The remarks by the Atlantic City titan, whether racially tinged or simply blunt, revisited issues that Indians and non-Indians alike say have been simmering for years and are now attracting more attention, both in Washington and in tribal circles.
What are the limits of tribal rights, and how does a tribe get them?


Magic Waives Catledge
TERRY CATLEDGE was waived by the Orlando Magic on Friday.
Catledge, 30, averaged 19.4 points and 7.6 rebounds in the Magic's first season four years ago, but he saw his role diminish gradually the past three seasons.
He appeared in a career-low 21 games last season, averaging 4.7 points and 2.2 rebounds.
The 6-foot-8-inch forward reportedly still will receive most of the original value of a six-year, $9.6 million contract extension he signed in 1990, under a buyout agreement made Thursday.
The Magic will be granted a $650,000 salary exception slot to replace him on the roster. (AP)


Shoplifting Arrest Leads to Discovery of Children Locked in Attic, Police Say
The two children a 15-year-old girl and her 11-year-old brother -- were caught in a local supermarket last Friday night stuffing bagels, bologna, crackers and candy into book bags and taken, terrified, to the Police Department on shoplifting charges.
"They were frantic, not so much that they were caught shoplifting but that I was going to return them home," Detective Frank C. Jones recalled today.
"They were completely hysterical."
Under gentle questioning over the next hour or so, the two children told Detective Jones a story of living for months in isolation with two other children -- like them, in foster care -- in a cramped and often locked attic room with no furniture, no lights, no heat and little food.
They pried open the bolt lock last Friday with a coat hanger and went out on their food foray because they were hungry, Detective Jones said.
At the time, the couple raising them had gone out for a seafood dinner at a fast-food restaurant in Paramus, the detective said.
"The girl told us more or less they had to go out and steal to get an adequate amount of food," he said.
Two Others in Attic
After the questioning, Detective Jones said he went to the two-story gray house on Howland Avenue and found a 16-year-old girl sleeping on a mattress on the floor in the pitch-black attic room and a 10-year-old boy in diapers asleep on the floor.
Several hours later, the couple, Anthony James, 36, and his wife, Shirley, 39, were arrested on charges of endangering the welfare of the four children.
Subsequently they were released on $10,000 bail each after a hearing in State Superior Court.
The four children have been placed in the care of New Jersey's Division of Youth and Family Services.
They were examined at Englewood Hospital and not found to be suffering from any serious physical ailments, Detective Jones said.
The other two children in the house, a foster daughter, 12, and the Jameses' son, 8, had their own bedrooms, the detective said.
The Englewood Police Department's Youth Bureau has been trying to trace the four children's lives as foster children and learn why the Jameses had them stay in the attic.
Not Attending School
He also said the four children had not attended school for months.
"They were imprisoned, more or less, in the attic," Detective Jones said today.
They were allowed out for meals, which consisted of warm cereal in the morning, no lunch, and peanut butter sandwiches, with water, for dinner, he said.
The youngsters told the detectives that they had to eat the food in the basement, not upstairs with the others.
The two boys also said Mr.
James hit them with belts and wires whenever they were caught taking food from the family refrigerator, the detective said.
Whenever the four had to go to the toilet, they had to knock on the locked door of the attic room to be released, the detective said.
They were required to use the bathroom in the basement, not the one in the regular living quarters.
"They were more or less rationed out toilet tissue," the detective said.
For the most part, he said, the two boys were allowed out of the attic, aside from meals and toilet trips, only when the Jameses' 8-year-old son wanted to play with them outdoors.
No one answered the door today at the James house.
They have no telephone listing.
Link to New York State
A neighbor on Howland Avenue who spoke on the condition of anonymity said the couple, like many on the quiet residential street, kept to themselves.
Occasionally, he said, he saw several children in the yard, cleaning it or sharing in barbecues.
He said he believed Mrs.
James was a Jehovah's Witness and took the children to worship on Sundays at the kingdom hall on Palisades Avenue, about a five-minute walk from their house.
Officials at the kingdom hall said today that they knew the Jameses and were aware of the charges against them.
But they declined to comment further.
Authorities said they believed the five foster children had been placed with the couple by social services officials in New York and that the Jameses received monthly subsidies of $500 for each, or a total annual stipend of $30,000.
Detective Jones said Mr.
James was unemployed.
Authorities, he said, were also investigating whether the couple had formally adopted the five children, possibly in New Jersey.
The Bergen County Prosecutor, John J. Fahy, said his staff was trying to learn why New York agencies paid the monthly maintenance stipends for the five children, but apparently did not monitor their living conditions.


Bassett Hall in Virginia Reopens
Bassett Hall, the 18th-century house that once belonged to the Rockefeller family, reopened this month in Williamsburg, Va., after being closed since January 1992 for renovations.
The project added a new reception area and a theater, where a videotaped presentation on the house is shown.
Set in 585 acres of woodlands, the house was bought in the late 1920's by the philanthropist John D. Rockefeller Jr., who financed the restoration of the old Colonial capital, Williamsburg, and his wife, Abby Aldrich.
After moving into Bassett Hall in 1936, the Rockefellers furnished the house with an eclectic collection of Asian, American and English antiques.
Mrs.
Rockefeller collected American folk art, including weather vanes, chalkware and pottery, which can be seen both at Bassett Hall and the Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Folk Art Center in Williamsburg.
Visitors, guided by portable audio tape players, can tour the house and the grounds, where they will see the Rockefellers' tea house, their gardens and a 300-year-old giant oak.


Tarnish on the Casino Glitter
To the Editor:
"In a Bid for Casinos, Chicago Comes Up With Snake-Eyes" (Oct. 3) is yet another sad commentary on the willingness of cities, big and small, to bet that municipal budgets can be balanced with a throw of the dice.


Bzzzz: Chainsaw Pleasures and Perils
A CHAINSAW can be a boon for those who have to do fall pruning or cut firewood.
Despite the brutish image, far less strength and stamina are needed to operate a chainsaw than to cut by hand.
Of all power tools, chainsaws probably are the most dangerous.
If a chainsaw can make life easier, do not let its potential hazards deter you from buying or renting one.
But learn to use it safely.


INSIDE
Sarajevo's Calm Is Shattered As Serbs Resume Barrages
After a lull of several weeks, Serbian forces resumed bombarding Sarajevo, raising fear that the siege could take a turn for the worse.
Page 16.
Despite Aid, Egypt Struggles
Billions of dollars in aid from the U.S. and other sources has not brought political stability or improved the lives of most Egyptians.
Page 10.
Few Verdicts in Beating Case
The jury in a Los Angeles beating trial told the judge it had reached verdicts on some counts but was deadlocked on others.
Page 19.


The Clique of Araby
THE ARABISTS The Romance of an American Elite.
By Robert D. Kaplan.
Illustrated. 333 pp.
New York:  The Free Press. $24.95.


Bringing Much-Needed Sand to a Storm-Battered Beach
Over the last year, erosion worsened by storms has devastated much of the Rockaways shoreline.
But with the Army Corps of Engineers expected to approve a $46 million, 10-year restoration plan, repairs may begin early next year.
"It's really a question of the sooner the better," said Joseph Vietri, a planner in the Army Corps of Engineers district office in Manhattan.
"We have about 50,000 people living on an island that has been decimated by a series of storms over the last few years, and this project will in essence give the people a measure of protection against the effect of storm damages."


The Better Partner? Too Close to Call
TAKE two world-famous players and try to decide who is better.
In theory it should be possible to answer the question by assembling deals on which they faced the same problem as declarer, and then tabulating the results.
The problem would be insoluble if the players were regularly partners.
If you wanted, for example, to compare the playing skills of Jeff Meckstroth and Eric Rodwell, perhaps the world's best partnership, your collection of deals would be ridiculously small.
The one shown in the diagram might be the only example.


Mutual Funds; Strategies for Style Index Funds
TWO sets of "style" index funds set up last year -- one by Vanguard and the other by Dreyfus -- have made it easier for mutual fund investors to use growth and value stockpicking strategies in building their portfolios, much as mutual fund managers use them in shaping their funds.
These index funds can serve as handy benchmarks for investors, or be used as tools themselves to implement a variety of growth- and value-related investing tactics.
Mutual fund managers using a value approach look for shares priced at less than what they think the company is worth, often in mature, dividend-paying companies with cyclical businesses dependent on the overall economy.
By contrast, those after growth prefer shares in companies with strong earnings or sales prospects; they may be relatively expensive but are less dependent on economic conditions.


THE GUIDE
RENEWED HAUNTED HOUSE
Reconditioned Body Parts for Sale is the theme in one of several frightful rooms to be explored at the Haunted House in New Rochelle.
The popular Halloween event, now in its 16th year, drew 23,000 visitors last year.


Who Will Control the Digital Flow?
THE promised allures of the information highway -- from Hollywood movies to the complete works of the Library of Congress, summoned to any living-room screen with the click of a remote control -- may still be a long time away.
But the announcement last week of the planned merger combining the Bell Atlantic Corporation and Tele-Communications Inc., a big telephone company and a cable television giant, is a sure sign that corporate America is betting that the information highway will become more than just a catchy concept.
It is far too soon to tell whether this particular deal, valued at as much as $33 billion, will prove to be money well spent.
Roger McNamee of Integral Capital Partners, a high-tech investment fund in Menlo Park, Calif., has started an office pool, taking bets on who will be the first to lose a billion dollars in the failed pursuit of what he calls "multimedia mania."


A Thunderbird Creates a Storm At a Garden
In American Indian mythology, the thunderbird is an enormous creature that causes storms.
And one designed by Parks Department workers is doing just that.
A year ago, workers for the Parks Department laid out a small flower garden near Pierrepont Place with daffodils, tulips, hyacinth, cleome, roses and coleus.
And, in what they said was a salute to the American Indian, they embedded in it gray stones in the outline of a thunderbird.


Madlyn Gleich, Richard Primoff
Mr. and Mrs.
Lawrence Gleich of Brooklyn have announced the engagement of their daughter, Madlyn Beth Gleich, to Richard Glenn Primoff, the son of Arlene Kelvin of Bayside, Queens, and the late Melvin I. Primoff.
A January wedding is planned.
Ms.
Gleich, 29, is a bankruptcy associate at the law firm of Battle Fowler in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Cornell University and received a law degree from Columbia University.
Her father is a newspaper deliverer for The New York Times.


Barbara Ehrenreich's Writing Attracts an Attentive Audience
THOUGH unmistakably a tribute to an author's achievement, critics' sensibility to past work and reputation to the detriment of the new, breakaway work at hand is always unwelcome.
It's enough to make writers fantasize about what their prospects would be if they had written under a pseudonym.
When the Long Island-based writer Barbara Ehrenreich switched gears and published her first novel and work of fiction, "Kipper's Game," last summer, it was almost universally reviewed, but not universally loved, by critics, including two in this newspaper. (Good reviews appeared on the West Coast and in other publications, including Entertainment Weekly.)  Not Examining the Novel
The problem, said a regretful Ms.
Ehrenreich during an interview in her Syosset home, is that the reviewers seemed bent more on addressing her than on examining the novel itself.
Foreseeing the difficulty, perhaps, she had proposed using another name to her editor at Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux but was turned down.


Q and A
Sharing a Studio In a Co-op Q. My wife and I own an alcove studio on East 77th Street.
We have been renting it out with board approval and the board scrutinizes tenants thoroughly.
We now feel we would like to use the apartment ourselves, but because the maintenance is so high we would like to give the key to two other couples.
Each couple would use the apartment for a whole or partial week once every three weeks.
Do we need board approval? . . .
Manny Zahav, Belle Harbor, Queens


A Cabdriver Is Shot Dead; 2d Is Wounded
The 31st New York City cabdriver to be slain this year was found yesterday slumped at the wheel of his yellow cab with two bullet wounds in the back of the head in a deserted park in Washington Heights.
The killing occurred 11 hours after another driver of a yellow cab was shot once in the back of the head on Friday by a passenger he had picked up in Astoria, Queens.
He was listed in serious but stable condition yesterday at Elmhurst General Hospital.


Corrections
A picture on the Mutual Funds page last Sunday, with a profile of Robert Rodriguez, manager of the FPA Capital fund, was published in error.
It showed James W. Stratton, chairman of the Stratton Monthly Dividend Shares fund.
Mr.
Rodriguez is pictured today, at the right.


Backup Passer Leads Washington State Over California
Washington St. 34, California 7
Backup quarterback Shawn Deeds, stepping in when Mike Pattinson was injured, threw for a touchdown and led Washington State to a 34-7 upset of California yesterday in Pullman, Wash.


City Planners Take New Tack On Giant Project: Think Small
It stretches for nearly two miles along the oceanfront, block after block of weed-filled, trash-strewn lots, occasionally interrupted by a cluster of buildings.
It is the Arverne urban-renewal area in the Rockaways, for a quarter-century the site of a repeatedly thwarted effort to build a "new town" of homes, parks and shopping centers.
The Arverne project suffered its latest blow two years ago when the developer of the most recent plan for the site, Oceanview Associates of Manhattan, pulled out, citing a poor economy in which to market the kind of vast development it was contemplating: a $1.5 billion complex of 7,500 apartments priced to sell or rent to families with annual incomes of $45,000 to $80,000.
Stores, movie theaters and a refurbished boardwalk and beach were also part of the package.


THE BEAT GOES ON
Thanks to Don Montague for helping to perpetuate the (male) notion that hormonal changes in women (brought on by pregnancy, menstruation or menopause) reduce them to morons (About Men: "The Beat Goes On," Sept. 26).
Not only does his lame attempt at humor in describing his wife's behavior during pregnancy insult and humiliate her and every other woman, but it also trivializes deafness, dwarfism and stillbirth.
Perhaps, his wife should whap him on the head with a spoon to make sure that his brain is still alive.
CHRISTINE R. PEARCE Albany


Celebrity Billiards


Help of All Kinds by Phone
Some hot lines give general information, some have financial data, some provide what may seem like superfluous, leisure-time trivia and tidbits.
Still others are lifelines to all-night crisis services.


Justice? Go Find It
To the Editor:
Why bother investigating police corruption?
The justice system in this city is a joke.
I was mugged on Dec. 7, 1992, by two men: one had a gun, the other a knife.
In February I picked the man with the gun out of a lineup, as did another witness.
Last week in court I again identified the gunman as did the other witness the next day.
He had been convicted twice before for armed robbery and was on parole.
Yesterday an assistant district attorney called to tell me the gunman had been acquitted.
She said she was sorry but these cases were sometimes like flipping a coin.
How can one trust a "justice" system that lets repeat offenders back on the streets?
ROBERT J. IERARDI  New York, Oct. 7, 1993


Need to Bounce Back? The Phillies Wrote the Book From Bottom to Top
Volatility is the byword.
The Philadelphia Phillies are playing in the World Series as the third team in three years to leap from last to first.
No one made that move in the first 22 years of division play.


Wrestling With the Ever-Changing Forces of Modernism
IT reads like stage directions: Nardin Galleries, formerly of Cross River, relocates here, occupying premises that used to house the Somerstown Gallery, now in Croton Falls and called the Schoolhouse Gallery.
Jacques Lipchitz (1891-1973), who lived in Hastings-on-Hudson from 1947 until his death, returns to Westchester by way of the bronzes and drawings currently celebrating the "new" Nardin.
Enter Joseph Stella (1877-1946), who came to the United States from Naples, in 1896, and who is represented by paintings and drawings.
Also present is a living sculptor, Henry Schiowitz who, though home-grown, acquired his skills in Petrasanta, Italy, near Carrara, where Lipchitz and other masters worked for a while.


A Beleaguered Family Breaks Apart
Not only does the first act of "The Fiery Furnace" take place during the 1950's, Timothy Mason's play about the travails of a small-town Wisconsin family could have been written back then.
The coffeepot's on the stove, the oilcloth's on the kitchen table, and all may not be right with the world, but you wouldn't know it from appearances.
The opening production of the Circle Repertory Company's season, "The Fiery Furnace" (Off Broadway at the Lucille Lortel Theater) brings instantly to mind the dramas of William Inge, who achieved enormous success during the Eisenhower years chronicling buried yearnings and spiritual death in Midwestern hamlets and, for a while, was considered in a league with Edward Albee and Tennessee Williams.
Inge's plays seem a little parochial to us nowadays, and so, in its early stretches, does Mr.
Mason's.


Honors Classes Cope With Reform
LIZABETH FREEMAN, a social studies teacher at Fox Lane High School here, prepares her daily lessons for two types of classes.
One is a ninth-grade group of honors students, who were recommended to her course for high achievers while they were still in the eighth grade.
The other is a group of 10th graders whose academic abilities are more varied.
Ms.
Freeman, who has taught here for 17 years, says she hates making distinctions between the honors students and those in her mixed groups, because students labeled ordinary often shine with a special light of their own.
Still, she conceded recently, when the school year was still new and the fresh faces before her held untold possibilities, "It's very hard to avoid low expectations of less gifted kids." Labeling Students Losing Favor
Labeling students, or tracking them in set courses of study according to their abilities, is losing favor in the state to heterogeneous groupings more in keeping with Albany's reform plan, a New Compact for Learning.
This is good, said Daniel Berman, coordinator of social studies at Fox Lane and a member of the New York State Curriculum and Assessment Council, an advisory committee appointed by the Board of Regents to help bring about the new plan.


'The Morning After'
To the Editor:
As a rape-crisis volunteer, I appreciated Wendy Kaminer's balanced review of "The Morning After: Sex, Fear, and Feminism on Campus" (Sept. 19).
Katie Roiphe's book may help temper some of feminism's excessive emphasis on women as victims.
Unfortunately, as Ms.
Kaminer points out, it will also be used -- against its author's will -- as a tool by those who minimize the existence of acquaintance rape or even say that the women who are raped by men whom they know "asked for it."


Pitt Goes for the Victory, but Syracuse Ends Up Winning
Syracuse 24, Pittsburgh 21
Pitt, with a chance for a major upset, came up short on a fourth-down play with 2 minutes 24 seconds left in the game yesterday and Syracuse escaped with a 24-21 victory on the road.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Added Mike Birkbeck, pitcher, to the 40-man roster.
Basketball  National Basketball Association  MIAMI HEAT -- Re-signed Matt Geiger, center.


Ellen Lautenberg, Douglas Hendel
United States Senator Frank R. Lautenberg of Cliffside Park, N.J., and Lois Lautenberg of Montclair, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Ellen Sue Lautenberg to Douglas Alan Hendel, a son of Judge Seymour Hendel and Patricia Hendel of New London, Conn.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lautenberg, 36, graduated from Clark University and received a law degree from Yeshiva University.
Her father, a Democrat, has served in the Senate since 1982.
Before that, he was the chairman and chief executive of Automatic Data Processing Inc. in Roseland, N.J., the payroll processing company of which he is a founder.
Mr.
Hendel, 37, is a marketing manager at Hendel's Inc., a family-owned petroleum distributorship in Waterford, Conn.
He graduated from Amherst College and received a master's degree in management and a law degree from Northwestern University.


Correction
A review on Sept. 19 about Robert E. Quirk's "Fidel Castro" misidentified the mountain range in Cuba where Mr.
Castro conducted guerrilla warfare against the Batista forces in 1956-58.
It was the Sierra Maestra.


Linda P. Gavlick, Kevin T. Heaney
Linda Patricia Gavlick, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard E. Gavlick of Fairfield, Conn., was married there yesterday to Kevin Timothy Heaney, a son of Bernard J. Heaney of New York and the late Mary E. Heaney.
The Rev.
George Sankoorikal performed the ceremony at St.
Pius X Roman Catholic Church.
Ms.
Gavlick is the senior vice president and the director of corporate communications for Wells Rich Greene BDDP Communications Inc. in New York.
She graduated from St.
Lawrence University.


A Gorilla Sulks in a Mall as His Future Is Debated
Staring at shoppers from the concrete cell at the B &amp; I Shopping Mall that has been his home for 26 years, Ivan, a 500-pound gorilla, scratched his matted hair and ambled over to a dim corner.
"We used to bang on the window and he'd bang back," said Donna Wetmore, a Tacoma resident.
"But now he just sits there and looks sad. He should be in a zoo with a girlfriend."


First, Perfect Fear; Then, Universal Love
STORIES FROM MY LIFE WITH THE OTHER ANIMALS By James McConkey. 171 pp.
Boston: David R. Godine.


Elizabeth S. Bolgiano, Peter C. Jacobs
Elizabeth Scott Bolgiano, the daughter of Dr.
Ralph Bolgiano Jr. and Elizabeth S. Bolgiano of Ithaca, N.Y., was married there yesterday to  Peter Cruys Jacobs, the son of Robert N. Jacobs of Napa, Calif., and Barbara J. Jacobs of Walnut Creek, Calif.
The Rev.
Gurdon Brewster, the Episcopal chaplain of Cornell University, officiated at Sage Chapel on the campus.
Ms.
Bolgiano is keeping her name.
She is a director of human resources at the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, the pharmaceutical concern, in Princeton, N.J.
She graduated from Cornell, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and from which she received an M.B.A Her father is a professor emeritus of electrical engineering at Cornell, where her mother, now retired, was the assistant ombudsman.


On the Lam in Rapallo
PRONTO By Elmore Leonard. 265 pp. New York: Delacorte Press. $21.95.


Bottom Line Black
This season, one shade fits all occasions.
Wherever and however you wear it, if it's black, it's the height of style.


Don't Be Befuddled By Equipment
CAMERA companies spend millions of dollars trying to convince us that it's easy to take great pictures.
But every time I walk into a camera store, I'm amazed that anyone gets around to taking any pictures at all, let alone great ones.
Lining the shelves behind the counters are cameras in all sizes and shapes, glittering with chrome and black plastic.
Over in one corner is apt to be a display of tripods and light stands, like a gaggle of storks; against another wall are the envelopes of photo paper, arranged in banks like X-rays in a doctor's office.
And behind the counter are the displays of film boxes: crumbling walls of yellow, green, red and white.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN  CHELSEA  $495,000
135 West 17th Street  2,250-sq.-ft. open-loft co-op; elevator, floor-through, 2 baths, 3 exposures; maintenance $1,100, 68% tax-deductible, listed at $525,000, 2 weeks on market (Broker: Wells &amp; Gay/Stribling &amp; Associates)


In Paris, Fashionable Views


From Mexico, Reed, Rattle 'n' Roll
LOS FOLKLORISTAS, a folk troupe from Mexico City, will perform today in the Prospect Park Picnic House.
The seven-member group, formed in 1966, plays traditional music from seven regions of Mexico, including Oaxaca and Yucatan.
Its repertory features songs saved from extinction by the group's collaboration with village elders.
Performing in traditional serapes, the members of Los Folkloristas play an array of instruments, like the reed, rattle, clay flute, guitar, violin and Yaqui Indian water drum.


The Last Farewell to Father Panik Village
KATHLEEN VILA was 9 months old in 1943, the year her family moved into the first public housing complex in the state, a sprawling modern community called Yellow Mill Village.
Later renamed after Father Stephen Panik, a priest who had worked for decent housing in the poor neighborhoods of east Bridgeport, the project was trumpeted nationally as a bold sign of social progress designed to abolish poverty and rid the city of crime and disease.
At the ground-breaking ceremony in 1939, Father Panik called the public housing development "the greatest Christmas present Bridgeport has ever received."


Edible Souvenirs
To the Editor: Your article about buying inexpensive gifts in Britain sparked many memories.
In my early years as a traveler, when imagination was in greater supply than cash, I, too, shopped for gifts in supermarkets, food halls and drug stores.
The gifts I bought were cheap, but the wrapping paper I found was free -- city and subway maps of the cities I visited, always available at tourist centers and subway stations.
It was always great fun watching friends unwrap gifts, showing them on the maps where I stayed and traveled and shopped for their presents.
It often triggered their memories and stories as well.
NANCY SHEAR  New York, N.Y.


Corrections
Because of a production error, an article on page 10 of the Arts and Leisure section today about Agnes de Mille omits several lines in some copies.
The last sentence at the bottom of the first column should read, "But Henry C. de Mille and William de Mille, respectively Agnes's grandfather and father, were playwrights with Broadway hits (William later worked in Hollywood)." The final sentence of the article should read, "Those that reached an eloquent pitch (especially 'Where the Wings Grow') also revealed the true Agnes de Mille, full of gumption and go."


Oct. 10-16: What Will He Do Next?; Surprise! Greeks Return Papandreou to Power
After four years in the cold, Andreas Papandreou is back.
The Greek Socialist leader overcame scandal, accusations of corruption and memories of economic mismanagement to win last week's elections with a solid majority for his Pan-Hellenic Socialist movement.
The 74-year-old Mr.
Papandreou immediately showed some of the mettle that made him Europe's gadfly of the 1980's by keeping a promise to revoke a privatization program that his conservative predecessor, Constantine Mitsotakis, hoped would help offset Greece's budget deficit.


Preview Day Turns Into McGaughey's Day
On New York's most glamorous day of racing, the day of the Breeders' Cup Preview, the colts Dehere and Lure and Miner's Mark won major races and Strategic Maneuver finally lost one.
But the day was dominated by a trainer, Shug McGaughey, a cherubic 42-year-old Kentuckian who made history when he saddled the winners of five stakes races and one allowance race.
In fact, the only thing at Belmont Park that outran any of McGaughey's horses was Dehere, the juvenile star who won the $500,000 Champagne Stakes by four lengths and established himself as the early, but absolute, favorite for next year's Kentucky Derby.
He blitzed a field of five rivals that included McGaughey's colt Personal Escort, who ran fifth.


Opening Loan Windows
NOT everyone has been able to profit from the giant refinancing party that has enabled thousands of homeowners to tap into rock-bottom interest rates.
Those left out in the cold include people whose homes may have plunged in value, leaving the old mortgages as high or higher than prevailing prices.
Or their incomes may have dropped, disqualifying them for the same amount of credit.
Still others may own co-op apartments in New York buildings that are no longer eligible for financing, or they may have been tardy paying bills.


Bzzzz: Chainsaw Pleasures and Perils
A CHAINSAW can be a boon for those who have to do fall pruning or cut firewood.
Despite the brutish image, far less strength and stamina are needed to operate a chainsaw than to cut by hand.
Of all power tools, chainsaws probably are the most dangerous.
If a chainsaw can make life easier, do not let its potential hazards deter you from buying or renting one.
But learn to use it safely.


In Health Care, Spare Us More Paperwork!
To the Editor:
Regarding "For Coverage, a W-2 Equivalent" (Your Own Account, Oct. 3), my personal conception of hell is a place where one is required to fill out forms all day and night!
As the chief administrator of a small, nonprofit organization, I already spend most of my time filling out forms for various government agencies.
Therefore, I was shocked -- Shocked! -- to find that next year the Government is going to require a new form annually for each of our employees covered by our health plan.
It's to be called an H-2 and is similar to the W-2 now issued to each employee.


A Tinkerer vs. Car Thieves
When Ciro Porricelli was 11 years old, he stole a car and, within an hour, had most of the motor disassembled.
It was his father's 1963 Chevrolet Impala.
"I just wanted to tinker," he confesses.
If there is any validity to the stereotype of the Italian guy from the Bronx who can't wait to get under the hood, Mr.
Porricelli could be typecast.
He grew up on the streets of Williamsbridge, where, for so many teen-agers, souping up a car was what you did after Sunday mass.


Food Reaches Angolan City Where 30,000 Died in Siege
The United Nations flew its first food shipment today to the Angolan city of Cuito, where aid workers say 30,000 people have died in a nine-month siege.
"My colleagues who went to Cuito said thousands of people were starving, without water, without medicine," said Philippe Borel, director of the Angola United Nations World Food Program.


New Loophole For Appeals: Tape Cassette
During the 1991 trial for the murder of Brian Watkins, the Utah tourist whose family was assaulted in a subway station after attending the United States Open tennis tournament, one thing that was never in doubt was the cause of the young man's death.
A medical examiner testified that he died from a stab wound to the chest.
But that testimony may hold the key to a new trial for four men convicted in the Watkins case as well as hundreds of other people convicted of murder or manslaughter in New York State.
Lawyers for the Watkins defendants, using a novel approach in appealing the case, say that during the trial, the prosecution never turned over the medical examiner's original tape recording of the autopsy to the defense.
That lapse, they say, gave the prosecution an unfair advantage.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
BAILEY'S CAFE By Gloria Naylor.
Vintage Contemporaries, $11.
This unassuming restaurant is in a black Brooklyn neighborhood in 1948, where the locals range from a Gospel-quoting revivalist to a Stanford Ph.D.
The novel is "a virtuoso orchestration of survival, suffering, courage and humor," Dan Wakefield said here last year.


Karin Bravin, John Post Lee
Karin Jennifer Bravin and John Post Lee, owners of a contemporary art gallery in Manhattan that bears Mr.
Lee's name, were married yesterday.
Don Robert Johnson, the senior leader of the Ethical Cultural Society of New York, officiated at Wave Hill in the Bronx.
Ms.
Bravin, 29, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Dartmouth College.
Her parents are Ira and Jean Bravin of New York.
Her father is the publisher of New York Connection magazine in New York, a monthly design-trade publication.
Her mother is the magazine's director of art and design.


Commands for Canine Care
You have the dog.
Now you need a little help.
Here are some tips on how to get your dog immunized and how often, what sort of food it should be eating, where it can get a Swedish massage, and more.
FOOD "One of the major nutritional issues with dogs in New York City is comparable to that of people," Dr.
Brodsky said.
"They eat too well and exercise too little. People tend to manifest their love and bond with their dogs by feeding them too much."
He recommends feeding a plump dog smaller servings of standard nutritional food and giving an under-exercised dog a higher-fiber variety.
Most food companies now make "less active" or "light diet" selections.
Eating garbage off the streets is unhealthy and should be discouraged.
If your dog does not respond to scolding, you may want to take it to the vet to make sure it isn't scavenging because of a nutritional deficiency.
LICENSING  Licenses -- and the tags that come with them -- are required for all dogs in New York City, though the A.S.P.C.A. says that only about 140,000 of the city's two million to three million dogs are actually licensed.
The license costs $8.50, as does its yearly renewal, which the owner can get by calling the City Health Department, (212) 566-2456, and asking for an application.
The fine for failing to license is $1,000; Sanitation Department workers are authorized to give summonses, although, truth told, they rarely do.
LEASHNG  New York City law dictates that all dogs must be leashed when outdoors and that owners must clean up after their dogs, in the name of street cleanliness.
There is a $250 fine for violating either the leash law or the poop-scooper law, and any Sanitation, Health Department, Parks and Recreation employee or city police officer is authorized to give a $250 summons for a violation.
But the laws are rarely enforced; about 250 poop-scooper summonses are issued each year.
If you see someone failing to pick up after his or her dog, shame is the best revenge.
SPAYING AND NEUTERING  The A.S.P.C.A. recommends spaying and neutering to keep the number of strays down.
The A.S.P.C.A. will neuter male dogs for $55 and spay females for $65; the fee increases, proportionally, for dogs over 50 pounds.
OBEDIENCE  If an owner expects to keep his shoulders intact, his or her dog must be taught quickly to walk properly, to obey the "heel!" command and to sit at corners, says Bob DeFranco, director of the Canines of America School of Dog Training in Rego Park, Queens.
Mr.
DeFranco also receives a lot of calls from owners whose dogs pick fights with other dogs in the park.
This too should be dealt with quickly in obedience training, at an early age.
"All a dog hears when its owner talks is 'blah, blah, blah,' " he said.
"We have to teach people early on to communicate with their dog so he understands that he is not leader of the pack." SHOTS  Rabies shots are mandatory in New York State; they cost $10 at the A.S.P.C.A. and about $45 at a veterinarian.
Do it two years in a row and you are home free for the next three years.
In addition, puppies should get distemper, hepatitis and parainfluenza shots every four weeks until they are 22 weeks old; older dogs should get yearly boosters.
Kennel cough shots are recommended for dogs that spend a lot of time in kennels.
Dr.
Stuart Brodsky, a veterinarian at the West Side Veterinary Center on West 83d Street, recommends that dog owners who spend weekends in the country consider Lyme disease vaccines.
BARKING  "Dogs bark because of separation anxiety," Mr.
DeFranco said.
"The dog says: 'Oh my God, my owners are gone, I need to chew something, I need to bark.' " To break your dog of this habit before your neighbor down the hall breaks its neck, Mr.
DeFranco suggests rewards when it follows commands.
This helps to build the dog's self-confidence and makes it less anxious when you are away.
Another trick: "Bye-bye bones," a rawhide variety that is hollowed out and filled with food treats that take the dog a long time to dig out.
Or try toys stuffed with socks that smell like the owner.
For chronic barkers that do not benefit from positive reinforcement or treats, there are collars that give off high-frequency sounds that encourage them to stop and collars that give mild electronic shocks.
HOUSEBREAKING  Mr.
DeFranco believes that city dogs need to be trained to urinate or defecate on command -- using a code word (like "park") that is repeated each time the dog goes until it learns the word and does its business on command.
This takes about four to six weeks.
A dog should be walked at least twice a day.
STRAYS  Largely because of the danger of rabies, you should not approach a stray at all.
If you must, keep your hands at your side, do not look it in the eyes, and do not make any sudden movements that will make it feel challenged.
The New York City Emergency Animal Pickup Service, (718) 649-8600, will pick up strays Monday through Friday from 8 A.M. to 5 P.M.
After those hours, call the local police precinct if you believe that a dog may be a health hazard.
PAMPERING  The city offers a number of dog day-care centers, a resource introduced five years ago when Joseph Sporn began Yuppie Puppy on West 86th Street.
For $20 a day, a dog gets to romp with a half-dozen other dogs, watch cartoons and splash in a wading pool.
Or, people like Leda Hanson, a pet nanny, will take your dog to the groomer or the vet ($38 per half-hour) or even drive it to a country house for the weekend ($95 round trip).
And then there is the Pet Department Store, where, among other things, your dog can get a Swedish massage.
Why would a dog need a massage?
"Why do people need a massage?" said Leigh Applebrook, the owner of the store, on West 54th Street.
"If the dog has had trauma or an injury, or if it is suffering from tension, maybe fear, the massage really helps." A 30-minute session of Swedish, shiatsu or Tellington touch is $30. (Mrs. Applebrook recommends a series of three sessions.)
For $50, you can leave the dog for a day of fun and beauty.
The dog will have a nanny at its side all day who will play with it, feed it "nutritious food" and bottled water, exercise it on a treadmill, walk it outside every two hours and assist it in "interrelationship socializing." An example of socializing?
"Meeting a kitten for the very first time, under supervision," Mrs.
Applebrook said.
ADOPTION  The A.S.P.C.A. is the major dog-adoption agency in the city.
About 90 percent of all applicants are approved, but the society does interview potential dog-owners on their ability to care for a dog.
The society also tries to make good matches (couch potatoes are paired with Great Danes, for instance; joggers are offered collies or some other strong, active dog; very busy people are steered away from puppies).
The adoption fee is $55, which includes spaying or neutering, vaccinations and one follow-up exam.
Another popular adoption agency is the North Shore Animal League, Port Washington, L.I., (516) 883-7575.
SUMMER . . .
Like their owners, dogs left alone in apartments need air-conditioning, particularly pug-nosed types, which have difficulty breathing in hot weather.
Of course, dogs should have plenty of water at all times in extreme heat; leave several bowls around if you plan to be out all day. . . .
AND WINTER  If rock salt irritates your dog's paws, wipe them with a moist cloth after each walk.
Boots help, too, but putting them on four times a day can be tedious.
Ditto for sweaters.
ABUSE  It is a misdemeanor offense to kill, maim, injure, torture, abandon or fail to provide food for a dog.
Violators can be sent to prison for a year and fined $1,000.
Having dogfights for profit or amusement is a felony, punishable with four years in jail and a $25,000 fine.
Anyone who sees such abuses should call the A.S.P.C.A. -- in New York, (212) 876-7700.
TOYS  As a rule, big toys for big dogs, small ones for puppies.
Mrs.
Applebrook of the Pet Department Store recommends, for city dogs, balls that light up when they are dropped, making them easily found in dark parks; an indoor frisbee that won't "ruin your crystal," and feathered toys with a turkey odor that fit over doorknobs (endlessly amusing).
DEATH  If your dog dies at home, call your vet, who can help you decide whether to have it cremated or buried in a pet cemetery.
It's a good idea to check with the Better Business Bureau or ask around for recommendations.
A pet's death can be as painful as that of a family member.
Therapy sessions are available to help children and adults deal with grief.
Call the A.S.P.C.A. or write to Hospice, 58 Pearl Street, Kingston, N.Y. 12401.


No Headline
The United Nations' special envoy in Somalia said today that he was determined to see the leaders of this country's armed factions surrender their heavy weapons, but that he was not convinced that Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid would agree to do so.
The demand has been a main point of friction in the dispute between the United Nations and General Aidid, who has been blamed for attacks on United Nations peacekeepers.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
IN THE FAST LANE A True Story of Murder in Miami.
By Carol Soret Cope.
Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.


Carolyn Thomas, Stephan Roselin
Carolyn Suzanne Thomas, a daughter of Bide L. Thomas of Sarasota, Fla., and Suzanne F. Thomas of Glen Ellen, Ill., was married yesterday to Stephan Andrew Roselin, a son of Alvin and Nancy Roselin of New York.
The Rev.
Karen A. Durski, the pastor of the Church of Spiritual Light in Wauwatosa, Wis., officiated at the Manor House in Kenosha, Wis.
The bride, 29, is a dancer, choreographer and dance teacher in Milwaukee.
She graduated from Western Michigan University, and she and her husband received master's degrees from Case Western Reserve University, she in dance and he in acting.
Her father retired as the president of Commonwealth Edison in Chicago.


Oct. 10-16: Talking Peace; Israel and the P.L.O. Pass Another Milestone On a Tortuous Road
The meter was running last week for Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Their Sept. 13 agreement in principle to create Palestinian self-rule in the West Bank and Gaza Strip went into effect Wednesday, and with that came the start of complex talks on how Israel will carry out a troop withdrawal to begin by Dec. 13 in Gaza and Jericho.
Handshakes on the White House lawn may be fine, but success or failure now lies in nailing down thousands of details.
How big is the Jericho district?
Will Israeli soldiers patrol surrounding roads?
Will Palestinian police officers work with the Israeli Army against terrorists?


New Fund Tables: Ugh!
Sept. 19, this section introduced mutual fund tables that offer more data, but eliminated net asset values.
Many readers demanded the return of the N.A.V. figure.
In response to that demand, the Friday closing N.A.V. returns to the mutual fund tables this week.
The percentage change continues to appear, making it easier to compare different funds.
To the Editor:
I am not happy. CHARLES LEVIN Chestnut Hill, Mass., Sept. 16


In the East as in the West, Frenzy Feeds Finance
A man ran frantically up the dark center aisle during a concert at Symphony Space recently and began to dance, waving his arms in the air right in front of the singer and her accompanists.
He pulled a wad of dollar bills out of his pocket and threw them on the stage.
But instead of being outraged or surprised, the performers smiled and bowed to him warmly in midphrase.
The concert was the first in the World Music Institute's seasonlong survey of music from the Islamic world, and the singer was Abida Parveen, a renowned Pakistani vocalist who specializes in Sufi mystical songs.
One of the Sufi musical traditions, qawwali, involves performances of these songs at the shrines of Sufi saints.
The poems, along with the repeated phrases and improvised variations on them, are meant to bring an audience to a state of religious frenzy.
When moved by the music, listeners offer money to the Sufi religious leader; the offering is meant partly as a spiritual transaction, but it also helps support the performers.


New Fund Tables: Ugh!
Sept. 19, this section introduced mutual fund tables that offer more data, but eliminated net asset values.
Many readers demanded the return of the N.A.V. figure.
In response to that demand, the Friday closing N.A.V. returns to the mutual fund tables this week.
The percentage change continues to appear, making it easier to compare different funds.
To the Editor:
The opening paragraph of "Tables Revamped to Aid Investors" (Mutual Funds, Sept. 19), promising "more comprehensive information," gave me the approximate sinking feeling that one gets when a letter arrives from the TV cable company announcing that the previous glorious lineup of offerings has been further improved -- by deleting two of my favorite channels and adding three new and totally unwanted replacements for only a 10 percent raise in my monthly fee.
I regret to say that the sensation did not go away.
If prices and price changes are worthy markers for stock tables, I fail to see why they should not also be appropriate for mutual funds.
STEPHEN I. KAPLAN Oak Ridge, Tenn., Sept.20


THE BAND PREENED ON
So what if Richard Gere and the other stars provided a spoonful of sugar?
The important thing is that the medicine went down.
JEANINE L. CARERI Edgewater, N.J.


A Pound of Prevention for Children
It worked in Namibia.
It worked in El Salvador.
And now, a type of grass roots immunization program designed for developing nations is being tried in New York City.
New York City Immunization Day, which took place yesterday at 130 clinics and hospitals around the city, is a joint effort of the city government and Unicef, the United Nations children's organization that has perfected the art and science of immunization around the world.


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
From Medical Supplies To Hollywood Films How does the owner of a medical supply company in Bensonhurst get involved in the movie business?
For Julius Nasso, it began when he landed a job translating Italian for the making of the film "Once Upon a Time in America" in his neighborhood.
That led him to think about entering the movie business, and when he was visiting Japan, he arranged to meet Steven Seagal, a distant relative.
That led the businessman and the actor to form a company, Seagal-Nasso Productions.


Diana T. Cook and Robert W. Reed Jr.
Philip S. Cook of Santa Fe, N.M., and Edith P. Cook of Washington have announced July wedding plans for their daughter Diana Talbot Cook and Robert William Reed Jr., a son of Mrs.
Robert Gall of Plymouth, Minn., and the late Mr.
Reed.
Miss Cook, a graduate of the Rhode Island School of Design, is a decorative painter in Ketchum, Idaho.
Her father is a freelance writer in Santa Fe.
Her mother is a vice president of Saks Jandel, a women's specialty store in Chevy Chase, Md.


A 'New' Masterpiece for the Verdi Canon?
Against all probability -- for important works by commercially successful composers do not easily disappear -- this century is getting a chance the last one missed: to hear what Giuseppe Verdi was doing on the very eve of his most beloved operas.
In the summer and fall of 1850, just after temporarily giving up his cherished project of an operatic "King Lear" and just before beginning "Rigoletto," the 36-year-old composer was occupied with a new French play, "Le Pasteur," suggested to him by his librettist Francesco Maria Piave.
The subject is a Protestant clergyman, Stiffelius, whose Christian charity is tested by his wife's infidelity.
"Stiffelio," which reached the stage in Trieste in the same year and will be given its first Metropolitan Opera performance on Thursday, is not a "forgotten" Verdi opera like "Macbeth" and "Nabucco" and many others that have been revived.
They had successful lives, faded from the stage to make room for newer works and were revived when interest in the new faded in turn.
"Stiffelio" had almost no chance at life.
Censors mangled its story at the premiere and forced some early productions to secularize it entirely.
Verdi, convinced that the same would continue to happen, cobbled most of its music into another opera, "Aroldo," with a different plot. (In the meantime he had chosen the battlefield of "Rigoletto" to engage the censors.)


Slipping Dancers Into Fashion
AN air-conditioning duct may be no place for a dancer (or in this case, two dancers), but it illustrates a point: their bodies have to flex and stretch, and so do their performance clothes.
So, sympathize with the complexity of the task alloted to the 16 fashion designers who were asked to invent costumes for "A Demand Performance," a benefit for the Design Industries Foundation for AIDS on Monday at the New York State Theater at Lincoln Center.
The event pairs famous dance groups with designers, for 19 six-minute works.


Corrections
An article yesterday about a debate between Susan D. Alter and Mark Green, candidates for Public Advocate, gave an incomplete account of Ms.
Alter's assessment of Rudolph W. Giuliani's position on women's issues.
Although she suggested that in the past she "hadn't heard a very strong platform" from Mr.
Giuliani on women's issues, she went on to say that she had recently been encouraged "by his embracing of the knowledge of just how sad the state of women's affairs are in this city." As a result of that omission, the article and its headline overstated Ms.
Alter's criticism of Mr.
Giuliani.


Corrections
The Practical Traveler column on Oct. 3, about protection for consumers against tour operators who go out of business, referred incompletely to a company that failed last year, and misspelled its name.
The company was Olson-Travelworld; its name was purchased in January by John M. Noel, president and chief executive of the Travel Guard Internationale insurance company.
The new Olson-Travelworld is functioning as a tour operator.


Miscalculation
To the Editor:
"A 'Carousel' Rethought for the Age"  [ Sept. 12 ]  reminded me of a little-known story about Ferenc Molnar, the Hungarian playwright who wrote "Liliom," on which "Carousel" is based.
Every Hungarian and every Hungarian-American over 50 has heard dozens of anecdotes about the charismatic Molnar, who was one of the most popular and prolific playwrights in pre-Communist Hungary.


Miss Sack, Mr. Cogswell
Alexandra Louise Emerson Sack, a daughter of Sandra Emerson Topping of Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., and August A. Sack 4th of Hamilton, Bermuda, was married yesterday to James Kelsey Cogswell 4th, the son of Cynthia Cannon Cogswell of Millbrook, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Cogswell 3d.
The Rev.
Alan E. Tilson conducted the Anglican ceremony at Holy Trinity Church in Hamilton.
Mrs.
Cogswell is a branch administrator in Atlanta for Smith Barney Shearson, the securities brokerage.
She graduated from Emory University.
Her father manages the investment department of the Bank of N. T. Butterfield in Hamilton.
Her mother is a landscaping and floral-design consultant in Hastings-on-Hudson.


Joan Lindsay, W. E. Donohue Jr.
Joan Lindsay, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John P. Lindsay of Rockville Centre, L.I., was married there yesterday to William Edward Donohue Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Donohue of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Msgr.
Robert Mulligan performed the ceremony at St.
Agnes Cathedral.
Mrs.
Donohue is a manager in the actuarial, benefits and compensation consulting group of Deloitte &amp; Touche, the accounting firm, in New York.
She graduated from Molloy College.
Her father, now retired, was an engineer at the Grumman Corporation in Bethpage, L.I.


It's Sydney, With Two Y's!
To the Editor:
Doubtless you'll think I'm taking this much too seriously, but I've just had it with you people not spelling my name properly ("Pages Of Their Own?" Oct. 3).
You have no problem with Sydney Gruson, Sydney Schanberg, Sydney Lawford, Sydney, Australia -- why is Sydney Barrows beyond you?
I didn't have to read about Hilary Clinton, Steve Hoffenburg, Pete Hamil or Liza Sliwa.
I've never seen Colon Powell, Billy Jean King, Caroline Rome, Shannon Doherty or Forest Sawyer.
It's not rocket science.
If they spelled it right in Her New York, the subject of the story, why did someone at The New York Times assume they were wrong?


We Are What We Do
WORKING MEN Stories.
By Michael Dorris. 286 pp.
New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $19.95.


Ms. Slomowitz, Mr. Hymes
Shelley Ann Slomowitz, a political consultant and fund-raiser, was married last evening to Jonathan F. Hymes, the chief of staff to United States Representative Peter T. King, a Republican of Nassau County, L.I.
Both work in Washington.
Rabbi Michael Joseph performed the ceremony at the Plaza in New York.
Mrs.
Hymes was the special assistant to the chairman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers under President George Bush.
She graduated from Rollins College.


Klein's 4 Touchdown Passes Power C. W. Post
Canisius 23, St. John's 18
Quarterback Ben Kucia threw touchdown passes of 5, 12 and 53 yards to Mark Kolbe as the Griffins (1-5, 1-1) won for the first time and knocked the Redmen (4-2, 2-1) out of first place in the Metro Atlantic Conference.
C.W.
Post 28, Trenton St. 18
Quarterback Perry Klein, who completed 28 of 44 passes for 266 yards, threw for four touchdowns as C. W. Post extended its winning streak to five with a 28-18 victory over Trenton State yesterday afternoon at Lions Field, Ewing Township, N.J.


Tourist and Nude: A Still Life


John J. Reynolds Is Dead at 70; Banker Developed the Mastercard
John J. Reynolds, the developer of the Mastercard, died on Thursday at Winthrop-University Hospital in Mineola, L.I.
He was 70, and had lived in Garden City, L.I.
Mr. Reynolds died of heart failure, said his daughter, Dianne Reynolds.


New York's Fusion Party Goes Own Way in Mayoral Campaign
To the Editor:
The Independent Fusion Party is neither "a hollow echo of the City Fusion Party that embraced La Guardia," nor does it "resemble the independent party created for  [ John V. ]  Lindsay," as Sam Roberts wrote (Metro Matters, Oct. 11).


Highway Robbery at the Tollbooth; Amid Rash of Holdups, a Rising Sense of Danger for Collectors and a Call for Arms
It is nearly 10 P.M. and the toll taker at the Triborough Bridge's Manhattan Plaza is near the end of her shift.
Her routine is methodical, icily efficient.
She glances out the window to see the kind and size of vehicle approaching.
She then pushes a button to electronically post the fare on a display screen.
In a practiced movement, she reaches out for money.
She hands back a token or change.
She does this 300 times an hour, three seconds a car, an endless stream of stop-and-go.
Such are the labors of one of life's invisible people, a toll taker for the Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority, which last year collected $653.6 million from 277 million vehicles.
This particular transaction is recorded in grainy black-and-white images on a jerky surveillance video tape.
The woman, who officials would not name, is about to become a statistic, one of 26 Bridge and Tunnel officers to be robbed at gunpoint this year, already three times the number in all 1992.


WesBanco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fifth Third Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Alabama Bancshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A diagram on Wednesday describing the previous day's fire in Grand Central Terminal overstated the effects of the damage in some copies.
The fire knocked out radio transmissions and central signal controls for parts of the Metro-North system, not for the entire system.


Bridge
There are many ways to learn bridge.
You can sit down at the table and hope for the best, which is not recommended.
You can read a book.
You can watch experts.
You can take a group lesson.
Best of all perhaps, though involving some financial outlay, is to have a one-table group and an instructor.
One of many such groups is taught in Brooklyn by Arnold Rosner, who reports the diagramed deal from it.
North and South were Shoulie Theile and Eliane Eini, and East and West were Stella Dana and Aida Hasson.
After a third-seat opening of one club, South made a take-out double and then bid one spade, showing a hand too strong for a simple overcall.
South bid game, expecting to find any missing kings on her right.
A club was led to the ace and a diamond was returned.
South finessed, and was disappointed when West produced the king.


Lisa J. Kahn, Andrew Trauben
Lisa Judith Kahn, the daughter of Ruth and Eric Kahn of Swampscott, Mass., was married there yesterday to Dr.
Andrew Aaron Trauben, a son of Jean and Albert Trauben of Akron, Ohio.
Rabbi Edgar Weinsberg performed the ceremony at Temple Beth El.
Ms.
Kahn, 29, is keeping her name.
She is a clinical social worker at the Glendale (Queens) Mental Health Clinic.
She graduated from Salem State College and received a master's degree in social work from New York University.


DOLE TO OFFER BILL TO LIMIT PRESIDENT ON G.I. ROLE IN HAITI
The Senate minority leader, Bob Dole, said today that he would introduce legislation to restrict President Clinton from committing forces for use in Haiti, except for reasons of national security.
Mr.
Dole said that restoring President Jean-Bertrand Aristide to power was not worth a single American life and that the American people wanted more restraint on the use of troops abroad.
Administration officials responded that they would fight Mr.
Dole's proposal on both legal and foreign policy grounds.
Legally, they said, such legislation would constitute an infringement on the right of the President to make foreign policy.
Substantively, they said, the proposal would feed isolationist trends mounting around the country.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption yesterday about the Chesapeake Bay oyster industry reversed the identities of the two men shown in some copies.
Mindree Brown was at the left; his brother Walter was at the right.


Market Place; Amid upgrades, Greyhound finds profits are behind schedule.
GREYHOUND LINES, the venerable bus company, must have some serious engine trouble.
How else to explain the fall of its stock from $22 in early August to about $12 in late September, where it has remained since?
One reason: Its problems are exaggerated.


Bill, Take a Leaf From J.F.K.
To the Editor:
Russell Baker's experience, insight and writing skill combine to cheer his readers when he occasionally turns out a serious column.
And so it is with "Make It Bill and Lyndon" (Oct. 9), in which he correctly points out that Bill Clinton's focus on domestic issues matches that of Lyndon Johnson.
But Mr.
Baker errs when he states that John F. Kennedy "was so absorbed in foreign policy that he seemed to have no domestic policy at all" (until he became active with respect to civil rights).


Accounts
*
Dial Corp., Phoenix, to DDB Needham Chicago, to handle advertising for Dial Plus, a soap to be introduced in early 1994 that will combine the antibacterial ingredients of original Dial with a moisturizing formula.
DDB Needham already handles the original Dial account.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Columbia Tri-Star, Paris, to DDB Needham Paris, to handle its account in France, previously at Publicis, Paris.
Billings were estimated at $10.5 million.
To serve the account, DDB Needham formed a dedicated unit, DDB 7eme Art, which will be headed by Dominique Godefroy as managing director.


Arrow Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lawmakers Are in Talks On Insurance For Workers
Charles Paris is contemplating laying off supervisors next year from his building maintenance company in Manhattan.
Lawrence G. English is looking to open a new plant out of state rather than moving the entire workforce of his casket company into its new building in Syracuse.
Shawn P. Wood already has relocated out of state, closing his small electronics repair shop in Binghamton and moving it seven miles into Pennsylvania.
The common thread in these tales of financial woe is not foreign competition or constricting markets.
Rather, it is New York State's stunning succession of double-digit increases in the cost of workers' compensation insurance over the last six years.
Since 1988, the State Insurance Department has allowed average workers' compensation rates to rise by 153.2 percent on a compounded basis.


Intercontinental Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dance in Review
'Five'  Merce Cunningham Studio
The five choreographers who offered a program called "Five" on Saturday night shared a love of contrasts.
But they rarely made their shifts of tone convincing.


Parker Drilling reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


First Federal Capital (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Life Technologies (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


White House Memo; Even as Top Priority, the Health Plan Bogs Down
The White House sales pitch for its health care program began to veer off track even as President Clinton was delivering one of the biggest speeches of his career, the address to Congress laying out his goals for the health plan.
By then, Mr.
Clinton knew that inflation estimates were creeping upward and that the staff of the health care task force would be forced to revise the financial assumptions.


Devils' Lemaire on a Soapbox in the Coach's Box
The Devils' coaching staff is preaching that this is a new era for the team.That view is beginning to take root with the players, who have already exorcised two demons in the first five games of the season.
The Devils beat the Winnipeg Jets for the first time in 12 games with a come-from-behind victory last Tuesday at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
Then on Saturday night, the Devils won for only the sixth time in 39 visits to the Nassau Coliseum.


CHRONICLE
BARBARA BUSH, the former First Lady, who spent 25 years in Washington, says there's not much she misses about the nation's capital.
"My children, my friends," she told The Associated Press Saturday night.


Santa Fe Pacific Pipeline Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Stottlemyre Game 4 Start Likely
Cito Gaston, faced with two decisions for games in Philadelphia, said before tonight's second game of the World Series that he was leaning toward using Todd Stottlemyre as the starting pitcher for Game 4, but he continued to stall on his designated-hitter decision.
The Toronto manager ruled out Juan Guzman as a possible starter for the fourth game, pointing out that he threw 121 pitches Saturday night.
"He's pitched better on four days than three days," Gaston said, adding, "It might be Todd, it might be Al Leiter. But right now I'm leaning toward Stottlemyre."


Learning Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Thatcher Tells of '89 Plan With Paris to Rein In Bonn
Worried that a reunified Germany would dominate Europe, the leaders of Britain and France took tentative steps in December 1989 and January 1990 to create a British-French entente to "check the German juggernaut," Lady Thatcher has written in her memoirs.
But the plan, which she said evolved from three private meetings with President Francois Mitterrand, eventually came to nothing because the French leader believed that the reunification of East and West Germany could not be stopped and sought instead to contain a newly powerful neighbor by promoting a more integrated, federated Europe.


'90 Tax Rise Overshadows Trenton Races
The candidates for the New Jersey Legislature know they will face difficult fiscal decisions if they win on Nov. 2: on aid for public schools, auto insurance premiums and Federal clean-air standards, not to mention the perennial question of how to balance the budget.
But their campaigns, by and large, are not focusing on the future.
Instead, both parties are endlessly replaying the events of the last four years, with both Republicans and Democrats trying to drive home the same message: Our party acted responsibly and in the public interest and deserves voter support.


It's Tillman and Miller and Watch This Space
Like running back Lewis Tillman, linebacker Corey Miller was the man everyone wanted to talk to after the Giants beat Philadelphia.
They were the two Giants players in demand the most, which is a surprise, since before this season no one expected them to become stars.
Miller has turned into one of the best outside linebackers in the game, a spirited player who has four sacks and two interceptions in his last two games.
Miller's career resembles that of Junior Seau, the San Diego linebacker who erupted onto the scene in the National Football League.
But unlike Seau, Miller hasn't received the publicity or respect.
Until now.


Inter-Tel Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Co-operative Bank of Concord reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dallas Semiconductor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


First Union Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Glacier Water Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Federal Savings Bank (Colo.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


METRO DIGEST
A BARRIER TO HEALTH-CARE PLANS Two weeks ago, Earn J. Lloyd of Morris Heights, the Bronx, staggered into the emergency room at Montefiore Medical Center nearly comatose, nearly blind and barely able to walk.
Doctors discovered he had severe diabetes, which kept him in the hospital for 10 days.
But Mr.
Lloyd's more serious medical problem was the lack of a decent general doctor, which for him and hundreds of thousands of others in New York's poorer neighborhoods turns treatable outpatient diseases into life-threatening conditions.
This severe deficit of doctors in poor urban neighborhoods will make President Clinton's health-care plan, or any alternative, difficult to carry out in the areas that most need the help.
A1.
NEW YORK CITY  DIFFERING SHARPLY ON THE ECONOMY  As New York City struggles to shake itself out of its worst recession in half a century, the mayoral candidates are offering sharply different prescriptions on how to revive the local economy -- a split that mirrors a national debate over economic policy.
The Republican-Liberal challenger, Rudolph W. Giuliani, contends that fiscal conservatism -- keeping a balanced budget, streamlining city agencies and keeping them off the backs of business -- provides the best hope for the economy.
But Mayor Dinkins has unveiled proposals that many see as a sort of industrial policy, with the city marshaling resources to aid 12 industries in the hope that they will become centers of economic growth.
A1.


Immucor Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


NBB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Western Micro Technology Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


World Series
GAME 2 Philadelphia 6 Toronto 4
Boosted by home runs from Jim Eisenreich and Lenny Dykstra, the Philadelphia Phillies evened the World Series at one game apiece with a 6-4 victory over the Blue Jays in Toronto last night.


Fourth Financial Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


North Fork Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Weldotron Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


As U.S. Ships Arrive, Haiti General Refuses to Budge
The first of six United States warships dispatched to Haiti appeared through a thick haze off the coast here early today, a reminder to this country's military leaders of the sanctions that are due to take effect at midnight Monday unless they step down.
But Haiti's military commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, gave no indication that he was ready to comply.
In July he agreed to resign by Oct. 15 as part of an internationally brokered settlement calling for the return of the deposed President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, on Oct. 30.


Grenada Sunburst System Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Firstbank of Illinois Co.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday about the Kmart Corporation's plans to sell some specialty businesses misattributed the comment that the company would consider selling its Pace Membership Warehouse chain.
It was made by Walter F. Loeb, a retail consultant, not Thomas F. Murasky, Kmart's chief financial officer.


After Supporting Hunt for Aidid, U.S. Is Blaming U.N. for Losses
Despite the Administration's attempts to blame the United Nations for the Somalia crisis, the intensifying military operations there were repeatedly endorsed and sometimes driven by top American officials in the months before the disastrous Army raid on a hostile faction two weeks ago.
Last Thursday, 11 days after 18 American soldiers died in the raid, President Clinton sought to shift responsibility to the United Nations, which took over the Somali operation in the spring.


First Alabama Bancshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


John Ashworth, 83, Writer and Teacher
John Ashworth, an author of short stories who taught writing at Columbia University for nearly two decades, died on Friday at Northern Westchester Hospital Center in Mount Kisco, N.Y.
He was 83 years old and lived in Pound Ridge, N.Y.
Complications from cancer were the cause, his son Daniel said.


Books of The Times; Casey, Jackie, Mickey, Joe and Their Game
When you think about the years from 1947 through 1957, which Roger Kahn covers in his latest baseball book, "The Era," what comes to mind first, of course, is Jackie Robinson and the integration of the major leagues; the Yankees against the Dodgers in the 1947 World Series; Bobby Thomson's home run off Ralph Branca to end the 1951 playoff series between the Giants and the Dodgers, and the exodus of those two National League teams from New York City to California.
This is well-traveled territory, as the 173 entries in Mr.
Kahn's bibliography would seem to attest.
Is "The Era" therefore yet another account of how Cookie Lavagetto broke up Bill Bevens's no-hitter in the fourth game of the 1947 Series?
Or how Casey Stengel, the magical manager of the New York Yankees, and his which-ridden clauses charmed sportswriters into calling him "the old perfesser"?


Essay; The Fault, Dear Brutus, Is Not . . .
When Joe Louis was heavyweight champion of the world, he was fed a succession of pipsqueak challengers -- Lou Nova, Buddy Baer, Two-Ton Tony Galento -- until whoever faced him became known as "the bum of the month."
Today, the global superpower has been faced with the likes of the Serb Karadzic, the Somali Aidid and the Haitian Cedras, but those local bums have been belting the musclebound champ all over the ring.


Whirlpool Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Critic's Notebook; Shifting Perceptions of a Presidency
Presidential reputations are protean things, continually revised and annotated by shifting values and historical developments that vindicate or repudiate an individual President's decisions and world view.
Among the many factors that both shape and reflect popular perceptions of a President are biographies, memoirs and historical accounts of an administration.
The second volume of Robert A. Caro's biography of Lyndon Johnson ("Means of Ascent," 1990) left readers with an image of Johnson not as an architect of civil rights legislation, but as a politician of "utter ruthlessness" who "stole" his 1948 Senate election.
In contrast, David McCullough's affectionate 1992 portrait of Harry S. Truman ("Truman") served as the culmination of an ongoing process of rehabilitation, transforming an unpopular President (who left office with a 31 percent approval rating) into a kind of folk hero.


California Financial Holding (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Marianne Weill and David Waring
Marianne C. Weill, the coordinator of the book collections at the Greenwich (Conn.) Library, was married yesterday to David Inglis Waring, the music and art librarian there.
William C. Mitchel, a justice of the peace in Essex, Conn., officiated at the Fine Bouche restaurant in Centerbrook, Conn.
Mrs.
Weill is keeping her name.
She graduated from Tufts University and received a master's degree in library science from Columbia University.
She was the widow of David P. Weill.


How Pennsylvania Succeeds at Health Care
To the Editor:
"The States' Stakes in Clinton's Health Plan" (The Week in Review, Oct. 10) graphically illustrates that Pennsylvania is one of only five states with a rate of uninsured workers of under 10 percent.
And Pennsylvania has, by far, the largest population of the five.


British and U.S. Publishers Fight a Turf War for Europe
A long-simmering and complicated trade dispute over the sale of English-language books in Western Europe has finally reached its boiling point.
The dispute, which has been argued mainly in the abstract until recently, concerns the traditional ways that publishers have divided markets in different countries, and how those methods may or may not clash with European Community laws that regard all of Western Europe, including Britain, as one open market.


Ziegler Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CCB Financial Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Computers?? Brokers reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Heads of H.M.O.'s Have Concerns on Health Plan
Because President Clinton's health plan seeks to increase the number of Americans in health maintenance organizations, White House officials expected the directors of H.M.O.'s to be among the plan's most enthusiastic supporters.
But the people who run these organizations, while generally favoring the President's ideas, nevertheless express many concerns and doubts about the proposal.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Americans Win Dunhill  The American threesome of John Daly, Fred Couples and Payne Stewart edged defending champion England, 2-1, yesterday to win the Dunhill Cup in St.
Andrews, Scotland.
Although Stewart, the captain, shot a 74 to lose by four shots to Mark James, Couples carded a 68 to edge Nick Faldo by a stroke.
Daly beat Peter Baker, 70-73.
Earlier yesterday, the Americans beat Sweden in a semifinal, coming from a game down after Stewart lost to Jesper Parnevik by two shots.
Sweden was heading for a place in the final before Anders Forsbrand, a shot ahead of Couples, hit his second shot into a narrow stream.
The error cost him a penalty stroke and a double-bogey, which gave the American the lead.
Couples birdied the final hole for a 67 and a two-stroke victory. (AP) Victory in Playoff for Haas: Jay Haas, who birdied the last hole of regulation to force a playoff, sank a 10-foot birdie putt on the second extra hole to beat Bob Lohr and win the Texas Open in San Antonio.
Haas, who made a nearly 50-foot birdie putt on the 16th hole in regulation, earned $180,000. (AP)


Immucor Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Shake, Rattle and Foil: Cowboys Overcome 49ers
Piece by piece, chip by chip, the Dallas Cowboys kept chiseling away at the San Francisco 49ers until, by game's end, the 49ers had unraveled.
Up by 17-16 with 2 minutes 32 seconds left in the third quarter, the 49ers gave up a fumble that led to a Dallas touchdown, botched a snap on a field-goal attempt midway through the final quarter that could have cut the Dallas lead to 3 points and then committed successive unsportsmanlike-conduct penalties that helped lead to a Dallas field goal.


Learning Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Palmas Journal; Brazilians Rush West, to Citadel of Self-Reliance
Blueprints in hand, Walfredo Antunes de Oliveira Jr. watched officials lay this frontier city's founding stone and wondered nervously: What if we build a capital and no one comes?
Then, looking across the table-flat savanna on that day in May 1989, he noticed dust plumes in the distance.
Slowly, they converged on this patch of wilderness on the east bank of the Tocantins River.


Life Technologies (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Media Business
Advance Publications and Cox Enterprises joined the frantic bidding war for Paramount Communications.
Each agreed to contribute $500 million to a hostile takeover bid by QVC Network for the entertainment company, an investment that could substantially expand their entertainment interests.
Both Advance -- the Newhouse family's giant media company, which controls book publishing houses, newspapers, magazines and cable television operations -- and Cox are privately held.  [ Page A1. ]


Iraqis Press the Panic Button
One defeat is not normally enough to put a soccer coach in a precarious position, but Iraq's opening 3-2 loss to North Korea in World Cup qualifying play on Friday was apparently one defeat too many for the Iraqi Football Association.
This evening, two new assistant coaches, Yahya Alwan and Akram Salman, arrived here by way of Amman, Jordan to join the head coach, Adnan Dirjal.
On Monday, a former national team coach, Amo Baba, is scheduled to arrive.


Michigan Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Santa Fe Pacific Pipeline Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NATO PLANES FLY SARAJEVO SORTIES
NATO warplanes flew low-level sorties today over Serbian gun positions on the mountains around Sarajevo, apparently in a warning to Serbian nationalist leaders not to resume the artillery attacks that caused heavy casualties and widespread panic in the Bosnian capital on Saturday.
United States and other allied aircraft from a force based in Italy and aboard aircraft carriers in the Adriatic Sea roared across the city throughout the day.
The low-level flights marked a return to a pattern established in the summer, when Serbian attacks on Sarajevo prompted NATO commanders to authorize what were described as "practice bombing runs" over the Serbian gun positions.


Intercontinental Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Michigan Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Parker Drilling reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


First Federal Capital (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Boost Recycling With More Education
To the Editor:
According to New York City Department of Sanitation statistics, recycling is "way up" from 5.5 percent to 10.7 percent in the last year.
While the rise is welcome, it is still far from warranting praise.
When one considers that more than half of average household refuse consists of recyclable material, the Sanitation Department numbers reveal the public's lackluster performance in recycling.


LaSalle National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Orchestra Strike Over, Capital Opera to Open
The Washington Opera said today that its season, delayed by a strike of the opera's orchestra, would open on Nov. 13 with Gaetano Donizetti's "Anna Bolena."


Karen Hershey, Laurence Green
Karen Hershey, the development director for the Mark Morris Dance Group, a modern-dance company, was married yesterday to Laurence Jay Green, the managing director of ABC Radio International, a unit of Capital Cities/ABC Radio Networks.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Joseph Potasnik performed the ceremony at the Woodcrest Club in Muttontown, L.I.
Ms.
Hershey, who is keeping her name, graduated from Hamilton College.
She is a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Paul E. Hershey of Syosset, L.I.
The bride's father is a podiatrist in Manhasset, L.I.


Ziegler Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article on Friday about Carol Bellamy, the new director of the Peace Corps, misstated the years she served as City Council President in New York City.
She held the post from 1978 to 1985, not 1986 to 1990.
An adjoining biographical sketch misstated her position with the law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore between 1968 and 1971.
She was an associate, not a partner.


U.S. Shoe and Fallon Separate on Account
Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis and the United States Shoe Corporation in Cincinnati have parted ways on the creative portion of the company's estimated $10 million to $15 million Easy Spirit footwear account, which Fallon had handled for about a year.
The agency and client said on Friday that Fallon had resigned the assignment, which it was awarded after the closing of McElligott Wright Morrison Wright in Minneapolis, Easy Spirit's agency of less than six months.


U.S. Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Bancorp of Ohio (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An entry in the Executive Changes listing of Business Day on Thursday about Datron Systems Inc. misstated an executive's new title.
William L. Stephan was named vice president and chief financial officer, not vice president and chief operating officer.


Alexis George Pincus; Ceramics Engineer, 82
Alexis George Pincus, a retired ceramics engineer who had written 18 books on glass manufacturing, died suddenly on Friday while visiting his son in Princeton, N.J.
He was 82 years old and had been living in Caracas, Venezuela.
The cause of death was not immediately known, said his daughter Betty Balcomb.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-9 HAITIAN POLICY BATTLE BREWS
Senator Bob Dole said he would introduce legislation to restrict the President from committing forces for use in Haiti, except for reasons of national security.
The White House said it would fight the proposal.
A1


Sound Bites and Fury in a Suffolk Race
The debate was over, and James M. Catterson Jr., the Suffolk County District Attorney, was not amused.
For 30 minutes, he and his opponent had sat before the cameras in a cable television studio here, trading barbs and accusations and managing to accomplish little more than to enrage each other.
Walking briskly out the doors of the Cablevision building, Mr.
Catterson could barely contain his fury.
"What a turkey!" he muttered contemptuously, before unleashing a few more colorful epithets.


WesBanco Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Divine Miss M Really Is: Anybody Can Tell You, And Everybody Will
"I bet you didn't expect me to look quite this fabulous," Bette Midler told the Radio City Music Hall crowd, opening her performance one night last week.
But in fact she was probably wrong.
In the eyes of this crowd and all the others who have flocked to Radio City to "Experience the Divine" (as Ms. Midler's show is being billed) the past five weeks, she was fabulous before she appeared on stage and remained fabulous all night long.
As one woman in the audience said at intermission: "I don't think my heart can take all this excitement. And she does look good."
With its gaudy costuming, bawdy burlesquerie and Ms.
Midler's booming balladeering, this is a show that parades a flamboyant star in civility-defying high style, portraying a heightened sense of life's miseries and joys and celebrating nothing if not fabulousness, a quality maybe not so easy to define but very easy to understand.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
ACM Managed Dollar Income Fund Inc., New York, an initial public offering of four million shares.
Merrill Lynch &amp; Co.


RACES FOR MAYOR FOCUSING ON CRIME
Pervasive fear of violent crime is dominating mayoral races across the country in a year that is seeing the largest turnover of big-city mayors in more than three decades.
In cities as diverse as Atlanta, Boston, Detroit, Miami and Minneapolis, whether the races pit blacks against blacks, blacks against whites, whites against whites, or involve other ethnic groups, veteran mayors are retiring, and crime is the dominant issue.
In cities from New York to Seattle, challengers are using crime as a battering ram to try to unseat incumbents.


Review/Television; Blacks Who Make a Choice To Be Among Themselves
"The Faltering Dream" -- a reference to the Rev.
Dr.
Martin Luther King Jr.'s vision of a color-blind society -- focuses on successful black professionals who have chosen to live in black neighborhoods, and on black college students who socialize mainly with other blacks on campus.
As the program's host, Walter Cronkite, says ruefully, "Many blacks now prefer to be equal but separate.
In Prince Georges County, Md., near Washington, Mr.
Cronkite finds "affluent self-segregation," complete with comfortable houses, safe streets, backyard barbecues and a country club.
Distressing though that may be to white liberals for whom integration remains the American ideal, the people who live in Lake Arbor have no apologies.
"I don't want to be a novelty," says a psychologist who could find a house in a mainly white neighborhood if that was what she wanted.


Cistron Biotech reports earnings for Year to June 30


Central Mortgage Bancshares Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cistron Biotech reports earnings for Year to June 30


Jennifer Naggar, Michael G. Weltz
Jennifer Rachel Naggar, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Serge C. Naggar of New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Michael Gordon Weltz, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul Weltz of Elberon, N.J.
Rabbi Marc P. Angel performed the ceremony at the Spanish and Portuguese Synagogue in New York.
The bride, 25, is a partner at Communicology: The Science of Total Communication, conflict resolution and mediation consultants in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Cornell University.
Her father is the founder of Naggar Consulting, a business-consulting concern in New York.
Her mother, Jean V. Naggar, is the founder and president of a literary agency in New York bearing her name.


Abroad at Home; 'The Siege Is Over'
On Oct. 9 Radovan Karadzic, leader of the Serbs in Bosnia, said his forces considered the war "finished" and would not renew their attacks on the small areas held by the Muslim-led Bosnian Government.
"The Siege of Sarajevo is over," he told John F. Burns of The New York Times.
"We don't want any more territory. We have enough already."


Ms. Schneider and Mr. Dukhovni
Elizabeth Schneider, the daughter of Shel and Judith Schneider of New York, was married yesterday to Viktor Dukhovni, the son of Bronislava Schkolnikova and Naum Dukhovni of Melbourne, Australia.
Rabbi Robert Goldenberg officiated at the Radisson Empire Hotel in New York.
Ms.
Schneider is keeping her name.
She is a doctoral student in mathematics at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York.
Her father is a psychoanalyst in New York.
Her mother is an educational therapist and the assistant director of the Stephen Gaynor School, in New York.


Susan H. Manber, Louis I. Abraham
Susan Hillary Manber, a vice president and an associate research director of Ammirati &amp; Puris, an advertising agency in New York, was married yesterday to Louis I. Abraham, the computer network administrator for New York for Bank Hapoalim, the Israeli bank.
Rabbi Stephen Arnold officiated at the Vassar College Chapel in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
The bride, 29, graduated from Vassar, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is the daughter of Vivienne and Malcolm Manber of New York.
Her father is a freelance medical writer in New York.
Her mother is the chief of research at the United States Mission to the United Nations, in New York.


Has France Gone Bonkers?
It's a molehill threatening to be a mountain.
Compared to the economies involved, the European-America -- really French-American -- farm war heading toward a decisive battle is strictly marginal.
But the martial music has grown deafening.
The cohesion of the European Community and relations with the U.S. are at stake.
Leaders on both sides have proclaimed that they will never surrender, provoking warnings that the whole Western structure of accommodation that won the cold war could be brought down.


Work Recovery (NSC) reports earnings for Year to June 30


The Democrats' Big Guns
"The party of Bill Clinton is an aggressive and confident party, willing to confront its foes," said David Wilhelm, the chairman of the Democratic Party, in a recent speech, declaring Democrats' willingness to do battle with powerful interest groups like the National Rifle Association.
Good for Mr.
Wilhelm.
But the party's boldness disappeared late last month when key House Democrats helped defeat an amendment to end the Army's Civilian Marksmanship Program -- a pet N.R.A. boondoggle.
Indeed, the sponsor of the amendment, Representative Carolyn Maloney, Democrat of New York, had to fight some Democratic leaders just to get her motion to the floor for a vote.
The program was established after the Spanish Civil War, when the Army found that too many recruits didn't know how to shoot.
It may have made sense in 1903, but such a program has no military value in the modern world of high-tech weaponry and well-trained reservists.
The Army concedes this point.


Xyplex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Debra Feinseth, Andrew Bodner
Debra Abbe Feinseth, the daughter of Miriam B. Feinseth of Fort Lee, N.J., and Melvin Feinseth of South Orange, N.J., was married yesterday to Andrew Ross Bodner, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Bodner of Livingston, N.J.
Rabbi Irving Spielman performed the ceremony at Tamcrest, a country club in Alpine, N.J.
Mrs.
Bodner, 28, is an account executive at the Gillian Group, a dress manufacturer in New York.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
Her father, now retired, owned the Advanced Leasing Company, an automobile-leasing concern in Summit, N.J.
Her mother is the director of advertising and communications for North America at Hunter Douglas Inc. in Upper Saddle River, N.J., makers of window coverings.


North Fork Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Weldotron Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Today's TV Listings
Television and radio news, listings and advertising appear today on pages B8-9.


Grenada Sunburst System Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Firstbank of Illinois Co.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Glacier Water Services reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NBB Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Central Mortgage Bancshares Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


City Seeks to Grow by Disappearing
Like other big city mayors, W. W. Herenton of Memphis was concerned that employers were fleeing to the suburbs and that white city residents were fleeing as well.
But Mr.
Herenton recently took a gamble that few other mayors would take: he proposed that his city merge with the suburbs in surrounding Shelby County.
To be sure, suburban officials are wary about the proposal.
For one thing, said the Mayor of one suburban city, Germantown, Charles Salvaggio, no suburban political leaders were included on a committee that Mr.
Herenton appointed on Oct. 12 to look into the legal issues in such a merger.


PRO FOOTBALL: Sports of The Times; The Giants Who Block and Create the Crease
AS the Giants awaited yesterday's game with the Philadelphia Eagles, guard William Roberts glanced across the locker room at Lewis Tillman.
"You feel like a buck-50 today?" Roberts asked.
"Yeah, I do," the running back said with a smile.


Giga-Tronics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


First Federal Savings Bank (Colo.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Banks See Excess in Reserves
As banks across the country report record profits, they are admitting that their problems with bad loans in 1990 and 1991 were overstated to such a degree that they can now recoup some of the charges that caused big losses in earlier years.
To some extent, the turnabout reflects the banks' own murky process for estimating loan losses, which includes a large margin for error at even well-run institutions.
But it is also a reminder that the fears of earlier years -- expressed in warnings from members of Congress and from Ross Perot, that banks could follow the downward spiral of savings and loans -- were exaggerated. 'May Have Gone Too Far'
"Congress and bank regulators were extremely concerned that banks be managed prudently," said David S. Berry, director of research at Keefe, Bruyette &amp; Woods, a securities firm specializing in banks.
"In retrospect, they may have gone too far."


For Race and Ethnicity, Shifts in Roles in Politics
RUMINATING on the difference between race and ethnicity in American politics, Representative Charles B. Rangel explained the other day why blacks in particular have not had an easy time inheriting the mantle of municipal power.
"The difference between race and ethnicity is that historically when everyone was out competing they knew at one time their name would get on the ballot," he said.
"First the Irish had to wait for the white Anglo-Saxons, and the Italians had to wait for the Irish, and the Jews had to wait for the Italians. But you knew that with party tickets, when your time came, you'd get it. Then they threw away the old rule book because who was up next? The blacks.


Eastern Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


First Union Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Community Bank System reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cami'z Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Dividend Meetings


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  None  Tuesday  Housing Starts . . .
September  Wednesday  None  Thursday Weekly Jobless Claims  Friday None


Chevy Chase's Show Canceled After 6 Weeks
Chevy Chase became the first casualty of the intense competition in late-night television yesterday as Fox Broadcasting announced that his late-night talk show was ceasing production immediately.
It had just six weeks on the air.
Acknowledging that the show had little or no chance to improve its dismal ratings performance, Lucie Salhany, the chairwoman of Fox Broadcasting, said yesterday that the network had decided to drop the showin the best interests of both its affiliated stations and its star.


Toronto's Leiter Fulfills His Backyard Dreams
Al Leiter calmly remembered the bleakest moments of a baseball career that has been fraught with expectations, disappointments and now, finally, excitement.
He had just won a World Series game with some stingy relief pitching Saturday and he had just helped the Blue Jays get a quick start against the Philadelphia Phillies.
But May 1991 was still on his mind.


Damark International Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Metropolitan Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Xyplex Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ms. Mazurczyk, Mr. Carlin
Victoria Francesca Mazurczyk was married yesterday to Benjamin Marc Carlin.
Both are assistant vice presidents at Citibank, she in Manhattan, he in Long Island City, Queens.
The Rev.
Robert Jacunski, a Roman Catholic priest who is a cousin of the bride, and Cantor Raymond Smolover officiated jointly at the Belle Haven Club in Greenwich, Conn.
Mrs.
Carlin graduated from Haverford College.
She is a daughter of Victoria and Henry Mazurczyk of Rumson, N.J.
Her father is a project manager, in Eatontown, N.J., with the Department of Defense.
Her mother is a real estate saleswoman with Little Silver (N.J.) Realty.


Eisenreich Conquers a Stigma to Reach His Goal
The cruel imitations do not bother Jim Eisenreich anymore.
The mean-spirited spectators who know he has Tourette's syndrome and try to unnerve him by contorting their faces and screaming as sometimes does a person with the disease are wasting their energy.
Eisenreich has heard it, seen it and conquered it.
There are about one million people in the United States who have the neurological movement disorder, which manifests itself in nervous twitches and impromptu shouts.
Only one of them plays major league baseball.
Only one of them is playing in the World Series.


Dallas Semiconductor Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Shari L. Kellner, Jeffrey Jacobson
Shari Lynn Kellner, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Irwin L. Kellner of Port Washington, L.I., was married yesterday to Jeffrey Howard Jacobson, a son of Dr.
Donald Jacobson and Susan Jacobson, both of Woodbury, L.I.
Rabbi Neil Kurshan performed the ceremony at the Woodbury (L.I.) Jewish Center.
Mrs.
Jacobson, 25, is an assistant treasurer at the Bankers Trust Company in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y.
Her father is the chief economist at the Chemical Banking Corporation in New York.


Critic's Notebook; An Operatic Marilyn, Goddess or Victim, Doesn't Fill Spotlight
One question raised by the recent world premiere of Ezra Laderman's "Marilyn" at the New York City Opera is whether Marilyn Monroe is the proper subject for an opera.
And if she isn't, what should operas in our time be about?
It's a worthwhile question, for in its grandiose and somewhat distorted way, opera is another of those mirrors culture holds up to the times it lives in.
The very first operas in the early 1600's were about gods and goddesses, a fact explainable by their listeners.
Audiences were the height of Venetian nobility; and if opera was by nature larger than their own lives, who else would they have had to look up to?
Verdi spent most of his career in the midst of violent struggles toward a unified Italy, hence, perhaps, his taste for historical figures fighting comparable battles in a real or mythic past.


The Mayoral Campaign -- At Issue: The Economy; Fixing New York's Sick Economy
New York City's economy is limping along, with high unemployment and rising welfare rolls.
Voters naturally demand solutions from their leaders.
Mayor David Dinkins and his challenger, Rudolph Giuliani, have responded by offering development plans that promise to turn the local economy around.
The plan put forward by Mr.
Dinkins promises too much: 185 pages of proposals to channel money into biotechnology, business services, jewelry, apparel and about 10 other high- and low-tech industry clusters that often seem to have no more claim on taxpayer dollars than the fact that they hire lots of voters.
Mr.
Giuliani promises too little: Cut taxes to make it cheaper for business to operate in the city -- but leave it to some other time to figure out how to cut spending.


Work Recovery (NSC) reports earnings for Year to June 30


Western Waste Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Banknorth reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Arrow Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Terror of Duvalier Years Is Haunting Haiti Again
When President-for-Life Jean-Claude Duvalier fled in 1986 after a popular uprising, Haitians thought for sure that they had rid themselves of the family dynasty that ruled the country with a tight grip for 29 years.
But the Duvalierists, once operating clandestinely, are now out in the open, in a sort of recurring nightmare.
In the last month, several military-backed political organizations have been formed with the common goal of preventing the return of Jean-Bertrand Aristide as President, who was ousted two years ago in a violent coup.


Researchers Say U.S. Social Well-Being Is 'Awful'
Increases in child abuse and child poverty have driven the nation's social well-being to its lowest point in two decades, according to a study being released today by social scientists at Fordham University.
The scientists also evaluated Americans' confidence in their quality of life, and they said it was strikingly low.


Wellfleet Communications (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Provident Bancorp Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hancock Holding Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Headline
My view is, whether you're Republican or Democrat, Congress has decided that we'd better be more involved.
I think we were sort of caught napping in the Somalia effort.
We've seen the outrage of the American people, and I think what we need to do is go back and take a look at all the peacekeeping, how we use American forces. -- SENATOR BOB DOLE, the Senate minority leader.  [ A7:1. ]


Immigration Hurts City, New Yorkers Say in Poll
With the largest wave of immigration since the turn of the century raising New York City's foreign-born population to 28 percent, most residents say there are too many immigrants in town and add that while most are law-abiding, they have made the city a worse place to live, a new poll has found.
At a time when several illegal immigrants have gone on trial in the bombing of the World Trade Center, the poll also found that most New Yorkers think illegal immigrants pose a serious threat of terrorism and believe that the trade center bombing would not have occurred if immigration controls had been tighter.


River Forest Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


What, No Practice? Eagles Tell O'Brien To Just Go Wing It
What a scenario.
Bubby Brister, the Philadelphia Eagles' quarterback, goes down late in the first quarter of a scoreless game against the Giants with a badly sprained right ankle.
Ken O'Brien, an Eagle for only 12 days, takes over in the stadium where he once started for the Jets.
Can O'Brien, discarded this year by the Jets and then the Green Bay Packers, become an instant hero?
Unfortunately for the Eagles, no.
Under the circumstances, O'Brien did well, but the Giants had too many weapons and beat the Eagles, 21-10.


Eastern Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


First Tennessee National Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Giga-Tronics reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


First Michigan Bank Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In a Gesture, Somalis Dismantle Barriers
In an apparent gesture of good will, forces loyal to Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid have dismantled most of the dozen roadblocks they had erected along a main thoroughfare in the capital, United States military officers said today.
United States Army helicopters that fly surveillance missions over the city every night have detected a significant decrease in the number of barricades along 21 October Road, their commander said.
A flight along the streetthis afternoon showed that only two or three barricades now block the way of traffic.


Whirlpool Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Amid Cheers for Pilot, Tears for Dead
Along the road leading to the entrance to Fort Campbell, the signs in front of dozens of businesses read "Welcome Home Michael Durant, NSDQ." In this most military of towns, only an outsider and the uninitiated had to ask what NSDQ meant, and when they did, the answer was uttered like some magical incantation.
"N.S.D.Q. are the initials of the motto of the 160th, Mike's unit," said Loretta South, the wife of another member of the unit.
"The unit is called the Night Stalkers and the motto is 'Night Stalkers don't quit.' "


First Commerce Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Knogo Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


T. Rowe Price Sticks With Its Niche
Yes, there was a T. Rowe Price, and the money manager had a few precepts about running an investment business: a belief in low-cost growth stocks, a desire to be a niche player and a view that low-cost funds were the wave of the future.
At the investment company here that bears his name, the strategy that Mr.
Price laid out decades ago continues today.


Verifone Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; When news producers become part of the news, there's bound to be tension at the network.
NEWS producers rarely make news, and when they do, it's not necessarily good news.
Thus, it was surprising -- and for them, probably dismaying -- when the top producers of the NBC and ABC nightly newscasts became caught up in news stories last week.
At NBC, the executive producer of "Nightly News," Jeff Gralnick, made headlines by referring to the Somali faction leader, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, as an "educated jungle bunny."


World Economies


Dance in Review
Joy Kellman  Bessie Schonberg Theater
Joy Kellman makes her audiences work for their dance, to judge by an evening of her choreography presented on Thursday.
Ms.
Kellman's work also requires patience, but the rewards are great.


Fifth Third Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Commerce Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CCB Financial Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Great Goalie Debate Is More Like a Monologue
When the Islanders left practice at the Long Island Skating Academy today, they saw, on nearby lawns, some colorful signs urging voters to "Support Healey," a candidate for public office.
The spelling is slightly different, but it's close enough to remind them of Glenn Healy, the goalie who helped take the Islanders to the third round of the Stanley Cup playoffs last season before ending up with the Rangers through expansion drafts and trades.


Turks' War With Kurds Reaches a New Ferocity
One year after Turkish generals said they had broken the spine of a Kurdish separatist insurgency in these wild and remote uplands, the war has become more violent and more intractable than ever before.
Since the breakdown in May of a cease-fire declared by the rebel movement, the avowedly Marxist Kurdish Workers Party, more than 1,600 people, many of them civilians, have died, the Government says.
That toll amounts to the worst wave of killing in a nine-year war that has claimed more than 7,400 lives and raised fundamental questions about the stability of an area central to regional American policy.


Madge N.V. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


National City Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


French Fries and Fraternal Combat
Recrimination and rage mixed with family pride and a sense of betrayal have welled up in an unusual and very public struggle inside one of Canada's wealthiest families and one of its most successful companies, McCain Foods Ltd.
The issue: Who will succeed the two surviving McCain brothers to run the $2.3 billion family business?
The fight has become so bitter that the two brothers communicate chiefly through lawyers, other intermediaries and memos.
Consider this brotherly exchange of memos between the two, when one of them, Harrison, the chairman and co-chief executive, asks his brother, Wallace, the president and other co-chief, why he opposes him.


Independent Bank Corp (Mass.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bond Firms Poised to Ban Political Role
Wall Street's big brokerage firms are poised to announce a plan today to voluntarily ban political contributions to government officials and candidates who could award them lucrative municipal bond business.
The firms are expected to acknowledge their acceptance of the principle of a voluntary ban at a meeting in Washington with the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, executives involved in the discussions on the proposal said.
At the same time, the S.E.C. chairman, Arthur Levitt Jr., is expected to endorse the plan.


Tennant Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bucky Dreamed of Domes as Shelters
To the Editor:
The awesome earthquake in India with its tremendous loss of life brought back memories of two weeks with Buckminster Fuller, the engineer and inventor, 40 years ago.


First Bank System reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pugilistic Philosophy Provides the Punch for the Phils
In boxing circles, there's a saying attributed to Philadelphia's Smokin' Joe Frazier that goes something like, "Kill the body, and the head will die."
Well, Frazier's fellow Philadelphians, the National League champion Phillies, have used a variation of that theme with great success during the post-season: Kill the head of the batting order, and the body can't hurt you that much.


Candidates' Views on Economy Reflect U.S. Debate Over Policy
As New York City struggles to shake itself out of its worst recession in half a century, the mayoral candidates are offering sharply different prescriptions on how to revive the local economy -- a split that reflects their philosophical differences over the limits of city government and mirrors a national debate over economic policy.
The Republican-Liberal challenger, Rudolph W. Giuliani, contends that fiscal conservatism -- keeping a balanced budget, streamlining city agencies and keeping them off the backs of business -- provides the best hope for the economy, allowing private enterprise to flourish on its own.
Venture Capital Funds
But Mayor David N. Dinkins has unveiled proposals that many see as a sort of municipal version of an industrial policy, with the city marshaling resources to the aid of 12 specific industries, ranging from garbage recycling to biotechnology research, in the hope that they will become centers of economic growth.


Mercantile Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shortage of Doctors in Poor Areas Is Seen as Barrier to Health Plans
Two weeks ago, Earn J. Lloyd of the Bronx staggered into the emergency room at Montefiore Medical Center nearly comatose, nearly blind and barely able to walk.
Doctors discovered he had severe diabetes, which kept him in the hospital for the next 10 days.
But Mr.
Lloyd's more serious medical problem was the lack of a decent general doctor, which for him and hundreds of thousands of others in New York's poorer neighborhoods, turns treatable outpatient diseases like diabetes into life-threatening conditions.
In vast stretches of inner city New York -- from Harlem to Crown Heights to Morris Heights, where Mr.
Lloyd lives -- there are only a handful of doctors and virtually none who offer patients a reasonable standard of primary care.


Unemployment
The average length of unemployment claims is at an all-time high in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut in what state labor department officials say provides one of the most graphic indications of a job market that continues to shrink.
The average length of claims gives a picture of the job prospects of the recently unemployed but does not account for those entering the job market or the long-term unemployed.
While unemployment rates have fallen, after soaring to their highest levels in a decade last year, employment remains flat in the region largely because jobs are not being created.
New York's Labor Department currently estimates the average worker who loses their job will be out of work for more than a year.


Analysts International Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; Too Long, Too Late, But Still the Series
THE World Series.
No matter how much they tinker with it, it still has a special sound.
The World Series.
They play it in Canada now, but the bunting is still a festive international red, white and blue.
Players scratch themselves and spit and make eye contact with the fans just like in mid-season, but it's different.
It's the World Series.
"This is what you work for all your career, to get here," said a respectful Darren Daulton of the Phillies, who last night tied the 90th World Series at one game each with a wobbly 6-4 victory over the Blue Jays.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; If prices exceed perceived value, big brands may be at risk.
THE recent setbacks suffered by some of the nation's most famous name-brand products have "sounded an alarm," says the departing president of the trade organization representing giant advertisers, which members ignore at their peril.
"I don't have any question whatsoever about the power of brands, but many manufacturers have escalated retail prices beyond the value that the consumer perceives to be in their brands," DeWitt F. Helm Jr. said in an interview before the start yesterday of the 84th annual meeting and conference of the Association of National Advertisers.


American United Global Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Co-operative Bank of Concord reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dance in Review
Susan Hefner and Dancers  Dia Center for the Arts
The program presented by Susan Hefner and Dancers on Friday night looked like an attempt to take dance into a new realm of sleek social commentary.
True, Ms.
Hefner and three other female dancers moved across the floor to music, composed and performed live by Evan Gallagher and Martha Colby.
But the choreography, music and spoken text skimmed the surface, both as a whole and as individual elements.


Society Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Bancorp of Ohio (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Royce M. Phillips; School Principal, 69
Royce Marcellus Phillips, a former assistant principal in the New York City schools and former chairman of the education department at Medgar Evers College in Brooklyn, died on Oct. 3 at his home in Yonkers.
He was 69 years old.
The cause was a heart attack, said his sister, Daisye Glasse.


General Computer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


First Michigan Bank Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dinkins Stresses Recycling Plan As Pier Is Opened for Public Use
Outlining an environmental platform that rests largely on programs begun during his first term, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that the city would continue an aggressive program to recycle garbage, replace gas-burning city vehicles with those that burn alternative fuels and buy large tracts of land to protect its reservoirs of drinking water in the Catskill Mountains.
Speaking before a group of environmentalists at the foot of Pier 26 in lower Manhattan, Mr.
Dinkins criticized the "say-nothing, do-nothing, anti-environmental candidacy" of his Republican-Liberal opponent, Rudolph W. Giuliani, who has so far not made environmental protection a major theme of his campaign.


Western Waste Industries reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Despite U.S. Urging, Arab Lands Hold Firm to Their Israel Boycott
Diplomats said today that the 43-year-old Arab ban on commercial and financial ties with Israel would not be lifted anytime soon and that the official blacklist of foreign companies that do business with Israel might even be expanded at the urging of hard-line countries.
Arab League officials are to meet in Damascus on Oct. 24 to discuss increasing the blacklist despite appeals from United States officials, who argue that the boycott of 10,000 companies should be lifted soon to add momentum to Middle East peace talks.


Plan for Japan's Media Lab Is Stalled
A bold and much-debated attempt to establish a Japanese version of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology's famous Media Laboratory is suffering from financial and organizational problems and faces an uncertain future, many people involved in the project say.
The idea for the laboratory goes back to 1987, when a Japanese university and business executive signed a contract with M.I.T.
The goal was to build a research facility in Japan with the creative atmosphere of M.I.T.'s lab, which is known for its free-wheeling style and ground-breaking developments in multimedia technology and other areas.


General Computer Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


One Step for Courage and One for a Cure for Cancer


Provident Bancorp Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dance in Review
Ballet Metropolitano de Caracas  Pace Downtown Theater
There is something to be said for immodesty.
Keyla Ermecheo, the director of the charming Ballet Metropolitano de Caracas, chose to open and close a program presented on Saturday night with dances by two Venezuelan forefathers.
But the best part of the evening was a suite of three pieces by Ms.
Ermecheo, each a light and delicious souffle of a dance.


Metropolitan Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Newhouse and Cox Join QVC In Hostile Bid for Paramount
Advance Publications Inc., the Newhouse family's giant media company, which controls book publishers, newspapers, magazines and cable television operations, and Cox Enterprises joined the frantic bidding for Paramount Communications Inc. yesterday.
Each company has agreed to contribute $500 million to a hostile takeover bid by QVC Network Inc. for Paramount, the entertainment company.
That investment could give Cox and Advance new programming for their cable systems.
It could also help them develop new electronic uses for their vast array of published material.


Damark International Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Cami'z Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Tennant Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Madge N.V. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Knogo Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Hancock Holding Co. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Western Micro Technology Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fourth Financial Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Leo Salkin Is Dead; Movie Scriptwriter And Animator, 80
Leo Salkin, a Hollywood film animator and screenwriter who was the inspiration for the squinty-eyed cartoon character Mr.
Magoo, died on Wednesday at St.
Joseph's Hospital in Burbank, Calif.
He was 80 years old and lived in Hollywood.
The cause was congestive heart failure, said Ron Diamond, a family friend.


Phils Get the Big Hit, Then the Big Outs and the Series Is Tied
On one side, perhaps outside the cage, is Jim Eisenreich.
Short hair, no scruffy beard (no beard at all), no protruding stomach.
On the other, Mitch Williams.
Hairy, wild, unpredictable, nerve-racking.
Eisenreich, who sat out virtually five years early in his baseball career because of a belatedly diagnosed case of Tourette's syndrome, crushed a third-inning, three-run home run against Dave Stewart that propelled Philadelphia to a 6-4 victory over Toronto tonight in the second game of the World Series.


Becky Seawright and Jay Hershenson
Becky Seawright, a lawyer in New York, was married yesterday to Jay Hershenson, the vice chancellor for university relations of the City University of New York.
Rabbi Bernard Siegel performed the ceremony at Tavern on the Green in New York.
The bride was a legislative assistant to Lloyd Bentsen, now Treasury Secretary, when he was a Democratic Senator from Texas.
She also was an executive director of the Texas Women's Political Caucus and served on the fund-raising staff of Governor Ann Richards of Texas.
She graduated from Tarleton State University and received her law degree from the City University School of Law at Queens College.
She is a daughter of Duncan and Connie Seawright of Meridian, Tex.


Patents
DO men and women tend to invent different things?
Autumn Stanley, an independent scholar from Portola Valley, Calif., who has been studying the question for 15 years, says she thinks so.


First Bank System reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mercantile Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Bubble for 100 Years: A Place in Brooklyn


Inter-Tel Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Conservative Candidate Seen as Spoiler and Foil
When George J. Marlin, the Conservative Party candidate for Mayor of New York, pulled a rubber chicken out of his pocket and flopped it toward the empty place at the table where he had hoped Rudolph W. Giuliani would be a sitting duck in a televised debate yesterday, Mayor David N. Dinkins chuckled -- and not just because it was funny.
In fact, Mr.
Marlin, a 41-year-old investment manager and political novice from Queens, could end up costing Mr.
Giuliani vital conservative votes in a contest that polls suggest remains too close to call.
Though his support has hovered at only a couple of percentage points, that may change after encounters like the one with Mr.
Dinkins yesterday morning on WNBC-TV, and another last Thursday on the cable channel New York 1, both of which amounted to tag-team attacks on Mr.
Giuliani.


A Timely Peace Prize
The joint award of the Nobel Peace Prize to President F. W. de Klerk and his former prisoner, Nelson Mandela, was astute and well timed.
These two South Africans have been wary but nevertheless indispensable partners in a transition to non-racial democracy that will become a reality in elections scheduled for next April.
Thus the award endorses and helps propel a marvelous transformation few expected to occur in this century.
While celebrating what it called "Mandela's and de Klerk's constructive policy of peace and reconciliation," the Nobel Committee seemed to be honoring the process of racial peace as much as the two men who were largely responsible for it.
"These are not saints," Francis Sejersted, the chairman of the committee, said in Oslo.
"They are politicians in a complicated reality and it is the total picture that was decisive."


New Spanish Weekly
The Los Angeles Times has begun a new weekly Spanish-language publication called Nuestro Tiempo.
The magazine-style publication replaces a bilingual broadsheet section of the same name that The Times began publishing in 1989.


Society Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American United Global Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Direct-Marketing Venture Is Formed
Ayer Inc. and Ross Roy Communications Inc. are combining their direct-marketing capabilities to form a joint venture company in New York called Worldwide 1 on 1.
The new agency, which merges Ayer's subsidiary, Worldwide Direct, with Ross Roy's direct marketing operations, opens with 50 employees and billings estimated at $75 million.
Len Short, 34, the executive vice president and general manager of Ross Roy's direct-marketing functions in Bloomfield Hills, Mich., heads the joint venture as president, and Beverly Beaudoin, 42, the president of Worldwide Direct in New York, becomes executive vice president and general manager.


Independent Bank Corp (Mass.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


More Than Half-Court Measures for Knicks This Season
Finding talented players will be easy for Pat Riley this season.
Finding enough playing time to utilize all of that talent could be difficult.
New York's impressive 106-88 victory over the Houston Rockets in Saturday night's preseason opener at North Charleston, S.C., illustrated the Knicks' superb depth.
On a night when Anthony Mason (sore left shoulder) did not play, New York did not miss a beat.
Anthony Bonner (8 points, 4 rebounds) sparkled as a backup forward.
Tony Campbell (8 points) made four of his five shots as a backup small forward.
And Rolando Blackman (10 points), the backup shooting guard, enjoyed a successful debut following off-season back surgery.


National City Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Talk of Hollywood; A Director Moves On, Whether He's Safe Or Out
It's close to midnight, and Barry Levinson is in the closing hours of completing his newest film.
The untitled movie, made by Paramount Pictures and starring Joe Pesci and Christian Slater, is set in Hollywood and deals with actors but isn't really about the movie business.
"The movie kind of crosses into two things," said Mr.
Levinson, walking to his trailer.
"It's about the collapse of Hollywood, the place, and what it really is now, and it's about someone who has illusions of being an actor. And the two things kind of intersect."


TRANSACTIONS
WEEKEND Baseball National League  ATLANTA BRAVES -- Added Mike Birkbeck, pitcher, to the 40-man roster.


Computers?? Brokers reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Only Bills to Be Auctioned By the Treasury This Week
Treasury financing this week is confined to today's weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills.
On Friday, the outstanding three- month bill closed at a rate of 2.99 percent, and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.08 percent.


California Financial Holding (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Officer Injured by Shots Through Window
A police officer was hit with shards of shattered glass yesterday after two stray bullets plowed into the 88th Precinct house in Brooklyn, the police said.
The officer, Beverly Durity, 26, was treated at Bellevue Hospital Center for facial cuts and a glass sliver in an eye, said Sgt.
Joseph Gallagher, a police spokesman.
She was later released.
The incident occurred at 5:25 P.M. when a man across the street from the precinct house, at 298 Classon Avenue in Bedford-Stuyvesant, fired numerous shots at another man, the sergeant said.
One bullet smashed through a first-floor window, injuring no one.
A second bullet shattered a second-floor window and sprayed glass at Officer Durity.


McGaughey Sending 4 On to the Breeders' Cup
On the day after he made racing history by saddling the winners of five major stakes races, Shug McGaughey counted his blessings and his horses and decided to send four of his winners to California to extend his success into the Breeders' Cup.
"They all seemed to come out fine," he said yesterday morning at his barn at Belmont Park.
"It looks like we've got some contenders."


Piling It On as Mayoral Campaign Tackles Race
For three and a half years, Mayor David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani bobbed and feinted toward their electoral rematch, the issue of race a mostly unspoken taboo between them, just as it was in their last campaign.
But since President Clinton mused aloud three weeks ago that too many New Yorkers were unwilling to back the Mayor because he is black, all boundaries seem to have fallen.
How that happened in the most diverse city in the nation, where political victories have long depended on coalitions that cross racial and ethnic lines and where political oratory has long been famously crass, is a testament to many factors, but above all to the closeness of the contest and to the belief in both camps that appeals to pride, prejudice, anxiety or guilt can be used to influence the votes of at least some New Yorkers.


River Forest Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Tennessee National Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Daly at the Improv: Part of His Shooting Act Is Edwards
Deciding the starting lineup for the preseason opener last Thursday against his old team, the Detroit Pistons, was a no-brainer for Nets Coach Chuck Daly.
For Monday night's exhibition against Cleveland in Asheville, N.C., he plans to put more thought into it.
"I can't tell you who I'm going to start right now," Daly said after taking the Nets through a full schedule of drills at their practice center before embarking on their trip.
"Everything's up in the air. I'm going to have to sleep on it."


Florida State and Notre Dame Speed on Collision Course
Florida State's path to a national championship has few obstacles remaining, the most notable being a game against Notre Dame at South Bend on Nov. 13.
The Seminoles and the Fighting Irish now stand No. 1 and No. 2, respectively, in the latest Associated Press and CNN/USA Today polls.
Notre Dame had been No. 3 in both polls last week but moved up a notch after unbeaten Alabama could do no better than tie Tennessee on Saturday.


Review/Music; Ozawa Tackles Complexity of Henze's Eighth
The Boston Symphony Orchestra, which has commissioned so much that is beautiful and important in 20th-century music, brought the newest of its children to Avery Fisher Hall on Friday night.
Here, Hans Werner Henze's Eighth Symphony was framed by works of Berlioz.
On Wednesday and Thursday at Carnegie Hall, the orchestra played the Bartok First Piano Concerto with Krystian Zimerman and then the Mahler Fourth Symphony.
All three concerts were conducted by Seiji Ozawa who is celebrating his 20th season as music director in Boston.
It is a comment on Mr.
Henze's powerful personal voice that his Seventh Symphony -- which can sound so queasy and distasteful in the listener's ear -- and this serenely high-spirited new one use by and large the same methods and materials.
A dominating message in Mr.
Henze's symphonic style is that moods are not monoliths, that what we receive under the heading of anguish or good humor is in fact roiling complexity composed of many elements.


Looks Like Fall. Feels Like Summer.


No Screaming, Just the Facts: Giants Are Alone in First
The Giants, in a very rapid and startling transformation, have taken on the personality of their coach, Dan Reeves.
He has turned this year's Giants from complainers to a gritty, cohesive unit that plays smart, doesn't quit and says all the right things.
If this is beginning to sound like "The Waltons Go to Giants Stadium," sorry.
Yet this attitude brings up another trait of this team, another way in which it has become a carbon copy of its coach.
Take the atmosphere in the locker room after they beat up on the battered Philadelphia Eagles, 21-10, before 76,050 at Giants Stadium.
They had just beaten a team that had won five straight and 9 of the last 10 games against the Giants.
They had just vaulted to sole possession of first place in the National Conference East -- still the league's toughest division -- with a 5-1 record.
The last time they were in first alone was Week 16 of 1990.


Verifone Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Wellfleet Communications (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Community Bank System reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Confusion Over Verdicts in Denny Trial
This careworn city was in a state of nervous limbo today as it once again awaited the possibility of verdicts in a racially tense trial: the case of two black men accused of beating a white truck driver in last year's riots.
On Saturday, the jury said it had reached verdicts on 9 of 15 counts against the two men and had deadlocked on the others.
The judge, John W. Ouderkirk of Los Angeles County Superior Court, indicated he might read the verdicts on Monday but said he would also ask the jury to consider deliberating further on the unresolved counts.


INSIDE
NATO Warplanes Buzz Serbs
NATO planes flew low-level sorties over Serbian gun positions around Sarajevo, apparently in a warning not to resume shelling.
Page A5.
Los Angeles on Edge, Again
Los Angeles nervously awaited the release of verdicts in the case of two black men accused of beating a white truck driver in the '92 riots.
Page A10.
Policing Themselves
Wall Street's major brokerage firms are poised to adopt a voluntary ban on contributions to politicians who could award them business.
Page D1.
No More Chevy Chase
Fox canceled the comedian's six-week-old talk show because of dismal ratings and an imminent ratings "sweep" month.
Page B8.


Stewart Again Loses His Cape and His Location
Philadelphia's John Kruk said there was no reason to panic just because the Phillies were facing Dave Stewart.
Just because Stewart was "90-0 in the post-season," as Kruk estimated.
"Hopefully he's due for a loss," Kruk said, as the Philadelphia Phillies' first baseman and resident wit said before the second game of the World Series.


Workplace Drug Tests Incriminate Unfairly
To the Editor:
"Testing Workers for Drugs Reduces Company Problems" (front page, Oct. 10) neglects to mention the countless victims of urine-testing abuse who have been wrongfully fired without the slightest evidence that their performance has been adversely affected by drugs.


Kasparov Builds an Unshakable Defense
For weeks Gary Kasparov has spent his energies fine-tuning his favorite defense, but not until Game 18 of his world championship match with Nigel Short yesterday in London did it look foolproof.
Short could get nowhere, and after 34 moves, he and Kasparov shook hands on a draw.
The half-point brings the Russian's tally to 11 1/2 points, so that one more point will give him the 12 1/2 required to win the 24-game series and a $1.43 million share of the $2.55 million purse.
Short, at 6 1/2 points, thus cannot seriously be considered in contention.


Analysts International Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Banknorth reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jenine Tankoos, Michael Diament
Jenine Sheryl Tankoos, the daughter of Sandra and Kenneth Tankoos of Roslyn Heights, L.I., was married yesterday to Michael Stewart Diament, a son of Harriet Diament and Dr.
Bert Diament of Wesport, Conn.
Rabbi Aaron Petuchowski performed the ceremony at the Coveleigh Club in Rye, N.Y.
Ms.
Tankoos is keeping her name.
She is a solid-waste specialist in New York for the Environmental Protection Agency.
She graduated magna cum laude from Barnard College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.


New Immigrants Test Nation's Heartland
Its milky white sky sits squat on the plains, a horizon unbroken but for grain elevators and water towers.
At a feed yard off Old Highway 83, cowboys gallop into the noonday sun, fringed chaps slapping their thighs.
Blond girls practice cheerleading jumps on square lawns adorned by pumpkins.
Near a central intersection, a large sign says simply: Have a Nice Day.
That is Garden City at first sight, stereotypical Kansas, wheatlands and cattle pens and rosy cheeks.
But before long, a second reality grows apparent.
There is a tortilla factory on Main Street, a Laotian market offering Thai videos on Fulton Street.
At dawn, hundreds of immigrants and refugees file into Slaughter Employee Parking at a giant meat-packing plant.  'A Little New York City'
At nightfall, while locals head to the Grain Bin for Texas two-step dancing, Mexican immigrants crowd into Saigon, a Vietnamese-run karaoke bar, and Southeast Asians pack the Pho Hoa One Restaurant, where the fish sauce and lemon grass are plentiful.


NASA Hopes Third Time Is a Charm


CHRONICLE
LINDA LAVIN, the actress, became teary-eyed last week when none other than MAYOR DAVID N. DINKINS serenaded her at a luncheon fund-raiser at the Grand Hyatt.
While waiting in a receiving line to meet the Mayor, Ms.
Lavin was standing between MATILDA CUOMO, New York State's First Lady, and America's First Lady, HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON, as Mayor Dinkins made his handshaking way down the line.
When asked by Mrs.
Cuomo whether he had met Ms.
Lavin, the Mayor burst into song: "I walk down the street, my heart skips a beat, hello Linda."


LaSalle National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dance in Review
Rebecca Kelly  Gould Hall
Since 1979, Rebecca Kelly has directed a little company capable of giving neat performances in both classical and contemporary styles.
She is a good organizer, but her choreography is decidedly uneven in quality, as her troupe, Rebecca Kelly Dance, demonstrated on Thursday night.


Nigerian Soldier, Despite Ordeal, Shows No Wrath Toward Somalis
Stripped naked, chained to a table and bound hand to leg in pitch darkness, Pvt.
Umar Shantali of Nigeria, who was captured by Somali militia forces in early September, was convinced he would be killed by his captors.
He spent his time praying and thinking of his parents and his girlfriend.
In the five and a half weeks that the United Nations peacekeeper was held, he was allowed to bathe only once, the day before his release on Oct. 14.


HCA-Hospital Corp. of America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Watsco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Former Apple Chairman Causes a Stir in New Job
A question that was much on the lips of Wall Street's small-company pros yesterday: John Sculley and Spectrum?
Mr.
Sculley, who until Friday was chairman of Apple Computer Inc., has accepted the job of chairman and chief executive at Spectrum Information Technologies, a company with a computer store franchising business, seven patents for wireless data transmission and a controversial history as a public company.


Italy in a Furor as 'Mata Hari' Talks of Military Plot
After months of scandal involving politicians and business executives, Italy has found a new and riveting focus of interest and intrigue -- a glamorous 34-year-old woman known as the "Mata Hari of Udine" who is telling tales of conspiracy in the army and the secret services.
For days the woman, Donatella Di Rosa, has appeared in just about every television news bulletin, magazine and newspaper explaining her allegation that top army personnel planned a coup to free Italy from organized crime, narcotics and corruption.


Dr. John Z. Bowers, 80, Is Dead; Medical Educator and Historian
Dr.
John Zimmerman Bowers, a medical educator and historian, died yesterday at the Harrogate health-care center in Lakewood, N.J.
He was 80 and had lived on the East Side of Manhattan until 1989.
He suffered a long illness, his family said.


Loral Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Justices to Review Base-Closing Suit
The Supreme Court agreed today to decide whether senators and other citizens can ask the courts to overrule the Government's decision to close military bases.
At issue in the case, which involves the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard, is the future of a law that was carefully written to enable Congress and the President to close or shrink military installations without exposure to political retribution.


Dr. Paul J. Chapman; Entomology Professor, 93
Dr.
Paul J. Chapman, professor emeritus of entomology at Cornell University's New York State Agricultural Experiment Station in Geneva, N.Y., died Oct. 6 at his Geneva home.
He was 93.
He was active at the station until just days ago, a Cornell representative said.


Rust International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A music listing in the Arts and Leisure section on Sunday for the Hell's Kitchen Opera misspelled the surname of one composer and gave an incorrect address for the performances.
The composer is Murray Boren, not Borden.
The site is the Vineyard Theater, at 309 East 26th Street.


CHRONICLE
WILLIAM NORWICH, who has been writing a society and gossip column in The New York Post for two years and wrote one in The New York Daily News for six years before that, had a scoop yesterday.
And it was about himself: he is quitting.
The only people he had told ahead of time were his friend Gabe Doppelt, the former editor in chief of Mademoiselle, and Anna Wintour, the editor in chief of Vogue.
"She is my other boss," he said of Ms.
Wintour, referring to his position as editor at large at Vogue.


Avon Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jacor Communications Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gravity Lens Sightings Hint More Dark Matter
CONTINUING a burst of discoveries in a field where there had been none, still another group of scientists has detected the gravitational effects of what they think is the kind of unseen, or dark, matter that constitutes much of the mass of galaxies and largely dictates their shapes and motions.
The new findings encouraged astrophysicists to conclude that their experimental technique for probing galactic dark matter is sound and could in a few months establish its identity for the first time.
From the new observations, the galactic dark matter appears to be compact, massive objects smaller than the Sun and bigger than any known planets, radiating little or no detectable energy.


William Doyle, 53, Founder and Owner Of Auction House
William Doyle, who founded and ran one of New York City's largest fine art and antiques auction houses, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 53.
His family said the cause was leukemia, which he had fought for 10 years.


Paris Seeks to Rally Support for Its Opposition to Trade Talks
At loggerheads with Washington and increasingly isolated from its European partners, the French Government began a drive today to consolidate domestic support for its threat to torpedo global trade liberalization talks in the name of protecting French farmers.
With irritation over the French position mounting steadily abroad, Prime Minister Edouard Balladur spent the day receiving the heads of all political parties as well as key labor, business and artistic leaders in the hope of presenting a united front to the world.


Classical Music in Review
Juilliard Orchestra  Otto-Werner Mueller, conductor Avery Fisher Hall
The Otto-Werner Mueller one fondly recalls from the 1960's at the University of Wisconsin was a conductor who could rise thrillingly to a major challenge, and he did so again on Wednesday evening with a stirring account of Bruckner's Fourth Symphony.
His conception was noble and compellingly unified, and he carried the student players along in a performance that though far from note-perfect was infused with youthful ardor and Brucknerian generosity of spirit.


Is Montana Receiving Official Help?
Joe Montana is the most celebrated quarterback in the National Football League, perhaps the best ever.
Many players on the San Diego Chargers spoke in awe about their opportunity on Sunday to play against him.
But is Montana such an icon that game officials protect him against defenders trying to get to him?
Yes, say Charger players.
Yes, says their coach, Bobby Ross, and he says he plans to talk to league officials about it.
No, says a league spokesman, saying Montana is treated no differently from other quarterbacks.


Parents Occupy School Building in Protest
A group of 70 parents took over an auditorium at Public School 156 in East New York, Brooklyn, last night and said they would not leave until school officials found proper classrooms for students who have been displaced by the asbestos crisis.
Arriving with blankets and pillows for their children, who slept on the auditorium floor, the parents locked the auditorium doors from the inside and said they would stay several days if necessary.


Panel to Oversee La Guardia College Newspaper
To calm a rash of protests by City Council members, the president of Fiorello H. La Guardia Community College pledged yesterday to assert greater editorial supervision over a student newsletter that recently published an opinion article criticizing Jews.
In a letter to Council Speaker Peter F. Vallone, Raymond C. Bowen, president of La Guardia, denounced the article, calling it "divisive journalism" and promising to create a new editorial board of faculty, administrators and students to oversee the newsletter, The Bridge.
Run by students, The Bridge now has an adjunct professor as an adviser.


Privatizing City Hospitals Would Be Costly and Inefficient
To the Editor:
Rudolph Giuliani's repeated calls to privatize the New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation are distressing to those who work at and use municipal hospitals.
Privatization is not a new idea but it is repeated so often that people simply believe it will improve health care.
Unfortunately, it's not true.
Selling or leasing public hospitals will force New York City to spend more money than it now does, and will restrict access to care.


Review/Television; A Look at the Paranormal: It Turns Out to Be Normal
In "Secrets of the Psychics," James Randi, magician and skeptic, goes around making people who claim to be able to bend spoons, cure cancer and perform other marvels by the power of mind alone look silly.
The most amusing moments in this somewhat patchy edition of "Nova" are clips from his appearances on the "Tonight" show some years back, particularly his foiling of the then-celebrated superpsychic Uri Geller.
Mr.
Randi also demonstrates that you don't have to be a psychic to appear to be doing a stomach operation with your bare hands.
More recently, Mr.
Randi visited Moscow, where he is seen tormenting purported scientists and healers (who look like villains in B-movies) and two pleasant women who say they can describe a person's life in detail from a photograph.
For Mr.
Randi, a psychic is just a magician with pretensions.


Not Like the Movie: A Dare Leads to Death
Like the hero of the new movie "The Program," two teen-agers from Pennsylvania and another from Long Island lay in the middle of two different roads at night, apparently to prove they had nerves of steel.
Unlike the movie hero, they did not walk away unharmed.
Michael A. Shingledecker Jr., 18, of Polk, Pa., was killed almost instantly about 1 A.M.
Saturday when he and a friend were struck by a pickup truck while lying on a two-lane highway in Polk, a small borough in western Pennsylvania.
His friend, Dean G. Bartlett, 17, was critically injured.
And Michael Macias, 17, of Syosset, L.I., was critically injured when he was hit by a car at 10:40 P.M.
Saturday as he lay in the middle of Bayville Avenue in Bayville.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Canadiens Roll to Victory Over Nordiques  Guy Carbonneau assisted on first-period goals by Ron Wilson and Kevin Haller as the Montreal Canadiens mounted an early lead and went on to a 4-2 road victory over the Quebec Nordiques last night.
The Canadiens avenged a 5-2 loss to Quebec in Montreal last Saturday night.
The Montreal victory continued a curious pattern in meetings between the provincial rivals: Dating back to last season, the Canadiens have won the last four games in Quebec, while the Nordiques have won the last four in Montreal. (AP) Red Wings 6, Sabres 4: Shawn Burr scored his first three goals of the season and Ray Sheppard snapped a third-period tie to give Detroit the victory in Buffalo.
The Red Wings ended a four-game losing streak, while Buffalo extended its losing streak to six games.
For the fifth time in those six losses, the Sabres were tied or ahead going into the final period.
Sheppard beat Sabres goaltender Dominik Hasek between the legs with a short low shot at 6 minutes 20 seconds of the final period on the power play. (AP) Jets 6, Oilers 3: Kris King scored his first goal of the season early in the third period to put Winnipeg ahead to stay at home.
The Jets' Thomas Steen had tied the score for the final time halfway through the second period.
Keith Tkachuk's score and Steen's second goal followed.
Edmonton goalie Fred Brathwaite, making his first start, stopped 36 shots while Jets goalie Bob Essensa blocked 23. (AP) Stars 5, Blackhawks 3: Mike Modano scored twice and added an assist in leading Dallas to victory in Chicago.
Darcy Wakaluk, playing his first game in goal this season for the Stars, chipped in with an assist during a three-goal Dallas first period.
In the final period, he made a spectacular save on Joe Murphy from point-blank range at 12:38 and one on a 50-foot slap shot by Steve Smith at 13:08 to help preserve the Stars' third victory.
The Blackhawks (1-4-2) are off to their worst start since the 1988-89 season (1-5-1). (AP) TENNIS Americans Stage Upsets in Beijing Steve Bryan, an American ranked No. 117 in the world, upset third-seeded Henrik Holm of Sweden, 6-4, 6-4, in yesterday's opening round of the Salem Open in Beijing.
In the first ATP Tour event to be played in China, Bryant hit 15 aces past Holm, ranked No. 41.
Another unseeded American upset another Swede: Chuck Adams defeated No. 5 Mikael Pernfors, 6-1, 6-1. (AP)


LeaRonal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Federal Signal reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Central &amp; South West Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For Barkley, Comedy or Drama?
In the first quarter of a preseason game in Atlanta Sunday night, Charles Barkley got a technical foul for hanging onto the rim.
In the fourth quarter, he cursed an official and got himself thrown out of the game.
"Things are back to normal," the Phoenix Suns' coach, Paul Westphal, said yesterday, cheerfully.


Lakehead Pipe Line Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Federal Signal reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Opening For 'Moon' Postponed
"Paper Moon," the $4.5 million musical in tryouts at the Paper Mill Playhouse in Millburn, N.J., became the first casualty of the Broadway season yesterday when its producer said the opening would be indefinitely postponed.
The producer, Roger Berlind, told the cast on Sunday that the show would not be going back into rehearsal after the tryout run ends on Oct. 24.
He said the show's writers are "going into rewriting mode," with the hope of a spring opening.
Mr.
Berlind said, however, that a Broadway opening this season was uncertain because it was impossible to know if an appropriate theater would be available.
The Broadway opening was originally scheduled for the Marquis Theater on Dec. 5.
A delay was announced last week, but Mr.
Berlind said then that there was a possibility the show would open before year's end.
"If it's not on the page, it's not on the stage," he said yesterday.
"We're 70 percent or 75 percent there, but there's some transitional writing required between scenes, and some rethinking of the second act."


Dominion Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Verdicts Are Hailed as a Final Chapter
While a jury continued to deliberate two serious counts against the two black men charged in the beating of Reginald O. Denny, black Southern Californians today generally greeted the early verdicts as a sign that the courts could administer justice equally.
Many whites, by contrast, found those verdicts, in which the two men were acquitted on most charges, too lenient for the brutal crimes captured on television.


Umpires Resent That Eye in the Sky Watching Over Them
"Kill the umpire!" isn't cried very much in ball parks anymore.
The threat conveyed raucous color, but was an empty threat.
Maybe political correctness doomed it.
So what is today's punishment for bad calls, the penalty for merely being a man in blue?
Embarrassing television replays, if you believe the blue men and their complaints about CBS's overhead camera.


Linking Exports to Aid
At first glance, the Clinton Administration's new export policy is dismaying.
Mr.
Clinton wants to reinstitute a practice, known as tied aid, whereby the U.S. would give development aid to poor countries on condition that they purchase U.S. goods.
For example, the U.S. would give Paraguay cash to help build a dam; the U.S. would also provide subsidized loans with which Paraguay would be required to buy the needed construction equipment from U.S. companies.
The U.S. largely abandoned this practice 20 years ago because linking aid to exports isn't good for recipient countries or fair trade.
At second glance, however, Mr.
Clinton's policy is defensible as a means to pressure other donors to cut back the suspect practice.
Mr.
Clinton hopes that if we play the game just a little, our trading partners will play it a whole lot less.


Cambex
Shares of the Cambex Corporation, a Waltham, Mass., company that designs and manufactures computer hardware for I.B.M. mainframe systems, shot up yesterday.
There has been no recent news from Cambex, but some analysts said that investors might be anticipating new growth in the sagging mainframe market.


He's Driven One Lately
To the Editor:
You do readers a disservice and mislead by criticizing the new chairman and the former chairman of Ford Motor Company for not owning cars ("Blissful Ignorance in Detroit," editorial, Oct. 8).
You incorrectly imply that they are not familiar with the problems of buying, owning and getting a car serviced just because they don't own one.


I.B.M. Begins Service Shift
The International Business Machines Corporationis consolidating its service business, a fast-growing field that the company is counting on to help it recover financially.
The streamlined organization is an effort to deliver computer services more efficiently to customers, analysts said.
In a memo to employees yesterday, the company announced that Dennie M. Welsh, currently the chairman of the Integrated Systems Solutions Corporation, would also be general manager of services at the parent company.
Integrated Systems Solutions is the I.B.M. unit that supplies outsourced data processing and helps customers put together computer systems that typically include different kinds of hardware and software, a task known as systems integration.


Crawford &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Krystal Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Pacific Telesis Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


17 Big Underwriters Bar Campaign Gifts Aimed at Bond Sales
Seventeen of Wall Street's leading underwriting firms, which handle the bulk of the municipal bond business, today announced a ban on political contributions that are made to win the lucrative business.
The announcement came after a meeting of the top executives of most of the firms and the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, Arthur Levitt Jr.


Sports of The Times; Engaged In a Great Civil War
BY now, nearly everyone is aware of the sweeping currents that threaten to transform intercollegiate athletics and dismantle the National Collegiate Athletic Association, the self-anointed "voice" of college sports.
Two significant meetings are taking place today that strike directly at the N.C.A.A.'s foundation: one challenges the organization's leadership style, the other questions the N.C.A.A.'s ability to govern in a fair and equitable manner.


Lemieux Has First Workout of Season
MARIO LEMIEUX, still recuperating from back surgery, skated and shot pucks with his Pittsburgh Penguins' teammates yesterday for the first time since the season started.


Separated At First: Kruk and Olerud
One first baseman has shaggy brown hair, a full beard, a protruding stomach and enough witticisms to earn him a guest appearance on "The Late Show With David Letterman." The other first baseman has hair that does not reach his collar, a lean physique and is so reserved and polite that Letterman will not be calling for comedic material anytime soon.
One is John Kruk, the 5-foot-10-inch, 214-pound bouncer for the Phillies.
The other is John Olerud, the 6-5 choir boy for the Blue Jays.
While Kruk epitomizes a renegade image, Olerud epitomizes an all-American-boy image.
They may be as different as two players who play the same position could be.


Mr. Dole's Bad Idea
When President Bush was building up for the Persian Gulf war, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas had some reservations about sending troops to the gulf; but he backed his President.
In October 1990 he said the only reason the United States had entered the conflict was "O-I-L," and that that was not something American parents were anxious to see their sons and daughters die for.
By February, George Bush was riding an 84 percent approval rating and Senator Dole was able to see the bright side of this Presidential military initiative.
"There will be no letup, no cease-fire, no time-outs until Saddam Hussein himself raises the white flag," Mr.
Dole said.
But now, presented with a Democratic President with pallid public support, he has become a champion of Congressional prerogative.
On Sunday he announced he would introduce a measure in Congress limiting President Clinton's ability to deploy American troops in Haiti without Congressional approval.


Chase Posts 52% Jump In Third-Quarter Net
The Chase Manhattan Corporation said yesterday that it earned $267 million in the third quarter, up 52 percent from a year earlier on the strength of high trading profits, fewer problems from bad loans and a wide spread between what it pays for deposits and what it charges for loans.
Also yesterday, the PNC Bank Corporation, the holding company for Pittsburgh National Bank, reported record profits, and Nationsbank of Charlotte, N.C., posted a drop in earnings.


Comet to Hit Jupiter With Texas-Sized Bang; Astronomers Gear Up
A COMET on a collision course with Jupiter is behind the Sun now, out of sight but not out of the minds of astronomers, who are busy plotting its trajectory, estimating the potential power of its impacting force and planning ways of observing the reverberating effects with an array of telescopes on Earth and in space.
The astronomers are eagerly anticipating their first opportunity next July to observe explosive impacts on a planet that could be comparable in strength to the collision of a large asteroid or comet with Earth 65 million years ago, the catastrophe implicated in the mass extinctions of dinosaurs and many other species of life.


Multimedia Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Merck Profit Rises 11.2%; Sales Up 3.2%
Merck &amp; Company and the American Home Products Corporation, two of the country's largest health care companies, yesterday reported single-digit growth in third-quarter sales and lackluster profit gains.
Overall results were in line with most analysts' projections, but Merck reported earnings slightly above expectations on a per-share basis.
Reflecting growing competition at home, unfavorable foreign currency exchange rates and recently imposed German price controls, the gains also suffered in comparison with the 1992 third quarter, the last strong period before growth in the pharmaceutical industry slowed.


Morton International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Temple-Inland reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; A First Boston analyst sees great things for Crown Cork and Seal.
BOTTLE caps and aluminum cans, on the face of it, are pretty mundane items.
But a First Boston analyst says that many on Wall Street "just don't get it" by not jumping at shares of Crown Cork and Seal, the world's No. 2 plastic bottle and aluminum can maker.
Timothy P. Burns has broken ranks with his analyst brethren who have neutral ratings on the Philadelphia-based packaging company.
He claims Crown Cork is a "strong buy" based on the company's good showing during difficult times for its industry and because of some strategic decisions that are reshaping the $3.7 billion company.
Though his opinion is in the minority, it carries a lot of weight, largely because Mr.
Burns snared the No. 1 spot in the latest rankings of packaging analysts by Institutional Investor magazine.


Hanna (M.A.) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CMS Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Putting Everything in a Notebook, Neatly Tabbed
THE COMPAQ COMPUTER CORPORATION, in a welcome effort to make personal computers easier to use, has teamed up with the originators of the graphical user interface to create a much simpler way to work with Microsoft Windows software.
Novice computer users especially, but also many experienced Windows users, will find it a cause for rejoicing.
The ease of use comes about through special software called Tab Works that Compaq, a hardware company, plans to install on most of its future computer models, company officials said yesterday.
Tab Works is basically a "shell" for Windows that reorganizes files and applications in a notebook metaphor that will be familiar even to people who have not used a computer before.


NWA INC.
To a degree, NWA Inc., the parent of Northwest Airlines, could count on a solid performance in the third quarter because it would compare favorably to the results posted during last year's debilitating fare war.
Still, a number of restructuring moves allowed the company to report yesterday that it had seen a jump in net income in the third quarter to $112.3 million this year from a net loss of $19.7 million in the similar 1992 period.
The Minneapolis-based carrier is eager to tell a good story about its long-beleaguered finances because the privately held company wants to offer stock to the public next year.
It restructured its long-term debt in the summer to avoid filing for bankruptcy protection.


Mattel Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Haemonetics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Chris-Craft Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


McGraw-Hill Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Frozen Food Express (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Beckman Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nashua Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Did Bell Atlantic Go to Its 2d Choice?
Tele-Communications Inc. may not have been the Bell Atlantic Corporation's first choice for a merger partner.
As recently as July, Bell Atlantic had exploratory talks with the Cablevision Systems Corporation, the nation's fifth-largest cable television operator, several industry executives said yesterday.
That was a month before the beginning of serious negotiations between Bell Atlantic and Tele-Communications, the nation's largest cable operator, which culminated in the regional telephone company's decision last week to buy both Tele-Communications and the Liberty Media Corporation for a total of $33 billion.


TRAVELERS CORP. (N)
As expected, the Travelers Corporation reported a loss of $36 million for the third quarter yesterday.
Travelers avoided posting an even higher loss, industry analysts said, by releasing $16 million from tax contingency reserves.
Travelers, based in Hartford, said the loss resulted from a previously announced after-tax addition of $211 million to the reserve for asbestos and environmental claims and litigation.


Delta Air Switches Agencies on Shuttle
Delta Air Lines said yesterday that it had dismissed Messner Vetere Berger McNamee Schmetterer Euro RSCG of New York and moved its $6 million to $8 million Delta Shuttle account to BBDO New York, without a review.
BBDO's Atlanta office already handles Delta's main account.


Review/Music; A Birthday Tribute to Elliott Carter
It is somewhat quixotic to proselytize for the music of Elliott Carter at this late date.
For those of us who are moved by his works, he is clearly a contemporary master whose agile mind has given us a series of compelling works written in a robust and idiosyncratic musical language.
But for most listeners he is a cipher, an intellectual whose cerebral fantasies are suitable only for specialists.
And as celebrations begin for his 85th birthday this winter, neither the size of these opposing camps nor their arguments are likely to change.
In fact, when Speculum Musicae presented a concert of Mr.
Carter's works on Thursday night in honor of his birthday, including two American premieres and one piece new to New York, the faithful could not even fill the chamber-size Merkin Hall.


Comptroller's Race Reveals Ticket Politics
When Herman Badillo, the Republican-Liberal candidate for comptroller, campaigns these days, the top of his ticket, Rudolph W. Giuliani, is often at his side.
Several of his television commercials have featured or been partly paid for by Mr.
Giuliani.
And his campaign platform, from privatizing hospitals to slashing the city workforce, closely matches Mr.
Giuliani's.
But when Mr.
Badillo's Democratic opponent, Alan G. Hevesi, campaigns, it is usually without his running mate, Mayor David N. Dinkins.
Mr.
Hevesi has not produced any television commercials that mention Mr.
Dinkins.
And though he supports some of Mr.
Dinkins's ideas, he routinely emphasizes his desire to remain independent and critical of the Mayor.


Amphenol Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Patterns
Tying In
Runway show tie-ins are beginning to rival those of tennis tournaments.
Kate Moss swigged Vittel mineral water on the Bella Freud runway.
Models at the "Red or Dead" show chugged Stella Artois beer, and a news release called the show "the first instance where a major premium beer and a fashion house have joined forces in such a comprehensive manner." But probably, in the current economy, not the last.


A Return to Form


NUCLEAR MATERIAL DUMPED OFF JAPAN
A Russian naval ship dumped hundreds of tons of low-level nuclear waste into the the Sea of Japan over the weekend, touching off a sharp diplomatic dispute between Tokyo and Moscow today just after they had declared a new era of cooperation.
Dumping radioactive materials into the ocean has been banned worldwide for more than 30 years, and a decade ago the prohibition was extended to low-level waste.


E-Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Execution That Cuomo Fought Is Called Off
Oklahoma officials yesterday called off the planned execution of a death-row inmate but did not immediately move to return him to New York, as Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo has demanded.
The execution was canceled after a Federal judge repeated his ruling of Oct. 8 that the prisoner could be sent back to New York, where he faces a sentence of 20 years to life.


Welfare Reform? First Improve Child Care Aid.
To the Editor:
We applaud Richard P. Nathan's call to make the Family Support Act work before launching a new effort at welfare reform (Op-Ed, Oct. 7).
The act has indeed fallen far short of its goals.
In particular, the child care guarantees that would make it possible for mothers to participate in job training or to take the entry-level positions that might be available have not been fulfilled.


New Yorker Tries for the Knicks
After growing up in Harlem and attending St.
John's University, David Cain felt special wearing a Knicks uniform last night at Madison Square Garden.
Cain knows that others give him a slim chance of making the Knicks' final 12-man roster.
But that will not stop the free-agent point guard from giving his all.
"I don't have time to be nervous," Cain said before the Knicks' 100-90 victory over the Phoenix Suns in their preseason home opener.
"This is the chance of a lifetime and I don't want to let it slip by. I know I can play at this level, there's no doubt in my mind. I just have to stick to the things I do best."


Lincoln Foodservice Products Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Publicis to Acquire Big French Agency
Publicis S.A., France's second-largest communications and advertising company, said yesterday that it was taking over another Paris-based agency, Groupe FCA, the parent of Bloom FCA in the United States.
As part of the acquisition, which had been expected, Groupe FCA will operate under the Publicis-FCB Communications network alliance.
Groupe FCA, which was created in 1966 by two former Publicis employees, Jean Feldman and Philippe Calleux, has 14 offices in Europe and 2 in the United States that operate under the Bloom FCA banner.
Groupe FCA has billings estimated to exceed $438 million, or 2.5 billion French francs, from clients like Sandoz Pharmaceuticals and the Scott Paper Company.
With the deal, those billings will be added to Publicis's billings, which are estimated at $3.5 billion, or 20 billion francs, from clients like Colgate and Shell.
Both agency networks share major clients like Nestle, L'Oreal and Henkel.


Sherrard Out for Season, Leaving the Giants Short
Giants wide receiver Mike Sherrard has been through enough tragedy in his eight-year National Football League career to last a lifetime.
He is very talented but terribly unlucky.
The latest bad news for Sherrard is a subluxated left hip, or a partial dislocation of the joint, which means his season is likely over.
There is also a danger that Sherrard again faces an injury that could end his career.
Sherrard, reached at his home tonight, said he didn't want to talk about the circumstances until Tuesday when he is scheduled to talk to the news media.


Oce-Van der Grinten NV (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


CHRONICLE
Does MARGARET THATCHER, now Baroness Thatcher, have a mother?
Careful readers of "Who's Who" have had cause to wonder.
For 30 years or so, the former Prime Minister's entry in the volume of notables has read, "b 13 Oct. 1925; d of late Alfred Roberts."
The Daily Telegraph reported last week that Lady Thatcher, who now sits in the House of Lords, was unaware of the omission.
"What do you mean?" the newspaper quoted her as saying when told that neither "Who's Who" of Britain nor "The International Who's Who" included any reference to her mother, Beatrice Roberts, who is also deceased.
"She was my mother. Well, I must correct that."


Standard Products Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Army Goal: Somali Hearts and Minds
After a summer in which the United States used gunships and attack helicopters to pound sections of this city, the elite American forces that spent the Vietnam War trying to win hearts and minds have resumed the quest.
The United States Army Special Forces have thus begun to venture out in Somalia and have found a rare oasis of support in southern Mogadishu, the hostile blight that is the domain of the Americans' principal foe, Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid.


Paul Barritt Humes; Design Consultant, 48
Paul Barritt Humes, a merchandising and design consultant whose business served clients like Tiffany &amp; Company and Saks Fifth Avenue, died on Friday at New York University Medical Center.
He was 48 and lived in North Tarrytown, N.Y.
The cause was AIDS-related cancer, said his companion, Edward Rice.


N.Y.U. Opens Research Laboratory for AIDS
New York University Medical Center, providing what some experts hope will be a cornerstone for an expanding biomolecular research industry in New York City, yesterday opened a $75 million laboratory devoted entirely to scientists who will seek new treatments for cancer, AIDS and other diseases.
The laboratory, part of a new, 23-story university building on First Avenue off 30th Street, is to employ 70 to 80 scientists in full-time research, university officials said.


Nashua Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


CHRONICLE
After working a full day on Friday, PAULA ZAHN, the co-anchor of "CBS This Morning," gave birth to a boy on Saturday morning at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
The baby, named JARED BRANDON COHEN, weighed 6 pounds, 7 ounces.
Ms.
Zahn and her husband, RICHARD COHEN, a real-estate developer, have a daughter, Haley, 4.


Giuliani Achieves Fund-Raising Success
The last time Rudolph W. Giuliani ran for mayor, he had to struggle hard in the last six weeks of the race to raise even half the amount of money that was flowing to the Democratic nominee, David N. Dinkins.
He was forced to borrow $200,000 from the Republican State Committee and he asked President Bush to help coax donations from the Republican faithful.
This time, Mr.
Giuliani raised all the money the law would allow him to spend with two weeks to go, even as Mayor Dinkins continued to worry about fund raising.


Jacor Communications Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Abraham J. Gellis, 84, Kosher Meat Supplier
Abraham J. Gellis, former president of Isaac Gellis Inc., whose kosher meats have been a staple at delicatessens for more than a century, died on Sunday at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.
He was 84.
He had had a long illness, said Henry Gellis, his son.


Amphenol Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Loral Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Avon Products reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Salinas Calls Nafta a Test of U.S. Relations With All Latin America
Reflecting strong and growing support in Latin America for the North American Free Trade Agreement, President Carlos Salinas de Gortari said today that the region would feel "cheated" if the United States Congress were to vote the agreement down.
In an interview on his return from a meeting of leaders from 12 Latin American nations in Chile, Mr.
Salinas said that the fate of the trade accord had become a fundamental test of American relations not only with Mexico but also throughout the hemisphere.


HCA-Hospital Corp. of America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Blue-Chip Issues Gain as Most Others Drop
After a wobbly start, blue-chip stocks racked up modest gains yesterday, driven by spurts among the pharmaceutical and transportation issues.
But broader indicators slipped as uneasiness over interest rates and fears that the market could not sustain its recent highs seemed to take their toll.
Bank stocks suffered after the Morgan Guaranty Trust Company reduced its prime lending rate to 5.5 percent from 6 percent.
Investors appeared worried that the move would chip away at the growing profits of banks like the Chase Manhattan Corporation, whose stock dropped 1 3/4, to 34 1/8.
Citicorp, the most active stock on the Big Board, fell 1 3/4, to 35 5/8.


Rancor in District Attorney's Race; Cherkasky-Pirro Campaign Pits Newcomer Against Veteran
Michael Cherkasky was introducing himself to voters and slapping "high fives" with their children outside a department store recently when a woman pushing a stroller approached with a pressing question.
"Would you happen to know where the T.G.I. Friday's restaurant is?" she asked.
Told it was down the road, she thanked the candidate for "being very helpful" and rushed off.


Oak Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Giuliani Achieves Fund-Raising Success
The last time Rudolph W. Giuliani ran for mayor, he had to struggle hard in the last six weeks of the race to raise even half the amount of money that was flowing to the Democratic nominee, David N. Dinkins.
He was forced to borrow $200,000 from the Republican State Committee and he asked President Bush to help coax donations from the Republican faithful.
This time, Mr.
Giuliani raised all the money the law would allow him to spend with two weeks to go, even as Mayor Dinkins continued to worry about fund raising.


Frozen Food Express (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BHC Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mexico Defends Free Trade
Mexico's leader said the fate of the North American trade pact had become a test of good relations throughout the hemisphere.
Page A10.


Watsco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge
Half a century ago, a poll of experts voted Howard Schenken the best individual player in the world.
His widow, Bee Schenken, who died two weeks ago, was a fine player in her own right: equally at home in tournament play, winning seven national titles, and at the rubber bridge tables, where she was a steady winner.
On the diagramed deal, played a decade ago, she held the South cards and had a difficult rebid after opening one diamond and hearing a weak jump to three clubs.
She gambled with three no-trump and her partner had nothing to say.
As it turned out, five diamonds would have been a far better contract and six diamonds would have had good play, although failing as the cards lie.


PRIMERICA CORP. (N)
The Primerica Corporation reported third-quarter earnings yesterday that were better than expected, largely because of the strong performance of its Smith Barney Shearson investment banking unit.
Primerica's third-quarter net income of $258.7 million, or $1.03 a share, was about $30 million, or 6 cents a share, higher than what Guy Moszkowski, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company, had forecast.
Mr.
Moszkowski said he was likely to revise upward his $3.40 a share estimate for all of 1993 and $3.85 a share for 1994 because of Primerica's strong performance.


Mattel Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Haemonetics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Ceridian Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mueller Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Temple-Inland reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Changes in Times Card
The New York Times Company said yesterday that it had teamed with Transmedia Network Inc., a discount dining card company, to offer larger discounts and other benefits with its Times Card service.
The Times Card already provides discounts at restaurants, retailers and other establishments for some home delivery subscribers to The Times.
As part of the program, which takes effect in January, holders of the joint Transmedia/Times Card will receive a 25 percent discount at participating restaurants.
The card will be accepted at more cultural and entertainment establishments, including Radio City Music Hall.
In addition, it will function as a charge card at participating restaurants, rather than simply as an identification discount card.


Hanna (M.A.) Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chris-Craft Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Life Springs Up in Ocean's Volcanic Vents, Deep Divers Find
Scientists on a research expedition off the Oregon coast are finding that the ocean's barren abyss can rapidly be colonized by new life.
The icy sea floor a mile and a half below this vessel has recently been heated by a volcanic eruption and enriched with a rush of minerals in solution, creating warm flows of shimmering water that have come alive with odd-looking colonies of bacteria, some sporting long tendrils that sway back and forth in warm currents.
The bacterial colonies, the scientists say, are eventually likely to become feeding grounds for complex forms of higher life.


Home on the Range (Or What's Left of It)
In the most ambitious attempt so far to revive one of America's formerly vast and robust but now moribund ecosystems, 300 bison today galloped headlong onto 5,000 acres of unobstructed tallgrass prairie -- there to live free, eat their fill and play a major ecological role, as their ancestors once did.
Nervous at first in the presence of nearly 1,000 humans who had come to see them resume their ancient place in nature, nudged along by a phalanx of pickup trucks, they moved balkily from their small holding pasture toward the narrow end of a fenced-in chute that led to freedom.


Multimedia Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Summer's Pursuit on a Summery Day . . . in the Fall


Coslet Is Sick and Tired Of Being Sick and Tired
Coach Bruce Coslet sounded sick and tired today of being reminded that on the last two Sundays his Jets played, they blew leads of 21 and 17 points.
And don't remind him, either, of whom the Jets are playing after next Sunday's game against Buffalo.
"We're two plays from being 4-1," he said of his 2-3 team that, he claims, needs no overhaul.
It returns after a bye week to face the powerful Bills at the Meadowlands.


Observer; Macabre Grocery Marvels
Not since "Famed Psychic's Head Explodes" has a news headline seized and held my attention so insistently as "Abraham Lincoln's Corpse Revived" in The Weekly World News of Oct. 5.
Doctors using the Emancipator's remains to test the experimental drug Revivitol brought him around for 95 seconds.
This was long enough for Lincoln to get his eyes open and ask, "Gentlemen, where am I?" before re-expiring.


Defendant in Bombing Case Released on Bail


In France, It's How You Cross the t's
Increasingly tormented after six months of unemployment, Michel Malat, a 40-year-old former furniture sales manager, made an unusual decision: he decided to have his handwriting analyzed by an expert.
"I had sent over 250 applications for jobs, all written by hand, and I knew that my writing was being analyzed by companies in order to gauge my character," Mr.
Malat explained.
"And the more rejections I received, the more I worried my handwriting was suspect."


Krystal Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


In Philadelphia, D.H. Means Designated Headache for Blue Jays
For the first time in nine post-season games, the Toronto Blue Jays will have a different starting lineup for the third game of the World Series Tuesday night.
The change, however, is strictly involuntary.
If the Blue Jays had their way, the same nine players who were in the batting order for the six games of the American League pennant playoff and the first two games of the World Series would be on Manager Cito Gaston's lineup card for the game against the Philadelphia Phillies.
Instead, the name of Pat Hentgen will appear in the ninth spot and another name, most likely John Olerud, will be missing from the card.


Additional Ban for Chelios of Blackhawks
CHRIS CHELIOS, the All-Star defenseman of the Chicago Blackhawks, was suspended for two more games yesterday by the National Hockey League for his part in last Thkursday's melee with the Hartford Whalers.
On Friday, the league announced that Chelios would be suspended indefinitely pending a hearing.
He has missed two games since.
Following yesterday's hearing in New York, BRIAN BURKE, the N.H.L. director of hockey operations, said Chelios would be suspended for two more games -- Thursday night against Quebec and Saturday night against Detroit. (AP)


Arbitron Decides to Pull Out Of the TV Ratings Business
With yet another pebble in its pouch proving a dud, the Arbitron Company left the battlefield of television ratings yesterday, unable to trip up the industry Goliath, the A. C. Nielsen Company.
Arbitron said that by the end of the year it would lay off 700 employees nationwide -- 58 percent of its staff of 1,200 -- and discontinue its ratings of syndicated programs and cable television in local markets.
More than 400 of those layoffs will be in Laurel, Md., where the company's television ratings operations are based.


Dana Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Foreign Policy Turf: Never-Ending Battle
The foreign policy struggle under way in Washington is especially confused these days.
The arguments for involvement in Bosnia, Somalia and Haiti all have appeal that is considerable but not quite compelling, and nothing like the Communist threat the country grew accustomed to.
And the tug-of-war over foreign policy, which reached a peak in the Vietnam War, goes back to the very first President.


Dana Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


KLA Instruments Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Iraqi Billy Martin Is Named Baba
It was a good day for the Near East, a bad day for the Far East and a rotten day for Adnan Dirjal.
The Saudi Arabians opened today's play by beating the North Koreans, 2-1, to take the early lead in this final round of Asian World Cup soccer qualifying.
The Iranians then beat the favored Japanese by the same score, erasing some of the large question marks raised by their lackluster performance in their first game of the round-robin tournament.


The Cable-Phone Revolution
The $30 billion merger between Bell Atlantic and Tele-Communications Inc. presages a communications revolution.
If approved, this merger would be the first in the U.S. between a telephone company and a cable company -- raising the prospect that a single giant company will someday bring a wide array of entertainment and information services into the home: video phones, movies-on-demand, live lectures from university classrooms, video conferences with pediatricians, computerized banking, viewer-controlled instant replays of live sporting events.
But there's another possible reaction to the Bell Atlantic-T.C.I. behemoth: apprehension.
The company that owns video access to the home would also own programs that flow into the home.
To some critics, that invites monopolistic price-setting and monopolistic taste-setting.
Besides, opponents of the merger want phone and cable companies to compete against one another, not join forces.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Baltimore Gas and Electric Co. is offering $125 million of 5.5 percent first-mortgage bonds due in 2004 at a price of 98.589, to yield 5.68 percent, through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
Noncallable through maturity, the securities are rated A-1 by Moody's Investors Service, A by Standard &amp; Poor's, and AA- by Duff &amp; Phelps.
Underwriters said the bonds are priced to yield 47.5 basis points more than a Treasury security with a similar maturity.
A basis point is one-hundredth of a percentage point.


Welfare Reform? First Improve Child Care Aid.; A 'Community School'
To the Editor:
You do a tremendous service for children in your report on the neglected health needs of the city's students ("Too Ill to Learn," news article, Oct. 10).
In human and in real financial terms, we pay a huge price for these false economies.


Prime Rate Cut to 5 1/2% By Morgan
Morgan Guaranty Trust Company reduced its prime lending rate to 5 1/2 percent from 6 percent yesterday, the first among the nation's largest banks to take that step.
While the rate cut matters little to Morgan's customers, millions of individuals and small businesses could benefit if other banks follow.
Because Morgan's business is concentrated in trading and in advising large companies -- with little consumer or business lending pegged to the prime, other bankers and analysts said the large New York bank was cutting the price of something it does not sell.


Great Lakes Chemical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Foreign Policy Tug-of-War: Latest in a Long String of Battles
When Senate Republicans demand a greater Congressional role in foreign policy, there must be a Democrat in the White House.
And when most Democrats support the use of troops abroad despite serious misgivings, the suspicion is confirmed.
Senator Bob Dole's demand for "certification" of American interests by President Clinton before any further involvement in Haiti, for example, stands in dramatic contrast to his words just before Congress voted to allow President Bush to make war on Iraq.
On that occasion the minority leader told the Senate, "I do believe that our best chance for peace and best hope for peace is to strengthen the President's hand in every way we can."


Central &amp; South West Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Conversing On Line With Older Americans
'TELL them that we lived through four wars," an older woman said recently about how she arrived at her obsession (she prefers to say she is "possessed") with that "soul snatcher," the personal computer.


Gorman-Rupp Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Beckman Instruments reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bruno's Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Shell Joins Chemical on Credit Card
The Shell Oil Company and the Chemical Bank will offer a joint Mastercard on Nov. 1 under which drivers will be able to save 3 percent when they buy Shell gasoline or 2 percent on other purchases for rebates of up to $70 a year on Shell gasoline purchases.
After they reach $70 a year in savings, customers could then get only 1 percent off their purchases of Shell gasoline.


Morton International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


College Soccer Report
Brown
The Bears repeated last season's feat by shocking two of the nation's powers over the weekend.
Brown defeated North Carolina, 2-1, on Friday in the opener of the Lanzera/Sheraton Classic and then upset Virginia, the defending national champion, 2-0, on Sunday to capture the title.


Tamara Dembo, 91, Gestalt Psychologist Who Studied Anger
Tamara Dembo, a psychologist who developed a method to study anger in social situations, died on Sunday at Memorial Hospital in Worcester, Mass.
She was 91 and lived in Worcester.
Professor Dembo, who had taught at Clark University in Worcester, did important early work in Gestalt psychology in the United States, particularly in rehabilitation psychology.
She developed a method to provoke anger in the subjects of experiments and developed a theory, in keeping with the Gestalt school, that the onset of anger depends more on situations than personality.


Value City Department Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Mueller Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Value City Department Stores Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to July 31


Q&amp;A
Squirrels' Nests
Q.
Do squirrels actually build nests?
One seems to be doing so in my London plane tree.


The Gift Horse Brought a Center for Urban Trees


On-Track Dropoffs Continue A Trend
Belmont Park closed for the winter yesterday after a six-week fall meeting that extended the recent trends in horse racing: Attendance at the track dropped by 11.4 percent and betting by 3.6 percent, although betting away from the track kept rising.
The scenic old course on Long Island will still be the winter home for about 2,000 horses, but racing won't resume there until May 4.
Meanwhile, the New York winter racing scene switches to Aqueduct tomorrow afternoon at 12:30.


Columbia Carries Crew of 7 Into Space
The space shuttle Columbia hurtled into space today, carrying a medical laboratory that scientists hope will answer many questions about how humans adapt to shifts between gravity and weightlessness.
Embarking on the 58th flight of the shuttle program, the Columbia lifted off after an almost flawless countdown at 10:53 A.M. in ideal weather to begin a two-week journey planned to be the longest shuttle mission so far.


EMC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Despite a Trip to Bench, Richter Looks to Revival
The morning after Mike Keenan used the hook on Mike Richter in the first period of the Rangers-Nordiques game last Wednesday, Keenan had only one thing to tell his struggling goaltender.
"It's not what happens," Keenan said to Richter. "It's how you react to it."


On My Mind; Those Three Words
Now here is a Government document with a lot of potential -- including the potential to make the incumbent President and his successors yearn for these safe days of Somalia, Haiti and the gulf war.
The document has to do with three words.
Proliferation -- as in third-world nuclear bombs.
Dual use -- as in: I sell you a chemical to make fertilizer and you use it to make biological weapons, which, to tell the truth, is what I expected you to do all along, but a dollar is a dollar.


METRO DIGEST
TESTS OF COURAGE END IN DEATHS Like the hero of the new movie "The Program," two teen-agers from Pennsylvania and another from Long Island lay in the middle of two different roads at night, apparently to prove they had nerves of steel.
Unlike the movie hero, they did not walk away unharmed.
Law-enforcement authorities say scores of young men are apparently copying the stunt from the movie.
A1.


Eugene Picker, 89; Originated Strategy For Releasing Films
Eugene Picker, who pioneered the showcasing of new films in 1962 by opening them simultaneously in dozens of theaters, died on Sunday at Parkway Regional Medical Center in North Miami Beach, Fla.
He was 89 and lived in Bay Harbor Island, Florida.
The cause was heart failure, his family said.


DSC Communications Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


KLA Instruments Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.97
3.05
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.06
2.99
2.94
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.14
3.08
3.10
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.81
4.73
6.24
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.84
5.78
7.56
TELEPHONE BONDS
6.93
6.89
8.63
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.35
5.33
6.50
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Human Noises in Ocean Held to Threaten Marine Mammals
WITH the world's oceans increasingly disturbed with man-made sounds, scientists are facing a vexing dilemma: many of the most important discoveries about sea creatures and their environment are made by the use of sound, but some sounds generated by scientists may be contributing to the destruction of the very mammals they want to protect.
At a meeting here of the Acoustical Society of America this month, scores of experts presented evidence that the welfare and lives of some marine mammals were increasingly threatened by noise of human origin.


Rust International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sales Push Up Long-Term Rates
Long-term interest rates moved higher yesterday, settling above the record lows set on Friday.
There was no big news event to prompt the selling, but traders said that after the strong rally late last week the market was due for a correction.


Human Noises in Ocean Held to Threaten Marine Mammals
WITH the world's oceans increasingly disturbed with man-made sounds, scientists are facing a vexing dilemma: many of the most important discoveries about sea creatures and their environment are made by the use of sound, but some sounds generated by scientists may be contributing to the destruction of the very mammals they want to protect.
At a meeting here of the Acoustical Society of America this month, scores of experts presented evidence that the welfare and lives of some marine mammals were increasingly threatened by noise of human origin.


CMS Energy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-18  CLINTON RESISTS RESTRICTIONS  President Clinton vowed to oppose efforts by members of Congress to restrict the use of troops in global hot spots, and he tightened the squeeze on Haitian officials trying to block the President's return.
A1  HOLDING PATTERN IN HAITI  In Haiti's capital, businesses were closed, streets were empty and military leaders showed no sign of preparing to step down as the blockade by the United Nations and the United States took effect.
A18


Review/Music; The Pittsburgh With a Premiere
The good ship Pittsburgh Symphony Orchestra lay in port at Carnegie Hall for two evenings over the weekend under big, colorful banners that whipped, crossed and tangled in the sonorous gusts.
First there were the flags of composers: Krzysztof Penderecki and Brahms on Friday, Mahler on Saturday.
Not far behind, and sometimes billowing proudly out front, was that of the orchestra's music director, Lorin Maazel.
Finally came that of Carnegie itself, since the Pittsburgh was the flagship of the hall's Mahler celebration, which extends through this season and into the next.
The main attraction on Friday evening was the New York premiere of Mr.
Penderecki's Adagio, of 1989.
Part of the composer's five-movement Fourth Symphony, the 35-minute Adagio was commissioned in France to commemorate the 200th anniversary of the Declaration of the Rights of Man and intended to stand on its own as well.
It has enjoyed a flourishing independent career since its premiere, by Mr.
Maazel and the National Orchestra of France; last year it won the $150,000 Grawemeyer Award for Music Composition, given by the University of Louisville.


Owens-Illinois Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clinton Vows to Fight Congress On His Power to Use the Military
President Clinton, trying to protect his power to control the use of military force, vowed today to "strongly oppose" efforts by members of Congress to restrict his authority to commit troops to restore democracy in Haiti or to work with the United Nations in other global hot spots.
After consulting with his legal experts, Mr.
Clinton said, he sent a letter to the Senate majority leader, George Mitchell, and the minority leader, Senator Bob Dole, saying his Administration would oppose several amendments now circulating that would "unduly restrict the ability of the President to make foreign policy" and to exercise his authority as Commander in Chief.


E-Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Montana's Sky and Its Hopes Are Left Bare After Logging
Throughout the 1980's, the Champion International Corporation went on a tree-cutting spree in Montana, leveling entire forests at a rate that had not been seen since the cut-and-run logging days of the last century.
Now the hangover has arrived.
After liquidating much of its valuable timber in the Big Sky country, Champion is pulling out of Montana, leaving behind hundreds of unemployed mill workers, towns staggered by despair and more than a thousand square miles of heavily logged land.


Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Coleman Turns Down $69 Million For 8 Years
The Nets yesterday offered Derrick Coleman an eight-year contract extension that they said would make him the highest paid player per season in the National Basketball Association.
But Coleman's attorney said the 6-foot-10-inch power forward would reject the proposal.
The attorney, Harold MacDonald, said the extension provided for $69 million over the eight years, but that the money up front was not enough and that the highest base salary, in the final year, was not guaranteed.


Classical Music in Review
Phyllis Pancella  Mezzo-Soprano Weill Hall
Phyllis Pancella's debut recital on Thursday night was immediately intriguing for its diverse program: John Dowland's "Come Away," Dominick Argento's "Elizabethan Songs," Hugo Weisgall's "Psalm of the Distant Dove," Dvorak's "Gypsy Melodies," two songs by Ildebrando Pizzetti, and four splendid songs by Charles Ives (concluding with "Autumn").
Ms.
Pancella is of Italian and Czech descent, and her program reflected that background as well as her enthusiasm for American music.


Review/Theater; An Ethereal Classic Is Adapted
In Antoine de Saint-Exupery's gossamer children's fable "The Little Prince," the most famous words of wisdom, spoken by a fox to the little boy space traveler who has fallen into the Sahara Desert, are the reminder that "what is essential is invisible to the eye."
Those words unfortunately come back to haunt Rick Cummins and John Scoullar's musical adaptation of the French author's 1943 children's classic.
An ethereal allegory spun from whimsical images and quicksilver emotions all lifted from the childlike recesses of Saint-Exupery's imagination has been bluntly literalized in the production, directed by William Martin, at the 28th Street Theater.


Fisher-Price Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Books of The Times; A 'Black White Man' In Colonial Australia
Remembering Babylon  By David Malouf  202 pages. Pantheon Books. $20.
The Babylon referred to in the title of David Malouf's new novel is Australia: a 19th-century frontier that many of its settlers regarded as Eden, a New World paradise where they might make a fresh start and begin new lives, tabula rasa.
Yet as we learn in this astonishing novel, Australia was also a harsh, dangerous land, a place that brought out in its colonizers the dark passions of racism, brutality and hate.


Oce-Van der Grinten NV (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Board of Education Agrees To Cutback in School Funds
Ending four months of negotiations with the Dinkins administration over this year's $7.3 billion school budget, the city's Board of Education agreed yesterday to accept a $60 million reduction in city financing for schools in exchange for pledges of protection against future cuts.
In a memorandum of understanding, the board and the city's Office of Management and Budget spelled out the rules and definitions they will use in resolving their differences over financing questions.
The negotiations have become an annual event since the two parties forged their first such agreement in 1991.


Classical Music in Review
'The Mikado'  New York City Opera New York State Theater
The best news about the cast changes in "The Mikado" on Friday night is that two major roles have remained untouched.
James Billings can still be heard compiling his little list as the Lord High Executioner, in a performance that is a classic Gilbert and Sullivan mixture of winks, mugging and merriment (with excellent diction as well).
And Richard McKee is still wickedly attempting to make the punishment fit the crime, as a grand, booming Mikado.


By Design; Laced With Romance
Designers keep changing their minds about hemlines, but not about romance.
They loved it for fall, and the enchantment continues for spring.
The most romantic fabric of all, lace, is on everything from hosiery to hair bows.
Barneys New York has Giorgio Armani's lace panty hose for $18.
Lord &amp; Taylor has lace hair bows for $22 and lace cuffs ($10) for a blouse or jacket.
Barneys also has long lace gloves for $100, and Saks Fifth Avenue has scalloped lace pocket squares for $18.


BHC Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nicor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Miami Goes With Sophomore Quarterback
RYAN COLLINS, a sophomore who has played sparingly, will be the starting quarterback, rather than FRANK COSTA, for Miami on Saturday when the Hurricanes play Syracuse in the Orange Bowl.
In making the change, which he announced yesterday, Coach DENNIS ERICKSON broke the succession of famous Miami quarterbacks that covered a decade.
From BERNIE KOSAR to GINO TORRETTA, one followed the other and backups only played late in games already won.


What's Sauce for the Oyster May Also Keep the Doctor Away
DOES Louisiana hot sauce, a principal ingredient in the spicy New Orleans cocktail sauce commonly served with raw shellfish, kill certain bacteria found in raw oysters?
The answer is yes, at least in the laboratory, researchers said in a preliminary report at a national scientific meeting on microbes and antibiotics yesterday.
Principal ingredients of the traditional New Orleans cocktail sauce were found to kill a rare but sometimes fatal bacteria called Vibrio vulnificus.


Marvel Entertainment Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Standard Products Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nicor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Health Care &amp; Retirement Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clinton Urging Voluntary Goals on Air Pollution
The Clinton Administration, in a new plan to reduce the waste gases that threaten to warm the global climate, has decided to avoid most mandatory controls in favor of voluntary goals and incentives, officials said today.
Environmental groups attacked the plan, whose outline had been known for a week and which is expected to be presented by President Clinton and Vice President Gore at the White House on Tuesday.
They said the plan favored industry groups worried about the costs of controlling carbon dioxide and other polluting gases that can trap heat within the atmosphere.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Consumer product companies seek better methods to gauge the effect of marketing on their sales.
THE more strenuously advertisers labor to achieve success in marketing consumer products, the more insistent the clamor grows to find methods to measure the effectiveness of advertising.
So the 84th annual meeting and conference of the Association of National Advertisers is trying to offer some solutions.
"Advertising, as a marketing and communications tool, will never command the respect it deserves until correlation between share of voice and profitable growth is firmly established," said DeWitt F. Helm Jr., president of the association, whose members account for more than 80 percent of annual spending on national and regional advertising.


County Executive Race Reflected In Refusal to Allow Tax Refund
The race for Nassau County executive spilled into the Board of Supervisors meeting this morning as Republican board members refused to approve a routine property-tax refund for a prominent contributor to the Democratic candidate, Benjamin L. Zwirn, the North Hempstead Supervisor.
Although Mr.
Zwirn abstained from the vote, Republicans said he acted questionably in allowing the board to consider the $18,168 tax settlement for Bert E. Brodsky, a Long Island developer, only days after Mr.
Brodsky loaned him $50,000 for his campaign.


Will It Be Gretzky Against Gretzky?
The Tampa Bay Lightning recalled rookie center BRENT GRETZKY from their International Hockey League affiliate in Atlanta yesterday, possibly setting up the first-ever National Hockey League meeting between Gretzky and his superstar brother WAYNE.
Wayne Gretzky, the N.H.L.'s all-time leading scorer, will lead the Los Angeles Kings against the Lightning tomorrow night at the Thunderdome in St.
Petersburg, Fla.


Integrated Device Tech (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


HOUSE REPUBLICANS REBEL OVER TAXES IN FREE TRADE PACT
With the fate of the North American Free Trade Agreement turning on a few undecided lawmakers, the Clinton Administration is now threatened with the loss of a group that is central to the White House's legislative strategy: conservative Republicans.
House Republicans have rebelled at the prospect of $2.37 billion in higher taxes over five years to replace tariffs eliminated by the free trade agreement, inflicting a serious blow to the pact's prospects with the vote only a month away.


Defendant in a Bombing Plot Released on Bail
A defendant in the conspiracy case to blow up New York City landmarks was released on bail yesterday, the only person to be freed in two major bombing cases involving the World Trade Center, the United Nations and the Hudson River tunnels.
A Federal judge in Manhattan released Earl Gant, a Philadelphia vendor charged with agreeing to help obtain explosives for the foiled plot, saying Mr.
Gant had "no real awareness of the enormity of what other people were planning."


The French To Overhaul Groupe Bull
In a move to prepare the troubled Groupe Bull for privatization, the French Government today named a new chairman to head the largely state-owned computer giant and announced that it would provide almost $1.5 billion in fresh capital to ease its debt burden.
As Groupe Bull's long-expected reorganization was disclosed, the Government also disclosed that Rhone-Poulenc, the state-owned chemical company, would be the next enterprise to be sold, followed by Elf Aquitaine, the big oil company, early next year.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FIRST UNION CORP., Charlotte, N.C., announced a definitive agreement to acquire Lieber &amp; Co., a New York-based investment management and research organization.
Terms were not disclosed.
LOCKHEED CORP., Calabasas, Calif., has received an $832.1 million United States Navy contract, which extends through September 1996, for production and deployed support of the Trident nuclear missile.


COMPANY NEWS: Armor for the Average Car; Amid Roadway Offenses, Defensive Sedans
It may be a measure of the decline of civility: a manufacturer of armored limousines for royalty and heads of state says the time is ripe for an armored car for the common man.
The well-heeled common man.


Ferraro Agrees to New Islander Pact
The Islanders and center RAY FERRARO canceled their arbitration date after agreeing on a new contract, a one-year deal plus an option year.
The 29-year-old Ferraro, a 10th-year veteran who came to the Islanders from the Whalers in November 1990, had been in the option year of a 1991 contract calling for a $300,000 salary this season.
Instead he will get more than a 100 percent increase and a total of more than $1.3 million over the two years.


Human Noises in Ocean Held to Threaten Marine Mammals
WITH the world's oceans increasingly disturbed with man-made sounds, scientists are facing a vexing dilemma: many of the most important discoveries about sea creatures and their environment are made by the use of sound, but some sounds generated by scientists may be contributing to the destruction of the very mammals they want to protect.
At a meeting here of the Acoustical Society of America this month, scores of experts presented evidence that the welfare and lives of some marine mammals were increasingly threatened by noise of human origin.


HAITI CAPITAL CALM AS STREETS EMPTY
The streets were empty of traffic and most businesses remained closed today as the deadline approached for an international naval blockade of oil and arms supplies to Haiti that goes into effect at midnight tonight.
Today, the third day after the negotiated deadline for their retirement, Haiti's military leaders showed no sign of leaving to make way for the return of the deposed President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic  Zdenek Macal, conductor Avery Fisher Hall
Zdenek Macal, just named the New Jersey Symphony's artistic director and principal conductor, has been guest conducting at the New York Philharmonic this last week.
The program, as heard on Friday morning, weighed lightly on the spirit, but then who says that every symphony concert must storm the heavens or the cortex?


Fisher-Price Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


'Resort' Film Festival Hits the Hamptons
The Hamptons have beautiful beaches and beautiful people.
Now they have a film festival.
For five days, beginning tomorrow, the first Hamptons International Film Festival will present 85 films -- features, documentaries and shorts -- as well as a program of seminars.
The festival will open with one of its three world premieres, Tony Bill's "Home of Our Own," starring Kathy Bates, and will close on Sunday with Emile Ardolino's film of a New York City Ballet performance of "The Nutcracker" choreographed by George Balanchine.


ANTARCTIC OZONE HITS RECORD LOW
The amount of ozone in the atmosphere over Antarctica reached a record low this month, Government scientists reported yesterday.
This was the lowest recorded ozone level anywhere in the world, raising new concerns that measures to restrict the use of ozone-destroying chemicals may not be strong enough.
The scientists said the area of intense ozone depletion, commonly called an ozone hole, was not quite as wide as it had been a year ago.
But balloon-borne instruments showed that ozone, the atmospheric molecules that absorb harmful ultraviolet radiation from sunlight, was totally destroyed between the altitudes of 8.4 and 11.8 miles, creating an unusually thick void.


INSIDE
Big Bank Cuts Prime Rate
Morgan Guaranty Trust reduced its prime lending rate to 5.5 percent from 6 percent, the first of the nation's largest banks to do so.
Page D1.
Justices Take Bases Case
The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether the Government's recent closings of military bases can be challenged in court.
Page A20.
A Mata Hari Tale in Italy
A right-wing lawmaker's story of romance, intrigue and a conspiracy for a coup to rid Italy of crime and corruption has caused a furor.
Page A3.


U.S. Renews Warning to Serbs on Sarajevo Shelling
The United States warned the Serbian leadership today for the second time in two months of the possibility of air strikes by NATO warplanes if there was a step-up in attacks on Sarajevo.
The warning was contained in a message from Secretary of State Warren Christopher to Slobodan Milosevic, the President of Serbia, reminding him of a statement on Aug. 3 by NATO that it would not tolerate "the strangulation of Sarajevo and other areas," and that it was ready to order retaliatory air strikes against Bosnian Serbs.


Health Care &amp; Retirement Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sculley to Head Small Networker
John Sculley, who resigned on Friday as chairman of Apple Computer Inc., confounded the computer and communications industries today by betting his grand vision of a digital-information future on a little-known wireless networking company.
Mr.
Sculley said he would become chairman and chief executive of Spectrum Information Technologies Inc., a company based in Manhasset, L.I., that controls a series of crucial patents related to the wireless transmission of computer data.


One More Shortage in Haiti: News
Minutes after a United States warship was spotted a few miles offshore on Sunday, the quiet streets of this capital city suddenly came alive as people scurried to get some news.
Radio stations did not interrupt their musical programs to give a special report.
Newspapers did not run any special editions the next day.
The only radio station broadcasting news on Sunday, Radio Tropic, simply told its listeners that two United States ships were visible at sea.


Owens-Illinois Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vietnamese Had Role In Gold Disposition
To the Editor:
With one exception there is no particular mystery about Nguyen Van Hao's role in evacuating the South Vietnamese gold reserve to New York in April 1975 ("Mysteries Circle Vietnamese at Center of Brown Inquiry," news article, Oct. 10).


Oak Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Crawford &amp; Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


DSC Communications Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pass the Hoagies And Cheese Steaks
When former heavyweight champion Sonny Liston once said that he'd rather be a lamppost in Denver than the mayor of Philadelphia, probably not a lot of people argued.
The same probably applied when W. C. Fields said if the choices were either being dead or being in the City of Brotherly Love, then perhaps, all things considered, he'd rather be in Philadelphia.
Unfortunately for the city stuck in the backbone of the country's East Coast corridor, the identity crisis and the fight for respect have always been somewhat losing battles.


JUDGE REVERSES S.E.C. RULING ON CRACKER BARREL ISSUE
A Federal judge enjoined the Securities and Exchange Commission on Friday from issuing letters that would allow companies to omit shareholder proposals on hiring discrimination and other employment-related matters from proxy statements.
The decision by United States District Judge Kimba M. Wood reversed an S.E.C. ruling late last year that Cracker Barrel Old Country Store Inc., a restaurant and gift-shop chain based in Lebanon, Tenn., did not have to include a shareholder resolution asking the company to develop a policy prohibiting discrimination against gay men and lesbians.
Her decision clears the way for the proposal to appear in the proxy materials at Cracker Barrel's annual shareholder meeting next month.


Pacific Telesis Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Diversity on Sea Floor Declines Toward Poles
THE global pattern of species diversity on land -- a riot of life in tropical forests and progressively fewer species toward the poles -- turns out to be repeated among the creatures of the deep ocean bottom.
This surprising finding is reported in the current issue of Nature by an international team of marine biologists led by Dr.
Michael A. Rex of the University of Massachusetts in Boston.


Carlisle Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Great Lakes Chemical Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Liz Claiborne Profits Fall 40%; More Bad News May Come
Profits of Liz Claiborne Inc., the clothing manufacturer that has dressed legions of working women, plunged almost 40 percent in the third quarter, and the company warned Wall Street yesterday to expect more bad news through the remainder of the year.
Samuel M. Miller, the company's senior vice president of finance, said it now expected its earnings this year to be about 40 percent lower than in 1992, when profits were $2.61 a share.


Paris Designers Keep No Secrets
There is a desperation about the way European designers are striving to renew fashion for spring and summer.
Do women really want to dress like Greek statues in the electronics age?
Do they want to wear torn clothes and nose rings as punk dressers did a couple of decades ago?
Do they want to dress for dinner in clothes so flimsy that dinner should be served in the bedroom?
These are some of the concepts presented with great seriousness and conviction last week in the French ready-to-wear collections.
Granted that fashion is in a state of transition from the anything-goes exuberance of the 1980's to whatever is going to emerge as the style of the 1990's.
At the moment, it might be decadence.


Cardinal Distribution Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Raiders' Kick Wins With 0:16
In a game truly of two halves, the Denver Broncos, dominated by 13-0 in the first half by the Raiders, looked as if they had accomplished something in the second.
They scratched and clawed and climbed back into a 20-20 tie on Jason Elam's 37-yard field goal with 5 minutes 33 seconds remaining.
But with 16 seconds left, Jeff Jaeger kicked a low, booming line-drive 53-yard field goal for a 23-20 Raiders victory before 75,712 foot-stomping, shocked and disappointed fans at Mile High Stadium.


Jury Acquits 2 on Most Charges In Beatings in Los Angeles Riots
A jury today acquitted two black men of most of the severe charges against them in the beating of a white truck driver and seven other people in last year's rioting.
Deliberations are to resume Tuesday on two remaining charges, including the most serious one: attempted murder of the truck driver, Reginald O. Denny.
On this charge against one defendant, Damian M. Williams, the jurors said they were split 11 to 1, but they did not say in what direction.


Ball Park Is Quiet, and Now Burdens Grow for Drysdale's Widow
She palmed three baseballs in her right hand, four more in her left hand and was about to pitch in Dodger Stadium.
Then, the batter spoke up.


No Headline
"As a parent, I know that 95 percent of what gets on TV or in the movies gets into kids' heads. Why are they putting these movies out for our children?" -- PATRICIA SHINGLEDECKER, whose son was killed imitating a stunt he saw in a movie.  [ A22:1. ]


Gorman-Rupp Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cardinal Distribution Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Integrated Device Tech (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lincoln Foodservice Products Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Marvel Entertainment Group Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Webber Signs $74.4 Million Warrior Deal
CHRIS WEBBER signed a 15-year, $74.4 million contract yesterday with the Golden State Warriors.
"I know a lot of guys who play basketball and are overpaid and really can't play," said Webber, the National Basketball Association's No. 1 draft choice.
"I'd rather have a reputation of earning what I get. Right now, I have to prove that I deserve it."


Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


LeaRonal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


EMC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Ceridian Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
'Tosca'  New York City Opera New York State Theater
New singers stepped into the principal roles in "Tosca" on Wednesday evening, and Joseph Colaneri, the company's chorus master, took over the conducting.
Among the newcomers, Ann Benson made her house debut in the title role, and Paul Lyon, who made his debut as Calaf in "Turandot" this season, tried his hand at another Puccini hero, Cavaradossi.


McGraw-Hill Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CAPITAL CITIES/ABC INC. (N)
Capital Cities/ABC Inc. said yesterday that its third-quarter profits rose 26 percent, exceeding Wall Street's expectations and lifting the company's stock.
"The television network came back fairly strongly," said Thomas Wolzien, an analyst for Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company.
"Basically, it's a sign that the economy is improving."


Children Drew Some Scrutiny Before Inquiry
The four adopted children who the police said were kept in a locked and lightless attic while their parents collected $24,000 a year from a New York City adoption program had come to the attention of local school officials and state social-service officials before two of them broke out of their house and were caught shoplifting food at a supermarket.
The father of the children has said that the family had permission to educate them at home.
School officials say this is not true and that, in fact, the school system alerted the state Division of Youth and Family Services after it began investigating why the children were no longer coming to school.


Review/City Opera; 'La Rondine,' a Puccini Variation on the 'Traviata' Tale
For two acts, the New York City Opera and Puccini himself make a case for "La Rondine," a work that fell between "La Fanciulla del West" and "Il Trittico" and since then has never quite got to its feet.
This is Puccini at its light-footed and lyric best, with music that prods its characters into motion but does not mind pausing for the occasional set piece.
"La Rondine" returned to the house on Sunday afternoon, and opera lovers who don't mind putting up with anticlimax should go to hear it.
Ralph Funicello's first-act interior, with its undertones of pink and purple, is elegance without spectacle.
It gauges the weight of "La Rondine" perfectly.
Act III's Mediterranean scene is strewn with roses and hydrangeas.
Act II, I am afraid, is a jumble: a crowd scene without enough room for one.
The vague chorus singing echoed the visual confusions, but then there was Puccini's roof-raising ensemble number to win the afternoon.


Lakehead Pipe Line Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nine Months After Leaving the White House, Bush Finally Arrives Home


Dominion Resources reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Health Care Must Include Education
To the Editor:
President Clinton wants to provide the best health care to all Americans while trying to contain costs.
But a major factor in this process has largely been ignored: education to aid in disease prevention, specifically education about smoking, substance abuse, diet, heart disease, AIDS and contagious diseases.


Bruno's Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Carlisle Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sarajevo Adopted As Cause In Paris
A group of artists, intellectuals, politicians and institutions is pressing for a special designation of Sarajevo as Cultural Capital of Europe this winter.
The title, normally awarded to a city from 1 of the 12 members of the European Community for a full year, would be bestowed on the besieged Bosnian capital from December until February 1994, after Antwerp, the current cultural capital, and before Lisbon.


Mt. Sinai Changing Allocation Of Rooms as Bias Inquiry Starts
Mount Sinai Medical Center will change the way it assigns rooms to maternity patients on Medicaid, ceasing a practice of keeping all such poor patients on one floor, the Dinkins administration said yesterday.
Hospital officials said the Medicaid patients, who are attended by staff physicians at the hospital, were kept together to make it easier for the doctors to care for them.
The hospital denied that any discrimination was involved and insisted that services were the same for all patients.


Business Digest
The Economy
Seventeen of Wall Street's leading underwriting firms said they would stop making political contributions to state and local candidates who might determine underwriting assignments for municipal bonds.  [ Page A1. ]


Giuliani Accuses Dinkins Of a 'Surrender' on Drugs
Hammering away at what he sees as Mayor David N. Dinkins's most vulnerable issue, Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday made some of his strongest comments yet on fighting crime, calling for a "massive, intense, street-level" anti-drug campaign.
At the same time, his campaign moved to attract a crucial constituency -- liberal Democrats -- by airing two new advertisements, one featuring Robert F. Wagner Jr., the scion of a Democratic family, and the other featuring the actor Ron Silver, who talks of being a lifelong Democrat who says "we've got to give Rudy Giuliani a chance."


Gene Transfers Offer New Hope For Interspecies Organ Transplants
DOCTORS and scientists have reported major progress in breaking down the barriers to using animal organs in human bodies.
At the annual conference on transplants between species, or xenografts, two groups reported in London this month that they had for the first time successfully inserted human genes into pigs.
These genes should render the pigs' organs capable of being transplanted into humans without the devastating tissue rejection that commonly occurs when such transplants are made.


Foes Draw Battle Lines In Red Tape
THE fight between Ed Brown and the township will never rival the ancient blood feuds of the Middle East or the Balkans, but for this sandy, semirural shore community, it will do.
For Wall Township, it is a matter of fairness, safety and governmental responsibility.
For Mr.
Brown, it is the final assault on American enterprise and ingenuity by the dark forces of municipal regulation.


Can a Governor Really Save Jobs?; New Jersey Candidates Debate Role of State's Top Official
Two newly minted pickup trucks in dazzling colors are on display in front of the General Motors assembly plant here, and what they represent depends on who is doing the telling.
To G.M., the new S-line trucks represent the latest entry in the wildly popular sports-utility vehicle market.
To Bill Wisk, a 47-year-old assembly line worker, they represent a return, after a long layoff, to a highly paid manufacturing job.


Review/Theater; Self-Analysis as Forum For Deceiving Oneself
None of the characters in "Snowing at Delphi," Catherine Butterfield's play about a group of New Yorkers gathered in a country house for Christmas, are terribly shy about explaining what's gone wrong with their lives.
Fears, hostilities and personal philosophies are subjects to be presented, carved and served out like the holiday ham in this studiedly ironic comedy.
Never mind that the self-analysis often rings false.
That, as the author makes abundantly clear, is her point.
Ms.
Butterfield, who also appears in the play (and turns in its most credible performance), has a finely tuned ear for the language of self-deception.
And the evening's principal pleasures come from her ability to create lively dialogue among people whose elaborate systems of defense and justification are set up to be exploded.
"Know thyself" -- the inscription on the temple at Delphi, as one bombastic character announces -- becomes the play's shibboleth in a way that is both sardonic and earnestly sincere.


Hilb, Rogal &amp; Hamilton Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vermont Holds Its First Moose Hunt in 96 Years


Albank Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


FirsTier Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


What's Different About the Horn of Africa; Emotional Symbol
To the Editor:
The firestorm of commentary on the publication of the photograph of a dead American soldier being dragged through the streets of Mogadishu by a crowd of Somalis has raised once again the question of how much information the American public wants to have about its wars, how much reality is tolerable to a society whose free press has often been blamed for bearing bad news we would rather not confront (front page, Oct. 5).


Facing a Tough Test for a Winning Streak; After Nine Election Victories, Gulotta Is Encountering One of His Hardest Campaigns
Even before he won his first election, people knew Thomas S. Gulotta was destined to play a major role in Nassau County politics.
In the royalty of Nassau's Republican Party, which has long run the county government virtually unchallenged, he was clearly a prince.
His father, Frank, was the first Italian-American to rise through the ranks and win countywide office, first District Attorney and then Supreme Court judge.


Centex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Leftovers + Imagination = Mock Caesar Salad
More often than not, the dinner menu at my house is decided after a thorough investigation of the contents of the refrigerator.
I am always amazed to find out how many everyday leftovers can be transformed into wonderful dishes with just a little bit of imagination.
This is certainly the case here with the first course, a mock Caesar salad.
Conventionally, this classic salad includes a raw egg, which is omitted here because of concerns over possible salmonella contamination.


Harris Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


LSI Logic reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Savings of Florida (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reeve Schley Jr., 85, Lawyer, Banker And Horse Breeder
Reeve Schley Jr., a lawyer, banker and thoroughbred horse breeder, died on Monday at his home in Whitehouse, N.J., after a long illness.
He was 85.
Until three years ago, he was chairman of the Somerset Trust Company, where his father, Reeve Schley Sr., preceded him as chairman.


U.S. SHIFTS TROOPS TO DEFENSIVE ROLE IN SOMALIA MISSION
The top United States military commander in Somalia said today that American soldiers would no longer join United Nations forces in patrolling the streets of this city or in seeking to disarm any of the country's warring factions.
Outlining further limits that are being imposed on United States military operations here, the commander, Maj.
Gen.
Thomas M. Montgomery, also said the main mission of the American contingent would be to defend United Nations soldiers and their military compounds.
Marines to Go Ashore
He added that many of the 3,600 marines dispatched to the waters off Somalia would come ashore in the coming weeks to augment a United States Army force already swelling beyond 10,000 troops.


Shaw Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Citizens First Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For Blacks, Chef Jobs Finally Call
FOR hundreds of years there have been black cooks in America.
Now there are also black chefs.
In the last few years, more blacks have begun achieving prominence and recognition as professionals in fine restaurants, diversifying a field that was once almost exclusively white, male and, in the most prestigious restaurants, European.


Comerica Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rev. Joseph A. Hahn Dies at 81; Missionary, Pilot and Journalist
The Rev.
Joseph Augustus Hahn, a Maryknoll priest whose accomplishments ranged from mission work to aeronautics and from photography to bridge, died on Saturday at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center.
He was 81 and lived at St.
Theresa, a home for retired priests in Maryknoll, N.Y.
Father Hahn died after a long struggle with cancer, the order said.


No Headline
"It was the most unbelievable thing that I've ever seen and I wouldn't have missed it for anything in the world." -- DAVID WILLIAMS, a pro football player who passed up a game to attend the birth of his first child.  [ A1:4. ]


McClatchy Newspapers Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Interstate Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Blaze Devastates Brooklyn Building


GTE Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shaw Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Arden International Kitchens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Armor All Products (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dreyfus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Alcohol and Cold Risk
CIGARETTE smoking has long been known to increase a person's susceptibility to respiratory infections like colds and flu, but researchers were shocked to find that another common vice -- alcohol -- may foster resistance to the common cold.
While large doses of alcoholic beverages are known to suppress immune responses, thus increasing susceptibility to infections, a carefully controlled study suggests that more moderate alcohol consumption is protective.


ConferTech International Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Walter J. Kravetz; NBC News Producer, 66
Walter J. Kravetz, a producer and director for NBC News for 37 years, died on Sunday at his home in Hobe Sound, Fla.
He was 66.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Elco Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


MBNA Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Aquarion Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Keystone Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Allegheny Ludlum reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


In America; Blacks Killing Blacks
On Monday, in a high school on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson stood on the stage of a nearly filled auditorium and spoke to the ache in the heart of black America.
For whatever reasons, and they are many and complex, large numbers of black youngsters in America are on a rampage of killing.
And they are killing mostly one another.


Small Stocks Battered, and Dow Falls 6.99
Investors abandoned stocks in small companies yesterday, slicing away at the gains that had pushed the Nasdaq market to record highs last week.
The declines on the Nasdaq hit technology issues particularly hard and also seemed to spread pessimism to stocks in other areas, including the blue chips.


Chemical Waste Managment reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bankers First Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Knowledgeware Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Biographer to Assist Powell With Memoirs
Joseph E. Persico, a former speechwriter for Nelson A. Rockefeller and the author of biographies of Mr.
Rockefeller and of Edward R. Murrow, will be the collaborator for the memoirs of Gen.
Colin L. Powell, it was announced yesterday by Harold M. Evans, president and publisher of the Random House Trade Group.
Random House acquired the world rights in August for the autobiography of General Powell, the former Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, for a price said to be about $6.5 million.
Mr.
Evans said Mr.
Persico, who is represented by Clyde Taylor of Curtis Brown, had reached an agreement with the general's agent, Marvin Josephson.
Random House said Mr.
Persico would be paid by the general.
Neither Mr.
Josephson nor Mr.
Taylor would say whether Mr.
Persico would also receive a percentage of the royalties, if any.


In Haiti, There Is No Shortage of Fear
People familiar with Haiti's economy say that the international naval blockade that began today may cause severe damage but that it is uncertain whether the hardships will force the military leaders to restore democracy.
Concerns about the impact of the embargo grew as an international flotilla, including six warships from the United States, gathered on the hazy blue horizon off the coast to prevent fuel and arms from entering Haiti.


CHRONICLE
For legal name-dropping, it would be hard to beat the guest list for the party given in Manhattan on Monday by JAMES A. FINKELSTEIN to celebrate the 15th anniversary of the newspaper he publishes, The National Law Journal.
Among those at the party in the Harmonie Club on East 60th Street were Mary Jo White, United States Attorney for the Southern District of New York; District Attorney Robert M. Morgenthau of Manhattan, and lawyers like Arthur Liman and Floyd Abrams.
Also on hand were a few political figures, among them Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo of New York, who spoke, and Mayor David N. Dinkins and former Mayor Edward I. Koch, who managed not to cross paths.


California Microwave (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lakeland First Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


United Cos. Financial Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Incstar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Brenton Banks (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Florio-Whitman Debate Zeroes In on Ethics
Meeting in their second debate of the campaign tonight, Gov.
Jim Florio and his Republican rival, Christine Todd Whitman, traded sharp accusations over ethics and took swipes at each other's records and proposals.
Trailing by double digits in a series of independent polls -- including a 15-point spread in the most recent New York Times/WCBS-TV News poll -- Mrs.
Whitman was under greater pressure to perform well in both debates before a statewide audience.


Diceon Electronics Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bemis Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Aquarion Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Northern Trust (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corning Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 10


Corrections
An obituary on Friday about Andrew S. Zysman, a doctor in San Francisco who campaigned for accelerated AIDS research, described the use of the antiviral drug acyclovir incompletely.
It is prescribed to treat herpes, both in patients with HIV infections and in others.


Foremost Corp. of America (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Justin Industries Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Pop; Surfing U.S.A. Revisited
On Friday night, as it featured the surf guitarist Dick Dale, the Grand was filled with trash-culture enthusiasts, people for whom the overlooked and peripheral aspects of American popular culture are in fact a mainstream.
Mr.
Dale, who helped invent the surf-music genre in the late 1950's and early 60's, fit the audience's needs perfectly: he is a nearly forgotten figure whose music reflects the mania and voluminousness of American culture at that time.
Surf music, guitar-based and full of huge, whooshing sounds, is the expression of a certain type of innocent American modernity, pure California and pre-pollution, -Watergate and -Vietnam.
Mr.
Dale, playing a Fender Stratocaster, the quintessential American pop guitar, was hellbent on making noise.
He ran his fingers up and down the fret board in long glissandos, sending shimmering metallic sounds out into the room.
And he twanged away, letting the low notes ring like a jackhammer on a construction site.
In pieces from his new album, "Tribal Thunder" (Hightone), Mr.
Dale dipped into mambos and Arab scales, and he performed Juan Tizol's "Caravan" with flair.


ONBANCorp Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fleming Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


McClatchy Newspapers Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Irwin Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Malone Gets 2-Year Extension From Jazz
KARL MALONE's hurt feelings over LARRY JOHNSON's lucrative deal with the Charlotte Hornets have been soothed by a two-year extension of the power forward's contract with the Utah Jazz.
Malone, who had five years remaining on his contract, including the current year, reached agreement with the Jazz owner, LARRY H. MILLER, over the weekend.


Irwin Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Green, Released by the 76ers, Retires
SIDNEY GREEN, cut last week by the Philadelphia 76ers, announced his retirement yesterday.
The 32-year-old Green played 10 seasons, seeing action with six National Basketball Association teams.
Last month, he was traded from Charlotte to Philadelphia, but was then released.


Dow Corning Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Big O Tires Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Empi Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Male Bastion Finding Fewer Good Men
Half an hour before sunrise, hundreds of men in yellow sweatsuits stream out of the neo-Gothic barracks of Virginia Military Institute, saluting a statue of Stonewall Jackson as they race toward the foggy parade ground.
They are V.M.I.'s freshmen, known as "rats," who spend their 17-hour college days in workouts ("sweat parties"), marching stiffly ("straining") and answering trivial questions bellowed by upper-classmen who surround them ("flaming").


GBC Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Israel Frees Palestinian Leader Held 23 Years
In a gesture to the Palestine Liberation Organization that was seen as a harbinger of a possible mass release of prisoners, Israel today freed the Palestinian prisoner it has held the longest, 23 years.
It was the first release since the agreement on Palestinian autonomy signed last month.
Israeli officials called it a confidence-building measure that could increase support for the accord in the occupied territories.


Idex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Schmidt Can Now Extol The Value of Emotion
Mike Schmidt did not express his emotions on the field or get too close to the fans while he played for the Phillies.
But when Schmidt, who is likely to be a first-ballot Hall of Famer when he is eligible in 1995, threw out the first pitch before Game 3 tonight, he received a rousing ovation and enthusiastically waved to the fans.
He recognizes the value of emotion for the current Phillies.
"I made things look easy in the field and didn't get emotional," said the former third baseman, who hit 548 homers and had 1,533 runs batted in.
"When I see highlights of myself, I'm a little displeased. I think I got caught up with the pressure to succeed. The 1993 team are guys that fans can relate to. The team is like the city. The fans want to be like the Phillies and rise."


Toronto Defeats Philadelphia to Lead Series 2-1


Springs Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


House Kills the Supercollider, And Now It Might Stay Dead
The House pushed a stake through the heart of the $11 billion Superconducting Supercollider program today, voting emphatically, for the second time since June and the third time in 16 months, to reject financing for the vast Texas atom-smasher.
Each time, the Senate has rescued the project, which has already cost $2 billion, from the House attempts to kill it.
But after today's 264-to-159 vote on a crucial procedural vote in the House, its most important advocate in the Senate, J. Bennett Johnston, said the project appeared to be lost.


World Bank Issues Bond in Marks
The World Bank began selling its first global bond issue denominated in German marks yesterday, and officials said demand was very strong.
Kenneth G. Lay, director of the financial operations department at the World Bank, said the lead underwriters for the 3 billion mark ($1.83 billion) 10-year issue, Salomon Brothers and Deutsche Bank, were telling investors that the deal was oversubscribed several times, so they would not get the bonds they had requested.


It's 'Davis Cup, Anyone?' As a Trip to India Looms
The United States Davis Cup team learned yesterday that the same worst-case scenario that spelled disaster for its 1993 squad -- a first-round match in Australia that the top American players refused to fit into their schedules -- has returned for 1994 in the form of a first-round trip to India.
So far, said the brand-new Davis Cup captain, Tom Gullikson, there have been no first-round volunteers for 1994.
"It's going to be a formidable trip, and while I'm certain we have the players to subdue India, the main task is getting people down there and keeping them healthy," said Gullikson, who harbors memories of food poisoning and a unique court surface, cow dung, from his two trips to India in 1977 and 1978 while competing on the circuit.


42d Street To Get A Theater For Youth
The Victory Theater, an empty 93-year-old Times Square house with an illustrious past but no future until now, will become the city's first major midtown theater offering year-round programming for young audiences.
After a $7.9 million renovation, the Victory will become the first of nine historic theaters on West 42d Street to be restored and reopened, the project's organizer, the New 42d Street Inc., announced yesterday.


Arkansas Best Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


COMPANY BRIEFS
BANC ONE CORP., Columbus, Ohio, said the Federal Reserve Board approved its acquisition of Mid States Bancshares of Moline, Ill.
FIRST ENTERTAINMENT INC., Denver, signed a letter of intent to acquire a 51 percent interest in the Polton Corp. of Scottsdale, Ariz., for undisclosed terms.


Reinsurance Group
Shares of the Reinsurance Group of America have dropped sharply after the company, based in St.
Louis, said third-quarter earnings would be lower than analysts' estimates because of higher than expected claims.
Wall Street analysts had expected the company to earn 46 cents a share.
Insurance companies buy reinsurance to help spread their risk.


Trade Center Jury Hears Evidence of Vehicle Parts
A bomb expert testifying in the World Trade Center trial yesterday gave the first account matching vehicle parts found after the explosion to a yellow van the Government claims was rented by one of the defendants.
The expert, a bomb technician for the Federal Bureau of Investigation, said pieces of an exploded vehicle found under the trade center after the Feb. 26 blast were identical to a duplicate yellow Ford Ryder rental van.
The Government claims Mohammed A. Salameh, one of the four men accused as terrorist bombers, had rented the van in Jersey City three days earlier and then falsely reported it stolen.


Ukraine Now Says It May Keep Nuclear Weapons
In a sharp change of tone, President Leonid M. Kravchuk said today that Ukraine may keep some of the nuclear weapons it inherited from the Soviet Union, and he accused the West of not providing enough financial assistance to dismantle the 176 strategic missiles on Ukrainian territory.
President Kravchuk's statement, that Ukraine may keep 46 SS-24 missiles, came only five days before Secretary of State Warren Christopher is to arrive here for talks in which Ukraine's nuclear weapons will feature high on the agenda.


Warner Lambert Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Colonial BancGroup Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Honeywell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Thornton's Season Is Over
Giants defensive lineman George Thornton, who suffered a mild stroke last week, has been placed on the reserve/nonfootball-related injury list for the rest of the season.
Although the Giants can bring Thornton back, Coach Dan Reeves and Giants medical personnel said today that Thornton, 25, should not play again this season.
The Giants released a statement from the team physician, Russell Warren, who said: "George Thornton has sustained a transient ischemic attack, a mild stroke. George's hypertension appears to be under control. He will undergo further diagnostic testing and counseling this week at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center. George and the Giants have agreed that he should not play football this season."


Louisiana Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sprint Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


City National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


750 Rangers Are to Leave Somalia, President Says
President Clinton announced today that 750 Army Rangers would leave Somalia immediately, effectively ending the American role in the search for the clan leader who international officials have said is responsible for the deaths of scores of United Nations peacekeepers.
Mr.
Clinton said that the Rangers, who had been part of the United Nations effort to track down and arrest the Somali leader, Mohammed Farah Aidid, had completed their mission -- though they have not found General Aidid -- and that the 3,600 marines who have arrived offshore would monitor the situation in Somalia.


Chart House Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


State Street Boston (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Phillies Are Proving 3 Out of 9 Only Add Up To a Third of a Team
A .500 record after two games in the World Series in a foreign setting can camouflage much.
But sooner or later, the Philadelphia Phillies are going to have to address the parts of their offense that are drying up.
Not Lenny Dykstra, Mariano Duncan or John Kruk.
That trio continued their superb and consistent attack on Toronto pitching, collecting five of the Phillies' nine hits and reaching base a total of seven times in an 10-3 loss in Game 3 here tonight.


American Maize-Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Polaroid Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


California Microwave (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lakeland First Financial Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


ConferTech International Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Victoria Bankshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Briggs &amp; Stratton Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


MAF Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chemical Waste Managment reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bankers First Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Knowledgeware Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Male Bastion Finding Fewer Good Men
Half an hour before sunrise, hundreds of men in yellow sweatsuits stream out of the neo-Gothic barracks of Virginia Military Institute, saluting a statue of Stonewall Jackson as they race toward the foggy parade ground.
They are V.M.I.'s freshmen, known as "rats," who spend their 17-hour college days in workouts ("sweat parties"), marching stiffly ("straining") and answering trivial questions bellowed by upper-classmen who surround them ("flaming").


Victoria Bankshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


MBNA Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 15
Oct. 8
Oct. 16
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.5
7.3
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.5
3.4
3.1
Gasoline stocks
209.7
210.4
209.8
Distillate stocks
132.2
128.4
131.5
Crude imports, daily
7.5
6.9
7.8
Product imports, daily
1.9
1.4
2.3
Crude stocks
327.1
330.8
327.2
Crude production, daily
6.8
6.8
7.1
Refinery utilization (%)
93.7
92.9
88.3
Source: American Petroleum Institute


A Long Island Police Dog Is Honored at Burial


New Chairman Named By Chemical Banking
The Chemical Banking Corporation said yesterday that Walter V. Shipley, its president, would become chairman and chief executive on Jan. 1, when John F. McGillicuddy retires, and that Edward D. Miller, one of two vice chairmen, would become president.
The banking world and Wall Street had widely expected the appointment of Mr.
Shipley, 57, who headed Chemical Bank before its merger in 1991 with the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company, which was headed by Mr.
McGillicuddy.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  TERM LIMITS TO GO ON BALLOT
New York City voters will get to decide on Election Day whether to limit the Mayor, members of the City Council and other municipal officeholders to two consecutive four-year terms, the state's highest court, the Court of Appeals, ruled unanimously.
A1.
DINKINS CAMP TO PAY FOR CAMPAIGN ERROR
Under pressure from the city's Campaign Finance Board, the Dinkins campaign has agreed to reimburse the State Democratic Committee for more than $226,000 worth of political ads that the Giuliani campaign had complained were intended to circumvent spending limits.
B2.


Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dow Corning Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Weighing Spending on Breast Cancer
RESPONDING to anguished pleas from thousands of women with breast cancer, President Clinton has vowed to take action.
In a meeting on Monday with a delegation from the National Breast Cancer Coalition, an advocacy group for women with breast cancer, he announced that the Department of Health and Human Services would develop a national action plan for preventing and treating breast cancer.
Mr.
Clinton also said that his Administration would work with advocates for breast cancer patients at a conference in December to develop the plan.
"It is important that that plan be fitted into a larger commitment to the health care of Americans," he said, "to put women's health concerns -- from research to the development and delivery of health care -- on equal footing with men."


Corning Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 10


Honeywell Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Denny's Old Neighbors Say Fear Swayed Verdicts
Here in the San Gabriel Valley suburb where Reginald O. Denny lived at the time he was beaten, many residents say that the jurors who have mostly acquitted two men charged in the assault have been unfairly influenced by an earlier trial that led to deadly rioting in Los Angeles.
"It's a meshed thing, isn't it?" mused Connie Gustavson, a secretary at a Baptist nursery school here.
"It's very hard to be truthful when you're weighing so many things."


First Citizens Bancshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ahmanson (H.F.) &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


GTE Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Theater in Review
Marriage Play  Signature Theater Company Kampo Cultural Center 31 Bond Street East Village Through Oct. 31  By Edward Albee; set by E. David Cosier; costumes by Teresa Snider-Stein; lighting by Jeffrey S. Koger; fight direction by Marty Pistone; production stage manager, Kathleen M. Nolan.
Presented by Signature Theater Company, James Houghton, artistic director; Thomas C. Proehl, managing director.
WITH: Kathleen Butler and Tom Klunis.
When last we saw George and Martha, Edward Albee's prototypes for the angry middle-aged couple, they were confronting their fear of Virginia Woolf after a boozy dark night of the soul in academia and trying to find a way to carry on after shattering the illusion that bound them.


Florio's Ratings Slipping in Poll, But He's Ahead
Gov.
Jim Florio's standing with the voters has begun to erode in New Jersey's race for governor, according to the latest New York Times/WCBS-TV News poll, but he still maintains a commanding lead over Christine Todd Whitman.
With less than two weeks to go before the Nov. 2 election, the poll shows Governor Florio leading Mrs.
Whitman 49 to 34 percent among registered voters, a lead that is wider still among those who said they will definitely vote.
But his performance rating has slipped, his trust rating has slipped and so has his reputation for honesty and integrity.
Nearly two-thirds of the respondents think their taxes would go up if he is re-elected.


Bradford C. Williams Puppeteer, 42
Bradford C. Williams, a puppeteer and teacher, died on Sunday at Butterworth Hospital in Grand Rapids, Mich., from injuries suffered in an automobile accident.
He was 42 and lived in Holland, Mich.
Mr.
Williams, who was born in White Plains, attended Hope College in Holland.
He received his master's degree in puppetry from the University of Connecticut.


Citizens First Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BancorpSouth (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Comerica Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Business Information INc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Trustmark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Centex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Eating Well
WHILE brilliant chefs like Paul Prudhomme and talented cookbook authors like Jim Fobel invent new techniques for suffusing low-fat and low-sodium dishes with gorgeous flavors, many other chefs have taken only the first step along the road to the food of the 1990's.
They have removed much of the fat and salt from their dishes, but they have neglected to replace these essential seasonings with anything else.


Harris Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hue Journal; Once Again, a Fiery Suicide Sets Vietnam Aflame
Clutching a small bunch of flowers and a few pieces of fruit that would be his final earthly offering to the Buddha, Dao Quang Ho walked up the mist-shrouded stone steps that lead to one of Vietnam's most hallowed shrines, the Pagoda of the Heavenly Lady.
He also carried with him a box of matches and a small plastic bottle filled with gasoline.
Buddhist monks who were in prayer at the pagoda on that cool, sunny morning in May would later say that they saw Mr.
Ho place the flowers and fruit on three plates, setting one before each of the pagoda's three golden statues of the Buddha.
He then walked a hundred yards to a granite courtyard at the rear of the pagoda, where he doused himself with gasoline before striking a match.


RESULTS PLUS
7-0 Leafs Near Record  The Toronto Maple Leafs, backed once again by the exceptional goaltending of Felix Potvin, beat the visiting Hartford Whalers, 7-2, last night for their seventh victory without a defeat.
A triumph against the Panthers in Miami tomorrow night will give Toronto a share of the National Hockey League record for consecutive victories at the start of a season, shared by the 1934-35 Leafs and the 1975-76 Sabres.
Potvin has allowed only 15 goals in the seven games.
Panthers 2, Kings 2: Kelly Hrudey of the visiting Kings stopped 50 shots by the surprising Panthers, who in turn held Los Angeles scoreless through the final 61 minutes.
Florida shut out the N.H.L.'s highest-scoring team after falling behind, 2-0, in the first 3 minutes 16 seconds.


American Maize-Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Capital Bancorp Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hilb, Rogal &amp; Hamilton Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


McKesson Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Albank Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Interstate Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Trustmark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Nobel Laureates Won Unesco Peace Prize
To the Editor:
On Oct. 15 all American media featured the award of the Nobel Peace Prize to Nelson Mandela, the African National Congress leader, and F. W. de Klerk, the President of South Africa.
That attention was deserved in view of their unflinching commitment to negotiations for a nonracial, democratic South Africa.


Life Sign Listed As 8-5 Favorite
Presidential Ball, Riyadh and Life Sign will race for divisional honors in the $300,000 Cadillac Breeders Crown pace for 3-year-old colts Saturday at Freehold Raceway.
Three other pacing divisions will be contested on the Breeders Crown program, which is harness racing's year-end championships: 3-year-old fillies, 2-year-old colts and 2-year-old fillies.


After Shevardnadze's Plea, Russia May Help Georgians
After an urgent appeal for help from Georgia's embattled leader, Eduard A. Shevardnadze, Russian officials said today that they were considering joint action with other countries in the Caucasus region to protect Georgia's main supply route from rebel attacks.
But Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev and Defense Minister Pavel S. Grachev ruled out any direct Russian military intervention in Georgia, where Mr.
Shevardnadze is caught in a desperate fight for survival against a rebellion led by his archrival, former President Zviad Gamsakhurdia.


Sprint Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Metropolitan Diary
BREL RENEE MENARD of Seattle relayed this recent New York vacation experience of her friend, Ron Roseman; his wife, Liz Thomas, and their 2-year-old daughter, Catherine.
"While walking down the city streets, Catherine took great delight in pointing at a person and then loudly exclaiming 'That's a woman!' or 'That's a man!' Then, walking toward her was someone who gave her pause. She announced 'That's a man,' hesitated and then declared, 'That's a woman,' and then changed her mind again and said, 'No, that's a man.' The person in question finally neared, looked down at her and said, 'That's right, honey, a little of both.' "
. . .
CALL IT A SEASON  Summer ends sometime, but how can you tell when it's official to bid it farewell?
A calendar's nothing on which to rely;
Often October resembles July.
I know a sure sign; I know a token
Proving the back of the summer is broken.
Watch for the day when the ice-cream man's bell,
Lone and unanswered, tolls out the knell. -- ALMA DENNY
. . .
Dear Diary:
Carol DeCaprio was awakened from her reverie on a Metro North train between Bronxville and Manhattan when she heard:
"What's the matter with you? I can't close my eyes for five minutes! Why did you try to get off at Scarsdale? You don't know anyone in Scarsdale."
She opened her eyes and there was what she described as "a tall, scruffy man haranguing an equally scruffy looking but unconcerned dog."
"You know we don't get off at Scarsdale," he continued.
"This is where we get off; you know we get off at Fordham." And out they went.
. . .
Dear Diary:
While visiting Washington, D.C., we overheard a young boy pester his parents to buy him one of the toys that were being sold by a street vendor.
His father kept saying, 'No, no, no, too expensive.' I turned around to the young lad and said, "Why don't you ask your grandma?" A slight pause and he replied, "How would you like to be my temporary grandma?" -- EVELYN COHEN
. . .
Sylvia Bernstein of Far Rockaway, Queens, was preparing for her first flight abroad when she became concerned about the metal detectors at the airport.
She called the airline.
"If I wore an underwire bra on my overseas flight, would that set off alarms?" she asked.
"Not unless that was all you were planning to wear," the male voice replied, and then, in what was reported as "a sincere tone," it added, "and if there is any problem, I will personally assist you in removing the offending item."
. . .
Ken Murrell was at Barnes &amp; Noble on Fifth Avenue 18th Street when he overheard the following conversation:
Frantic College Student: Do you have Durk heim's "Suicide?"
Clerk: Yes, over there in the Death and Dying section.
Student: You have a whole Death and Dying section? That's fantastic. Terrific!
Noting that her enthusiasm shocked and amused both the clerk and a bystander, she added: "O.K., well not terrific, just good. It's good you have that section."
. . .
A friend of Augusto Bautista Tiongson believed he was the victim of a pickpocket, but a few days later, he received most of the contents of his wallet in the mail.
The cash was absent, replaced with a note that said the wallet was found in a puddle of water, damaged and not worth shipping.
The finder was keeping the cash, the note said, "because I'm impoverished and it's $43, not $430 like you're telling everyone. Sorry for your loss but Jesus works in many ways." Actually, the friend was telling everyone it was $42.71.
. . .
Add this (overheard by Ruth Nathan on the 57th Street crosstown bus) to the best-seller list:
Two well-dressed women.
One announces that she is reading "The Firm" and likes it, but not as much as the last Joan Collins novel, which made her cry.
The other woman puts in her 2 cents (more like $16.95, depending on where she bought the book): "The best book I've read this year is 'The Bridges of Madison Avenue.' "


2 Russians in Algeria Are Slain by Militants
Two senior Rusian military officers were assassinated in Algeria Saturday, officials announced today, apparently as part of a new phase of a two-year-old terror campaign by Muslim fundamentalists.
The movement that is trying to press the Algerian Government into giving up power has indicated recently that it will try to drive foreign specialists and diplomats out of the country.


Chart House Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


State Street Boston (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Checkers Drive-In Restaurants Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Signet Banking reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shadows Are Getting Longer, the Days Shorter


Universities Scrambling As Investment Incomes Fall Short of Past Levels
Colleges and universities across the country are eliminating jobs or freezing hiring, declaring construction moratoriums and trimming student financial aid because of the declining return on endowments, a source of income that is often second only to tuition.
At Stanford Law School, a student loan program was saved only because three jobs were cut.
At the University of Texas, building maintenance has been cut sharply.
And at the University of Pennsylvania, three departments were closed last week and their professors moved to others.


Coaches Seek Voice On N.C.A.A. Rules
Midnight Madness may be the traditional opening for college basketball, but the season got off to an intriguing start this afternoon as two major coaching groups -- one exclusively black, the other predominantly white -- met in different cities to discuss strategies to make their voices heard.
While the National Association of Basketball Coaches met here for the group's inaugural issues summit, 30 members of the Black Coaches Association boycotted the conference and instead met in Washington with members of the Congressional Black Caucus.


Colonial BancGroup Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Huffy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Designated Hero: Molitor Justifies Gaston's Decision
Cito Gaston, besieged for days with constant questions about his plans for his designated hitter in the World Series games here, could have left Paul Molitor out of the Toronto lineup tonight.
Or, among other options, he could have used Molitor in left field in place of Rickey Henderson and his .129 batting average.
But Gaston, showing shrewd instincts, benched the American League batting champion and put Molitor in John Olerud's spot at first base.
Molitor responded by making his manager look like a genius.
Henderson helped, too.


Gerber Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


UJB Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


FirsTier Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Warner Lambert Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
Syracuse
Marvelous Marvin Graves, big-play maker and superb passer, is carrying the Orange.
The running attack all but disappeared against Pitt -- 35 attempts mostly between the tackles for 116 yards -- leaving the offense up to the quarterback.
So Graves passed for 318 yards and 2 touchdowns, which is an average performance for the senior who has received Heisman Trophy attention.


GBC Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


LSI Logic reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Idex Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Books of The Times; Harlem's Face on Its Own Terms
VanDerZee Photographer, 1886-1983 By Deborah Willis-Braithwaite with a biographical essay by Rodger C. Birt Illustrated. 192 pages.
Harry N. Abrams. $39.95.
How does a photographer find his subject?
Or must his subject find him?
When young Alfred Stieglitz came home from Berlin in 1899, he claimed that New York City was photo-resistant.
He had to see the rambunctious vaudevillians Weber and Fields and the great Eleanora Duse in "Camille" before he got it: New York's sights, rhythms, tones and sensations dictated their own rules.
It was up to the photographer to grasp and make use of them.
Young James VanDerZee came to New York from pastoral Lenox, Mass., in 1908, and he came as a waiter, an elevator operator and a musician.
When he finally opened his photography studio in 1917, his subject was Harlem, a city within a city, and its rules were wildly contradictory.
What had first been a haven for upper-class Anglo-Saxons had then become a haven for middle- and working-class Irish, Italians and Jews, and was fast becoming a haven for upper-, middle- and working-class blacks from the South, the West and the Caribbean.


Gerber Products Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Greenspan Supports Fed's Secrecy
Alan Greenspan, testifying alongside 15 senior Federal Reserve officials, said today that the economy would be hurt if Congress forced the central bank to operate with less secrecy.
Mr.
Greenspan, the Fed's chairman, said proposals to require detailed disclosure of its discussions would discourage the central bankers from speaking freely.


Badger Meter Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Diceon Electronics Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Big O Tires Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Empi Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chicago Learns How Hard It Is to Better Schools
Four years ago, with the fanfare of a high school commencement and the passions of a civil war, the nation's most sweeping experiment in school governance gave broad authority to parents in each of Chicago's 551 public schools.
For the first time, parents could choose the principal, approve budgets and have final say over anything from the books their children read to the color of paint in the halls.


ONBANCorp Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fleming Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Melville Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Pfizer, American Cyanamid and Upjohn said that 7,000 jobs would be cut over the next three years, adding to tens of thousands of pharmaceutical-industry jobs eliminated in recent months amid growing pressure to restrain health care costs.
Many of the lost jobs will be in New York and New Jersey.  [ D1. ]


Armor All Products (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Northern Trust (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cytocare Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
It's certainly not the most difficult composition that the Philadelphia Orchestra has ever performed, but its members were getting ready yesterday to give their rendition of "The Star-Spangled Banner" at the fourth game of the World Series in Philadelphia this evening.
The musicians will have a police escort to Veterans Stadium, where they will stand between home plate and the pitcher's mound for the national anthem in what is believed to be the first performance by a symphony orchestra at a World Series game.
They will wear tails, Philadelphia Orchestra sweatshirts and Phillies hats.


Foremost Corp. of America (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Justin Industries Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Pop Life
Stones' Unclear Bass Line
You may soon see and hear a new Rolling Stone. But then again, maybe you won't.


Los Angeles Jurors Report Progress Despite Hardships
A juror in the racially charged trial of two black men accused of beating a white truck driver has expressed fears for her safety and that of her family, the forewoman told the judge today.
The word of the juror's fears, which were disclosed in response to a question from the judge, came before the jury cut short its deliberations at midday when one of them fell ill with high blood pressure.
Shortly afterward, a second juror fell ill and was taken to a hospital with an undisclosed ailment.


Lageman to Play Despite Warning of Neck Injury
Jeff Lageman, the Jets defensive end who has complained of numbness in his arms and other discomfort because of a problem with a disk in his neck, will play Sunday against the Buffalo Bills even though a doctor has warned him that he risks serious injury, according to a person close to the situation.
Lageman saw eight spine specialists in New York and Virginia last week in an attempt to determine the severity of the problem.
Seven of those doctors cleared him to play, the person said, but one doctor recommended that Lageman sit out at least six weeks before playing again or risk serious injury.


UJB Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Diamond Shamrock reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Topics of The Times; Get a Life, Coach
If we hadn't already suspected there was something seriously wrong with football, Bob Young would have convinced us.
The Houston Oilers' offensive-line coach needs to make an appointment with his nearest attitude-adjustment clinic.
When one of his offensive linemen, David Williams, missed a game because he wanted to be with his wife when his son was born, Mr.
Young compared it to avoiding a combat mission in World War II.


Male Bastion Finding Fewer Good Men
Half an hour before sunrise, hundreds of men in yellow sweatsuits stream out of the neo-Gothic barracks of Virginia Military Institute, saluting a statue of Stonewall Jackson as they race toward the foggy parade ground.
They are V.M.I.'s freshmen, known as "rats," who spend their 17-hour college days in workouts ("sweat parties"), marching stiffly ("straining") and answering trivial questions bellowed by upper-classmen who surround them ("flaming").


Checkers Drive-In Restaurants Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Signet Banking reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


London is minimal to the max: C13.


Unisys Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lilly (Eli) &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Huffy Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Melville Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Review/Television; An Evening for Savoring Classical Music's Details
Impassioned dedication, or just plain bargain hunting?
Public television's relationship with classical music generally falls somewhere between.
There are producers like Jac Venza and John Goberman, who are decidedly fervent, and there are programmers who, always budget conscious, are adept at finding a good deal or acquisition.
In the end, at least occasionally, music lovers win.
Tonight's lineup on PBS begins at 8 with Mr.
Goberman's series, "Live From Lincoln Center," in a celebration of the Chamber Music Society's 25th anniversary.
Mr.
Goberman has long crusaded for the live televising of music, dance and opera events.
This program -- featuring the pianist Andre Watts, the society's first guest artist member -- will open with the premiere of John Corigliano's Fanfare for Brass, and will also include Debussy's Premiere Rhapsodie and Mozart's Clarinet Quintet, with the clarinetist David Shifrin, who is the society's artistic director.


How to Police New York
Crime is always a visceral issue in New York City politics.
That's especially true this year when polls show crime to be a prime concern among voters.
Mayor David Dinkins and his challenger Rudolph Giuliani hold starkly different views on how dangerous the city is and how best to police it.
Mr.
Giuliani presents himself as a hard-nosed cop who'd round up the bad guys he says the Mayor has permitted to flourish in the streets.
Mr.
Dinkins points with pride to the thousands of new police officers he has hired, and to a drop in the most serious and violent crimes despite a popular perception that crime is getting worse.


Washington Talk; Moynihan on Health: Cure Social Ills
Health care hearings at the Senate Finance Committee under Daniel Patrick Moynihan's chairmanship are unlike any other health care hearings.
The talk today was not of how health care alliances would work under President Clinton's plan, nor whether small business could afford to pay premiums.
There were no emotional accounts of children denied treatment, no special pleading for victims of this disease or practitioners of that treatment.


Los Angeles Times Offers A 3d Buyout
In its latest effort to cope with a persistent advertising slump, The Los Angeles Times is pursuing yet another voluntary employee buyout program to reduce overhead, Times officials confirmed today.
Under the program, announced internally at the paper on Monday, The Los Angeles Times said it hoped to eliminate at least 100 jobs and save $5 million a year.
Newsroom, transportation, mailroom, fleet operations, security, finance and prepress employees are eligible for the program.


William Stansbury; Ex-U.S. Official, 84, Led Housing Efforts
William T. Stansbury, a retired official of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, died on Sunday at a hospital in the Philadelphia suburb of Springfield, Pa.
He was 84 and lived in Springfield.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Bridge
If your partner opens the bidding and the opponents reach a game, it is reasonable to assume that you can afford to double holding five trumps headed by the ace and a side king.
West made this assumption on the diagramed deal and was disappointed by the result.
The occasion was the New Jersey Swiss teams event in Chatham, N.J., played on Sunday, and North-South were Jane Mason and David Wizentowski, both of Madison, N.J., two members of the winning team.
North and South are close to making three no-trump and that would succeed if the defense leads too many hearts.


Christopher Gillis Tribute
A memorial tribute to Christopher Gillis, a choreographer and leading performer with the Paul Taylor Dance Company, is to be held on Saturday at 2 P.M. at St.
Mark's Church, Second Avenue and 10th Street, East Village.
Among those scheduled to take part are Margie Gillis, Mr.
Gillis's sister; Ruth Andrien, and members of the Paul Taylor and Jose Limon companies.
Mr.
Gillis died on Aug. 7.
Information: (212) 431-5562.


Hoopla Aside, Mayors Inspire Ho-Hum Attitude
PREDICTABLY, we are now at that point in the mayoral race when some people would have us believe that depending on how we end up using our ballot in 12 days, the city will be either doomed to perpetual ruin or assured of final deliverance.
In order to place such thinking into perspective, here is a list of people who have been Mayor in the last 50 years:


First Citizens Bancshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jefferson Bankshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
SEAN CONNERY has completed a course of radiation therapy on his throat.
"It has been a month, six weeks since it was finished, and I am fine," the actor said Monday on GMTV television in Britain, The Associated Press reported yesterday.


AFTER THE FLOOD WITH: Elizabeth Hanford Dole; Power Player, Playing Cautiously
ELIZABETH HANFORD DOLE, a smile fixed on her face and her charm at the ready, picked her way around the tangle of lumber and oozing mud, searching for flood victims.
Although the flood waters have receded here, the need has not.
But the Red Cross van bearing coffee and sandwiches was drawing few takers that day, so Mrs.
Dole, trim in a Red Cross T-shirt, khakis and smudgeless pink sneakers, marched gamely door-to-door.


Review/Theater; The Seminal American Musical Is Rebuilt From the Ground Up
Without "Show Boat," there would have been no "Porgy and Bess," no "Oklahoma!," no "West Side Story." Jerome Kern and Oscar Hammerstein's 1927 Broadway musical was the first to tell an adult story adapted from a sprawling novel (by Edna Ferber), the first to traffic in serious themes (miscegenation, marital collapse), the first to aspire to the epic size of classic 19th-century American literature.
With its cracker-barrel humor, metaphorical use of the Mississippi River and poignant attempts to bridge the vast American racial divide, "Show Boat" is the Broadway musical's answer to "The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn." Or would be if Twain had had Florenz Ziegfeld's taste for soaring melodies and lavish spectacle.
In today's American theater, there may be no artist more indebted to "Show Boat" than Harold Prince, whose entire career, from the original production of "West Side Story" to the current "Kiss of the Spider Woman," has been devoted to building on the serious musical that Kern and Hammerstein invented.
So it is no surprise that Mr.
Prince's staging of "Show Boat" here, as the opening attraction of the North York Performing Arts Center, is a seismic event in the American musical theater.
Given a huge budget, an enormous cast in which Broadway stalwarts vastly outnumber local recruits, and a house that resembles the mammoth Gershwin Theater back home, Mr.
Prince has approached the piece as if it were a new work that might have been submitted to him by Stephen Sondheim shortly after their collaboration on "Sweeney Todd." The result is a continuously fascinating display of theatrical wizardry that, largely because of inadequate acting, still falls short of what must be its principal goal: to make "Show Boat" as powerful for contemporary audiences as it was for those of the late 1920's and 30's.


Review/Dance; New Choreography and High Fashion In a United Expression About AIDS
The program was called simply "A Demand Performance," but it was an extravaganza in every sense, uniting the dance and fashion worlds in an evening that celebrated creativity in both fields.
The cause -- raising money for education, care and advocacy in relation to AIDS -- persuaded 18 choreographers to join forces on Monday night at the New York State Theater for an event that featured 17 dance works (most of them premieres) or excerpts, two vocal pieces and a strutting finale led by Tommy Tune.


Chemical Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Savings of Florida (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


LTV Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


What's Different About the Horn of Africa
To the Editor:
As every American seeks to understand the complex tragedies that have occurred in Somalia, a fallacy central to the present United Nations-United States policy seems, at last, to have become clear: we think that the Somalis ought to have a government (letter, Oct. 14).
The peculiar history of Somalia suggests otherwise.
The people of the horn of Africa hold themselves apart from other black Africans in several ways.


Yankees Would Create Environmental Nightmare in Midtown
To the Editor:
New York's Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo and the Urban Development Corporation propose to build a new Yankee Stadium in Manhattan to keep the ball club from moving to New Jersey.
But why should New Yorkers give the Yankees even $20 million a year, the cost of financing a new stadium, to congest and pollute Manhattan?


BanPonce Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ahmanson (H.F.) &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BancorpSouth (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bits of Heaven on Toast
THE incomparable bay scallops are with us.
The New York State season opened at the beginning of the month.
Supply dictates the price of these tiny bivalves, no bigger than your thumb, and even though they cost as much as a filet of beef, to aficionados they are far more desirable.
They are so sweet and succulent that it's a mistake to do too much to them.
Ed Gifford, an accomplished amateur cook who has a house in Amagansett, L.I., has taken traditional scallop ingredients and added a few dashes of Worcestershire sauce, the final fillip that has turned a lovely dish into one quite extraordinary.


Bronco-Raider War Moves to Front Offices
The Raiders and the Broncos have met 66 times and the most recent one, on Monday night, proved that as far as rivalries are concerned in the National Football League, this feud does not take a backseat to any other.
Late in the first half, General Manager John Beake of Denver strode over to Pat Haggerty, the N.F.L. officiating observer, in the Mile High Stadium press box and ripped the on-field officiating crew upside down and inside out.
There was grabbing and holding by the Raiders' offensive linemen and no calls were being made, Beake charged.
He said he was sick and tired of the league's catering to the Raiders' owner, Al Davis.
He told Haggerty that the league could expect a formal complaint first thing Tuesday morning.


Great Western Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


General Public Utilities Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Financial Management Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


F.C.C. Says Fees are Higher For 30% of Cable Customers
At least 30 percent of cable television subscribers are paying higher rates since new Federal cable regulations took effect last month, a Federal Communications Commission survey of 250 cable systems indicates.
The survey is the first comprehensive examination of how cable companies responded to the new regulations, and it comes after widespread complaints from consumers and members of Congress that cable prices were going up instead of down.


Cosell and Glickman Make Hall of Fame
HOWARD COSELL and MARTY GLICKMAN were selected yesterday for induction into the American Sportscasters Hall of Fame.


DSI Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Nets Appear Willing to Wait on Coleman
Now that Derrick Coleman has rejected the Nets' latest contract offer -- a $69 million, eight-year extension that would would make him the highest-paid player per season in the National Basketball Association -- the team faces a deadline for signing their 6-foot-10-inch power forward.
Coleman's attorney, Harold MacDonald, has given the Nets until Monday to offer a counterproposal, but the club doesn't appear to be moving quickly in that direction.


Officer to Resign From Lintas Nov. 1
Tony DeGregorio, executive vice president and chief creative officer at Lintas New York, said yesterday that as expected he would resign from the agency after nearly three years, effective Nov. 1.
"In my new role at Lintas, I had become an administrator," Mr.
DeGregorio said.
"It just wasn't rewarding to me and certainly not fun."


D'Amato Skips a Race
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato ended his public flirtation with a 1994 gubernatorial race, leaving the Republican primary to lesser-known contenders.


Mid-America Banc (Ky.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Incstar Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Brenton Banks (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Danaher Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Key Energy Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Louisiana Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Theater in Review
S.
S.
Glencairn Four Plays of the Sea  Willow Cabin Theater Company Harold Clurman Theater  412 West 42d Street Clinton Through Oct. 31 The Moon of the Caribees Bound East for Cardiff The Long Voyage Home In the Zone  Four short dramas by Eugene O'Neill; directed by Edward Berkeley; set by Miguel Lopez-Castillo; costumes by Dede Pochos and Fiona Davis; lighting by Michael Gottlieb.
Presented by Willow Cabin Theater Company, Mr.
Berkeley, artistic director; Adam Oliensis and Maria Radman, producing directors.
WITH: John Billeci, John Bolger, Paul Bolger, Thomas Borrillo, Doug Broe, Kenneth Favre, Ken Forman, Laurence Gleason, Peter Killy, Charmaine Lord, Stephen Mora, Angela Nevard, Adam Oliensis, Linda Powell, Michael Rispoli, Cheryl Rogers, Jonathan Sea and Craig Zakarian.


TCF Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Accounts
*
London Underground International, Portland, Ore., to Cole &amp; Weber, Portland, as the first agency to handle consumer advertising for its Doc Martens footwear brand.
Billings were estimated at $3.5 million. *
Food &amp; Wine magazine, New York, to Jerry Inc., New York, to handle its consumer and trade account, previously handled by Luca &amp; Moore Inc., New York.
Billings were estimated at $1.5 million.


In New Jersey, Slip-Ups Show Autopsy System Deficiencies
When Philip Mancini, a popular Vineland High School teacher, was found murdered in bed at home early this month, the news shocked this South Jersey farming and glassmaking community.
An autopsy performed by the Cumberland County Medical Examiner, Dr.
Larry Mapow, concluded that Mr.
Mancini, 53, had died from blows to the head by a blunt instrument.


Ducks Blast the Rangers, and Then Keenan Does
When Mike Keenan took over as the new head coach of the Rangers last spring, he had no explanation for the team's failure to make the playoffs despite its obvious talent.
Last night, he got a firsthand example of exactly what went wrong.
With a mind-boggling performance that rivals any of their ugly outings last season, the Rangers lost, 4-2, to the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim at Madison Squaren Garden, providing the expansion club with a victory in its first-ever road game.


American Business Information INc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Ah, loyalty. Always a warm concept, but the industry hears just how vital it is for brands.
"WHEN good brands go bad! On the next 'Geraldo.' "
There was no such titilating announcement to begin yesterday's closing general session of the 84th annual meeting and conference of the Association of National Advertisers.
But as speakers passionately discussed the problems and prospects for selling name-brand products when they are challenged as never before by lower-priced goods, the lurid language would have fit right into any sensational television talk show.


D'Amato Is Out of Race for Governor; Will Remain in Senate
Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato today ended his five-month public flirtation with a 1994 gubernatorial race, leaving the Republican primary to a field of lesser-known contenders.
Mr.
D'Amato announced -- in a letter to party leaders, on Howard Stern's radio show and then in a Washington news conference -- that he was staying in the Senate in the hope that the Republicans would take control in next year's midterm elections.
If the Senate changes hands, Mr.
D'Amato would become chairman of the Banking Committee.


Estrogen and Breast Cancer
To the Living Section:  In "Eating Well" (Sept. 8), Marian Burros correctly notes that many experts believe that the female hormone estrogen plays a role in raising a woman's risk of breast cancer and that the link between a high-fat diet and an increased risk of breast cancer may be that the diet increases estrogen levels.


Coachmen Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mother Who Saw Neighborhood's Dangers and a Stray Bullet
Moments before she died, Wanda Betts sat her two young daughters down on a small bench.
She fastened their jackets against the early evening cool then turned toward the sound of teen-age boys arguing across the street.
She must have seen their guns, the police said, because the last thing she ever did was to throw herself in front of her children, to be their shield.
Ms.
Betts, a 26-year-old college student, newly married and yearning to be a teacher, was killed by one stray bullet that tore from sidewalk to sidewalk Monday night between two housing projects in the Brownsville section of Brooklyn and struck her in the chest.
Her girls were spared.


Evans &amp; Sutherland Computer Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


10 Bad Minutes Ruin the Other 50
Can a team look good and come out of a slump while losing its fifth game in six attempts?
If so, that summarizes the Islanders tonight at Nassau Coliseum, where they lost, 3-2, to the Pittsburgh Penguins before 10,574 customers.
After falling behind by 3-0 in the first half of the first period, the Islanders dominated for the next 50 minutes, bombarding Penguins goalie Tom Barrasso with 47 shots, at least a third of them excellent scoring chances.


BanPonce Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Yankees Would Create Environmental Nightmare in Midtown; Cut Stadium Prices
To the Editor:
Regarding the latest proposal to relocate the Yankees in midtown, if you ride the trains when the Yankees are playing, you see a curious thing: the trains to Yankee Stadium coming from Manhattan are packed with fans, while the trains to the stadium coming from the Bronx are empty.
Why do so few people from the Bronx come to see the Bronx Bombers play?


Well, Yes, Being an Ex-Congressman Helps
The short man with the wide smile was working the dais in the House Ways and Means Committee's hearing room this morning, shaking hands, patting backs, button-holing, making small talk.
He slipped into the anteroom behind the dais after Representative Dan Rostenkowski, the Illinois Democrat who is chairman of the committee, dropped the gavel to begin the session on the North American Free Trade Agreement.
But periodically he reappeared at the door to summon one Congressman and then another into the back room.
A few times during the hearing he actually walked onto the dais to consult with legislators or staff assistants.


Chemical Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


School Is Taken Over by Angry Parents in Protest
Dozens of Brooklyn parents, angered by their children's nomadic journey in and out of other schools because of the asbestos crisis, have taken over an elementary school, camping out by night, conducting a few classes by day and vowing not to leave until they have a permanent building for their children.
The protest, at Public School 156 in Brownsville, began peacefully Monday night and has continued despite demands from the school district, No. 23, that their children report to a nearby school for classes.
The students have complained of harassment at that school.


Bemis Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Freedom to Regain Her Highest Glory


Unisys Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lilly (Eli) &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Somalia Envoy's Earlier Lobbying Under Investigation for Possible Conflict
The State Department is investigating whether President Clinton's chief envoy to Somalia, Robert B. Oakley, violated Federal conflict-of-interest laws in his work as a private consultant, Administration officials said today.
The inquiry centers on Mr.
Oakley's role as a consultant to Middle East Airlines, which hired his Washington-based company this year as part of a campaign to regain its profitable routes to the United States.
He has denied any wrongdoing.


11th State Set to Ban Blockading of Clinics
In an effort to prevent groups like Operation Rescue from blocking access to abortion clinics, the Massachusetts Senate passed legislation today forbidding blockades of medical centers.
The bill, which is expected to be signed into law by Gov.
William F. Weld, prohibits people from "knowingly" obstructing the entrances and exits to clinics.
"People can still sing and chant, and continue to speak out," said State Senator Lois G. Pines, who sponsored the bill, which was previously approved by the Massachusetts House of Representatives.


Polaroid Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Wary Draw Puts Kasparov Close to Victory in Match
Whatever happens now, after Gary Kasparov agreed to a draw in Game 19 of his world championship match with Nigel Short yesterday in London, he cannot lose his title.
He has 12 points out of a possible 24 and, under match rules, the incumbent retains his championship in the event of a tie.
That may well be why the Russian was so generous in offering a draw when he had just won a pawn that might have turned out to be decisive.
His strategy may have been to make his status secure first and then play for the $1.43 million winner's share of the $2.55 million purse by winning or drawing Game 20 on Thursday.


Michael L. Cipriano; Display Designer, 33
Michael L. Cipriano, a display designer whose work was shown at Macy's, Bloomingdale's and Barneys, died on Oct. 8 at St.
Vincent's Hospital.
He was 33 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was complications from AIDS, his family said.


Dinkins Campaign to Pay Party Panel for Some Ads
Under pressure from the city's Campaign Finance Board, the Dinkins campaign has agreed to reimburse the State Democratic Committee for more than $226,000 worth of political advertisements that the Giuliani campaign had complained were intended to circumvent spending limits.
The agreement was applauded by advocates of public financing as a sign that the board, created in 1988, was forcefully executing its mission.
In agreeing to pay for the ads, the Dinkins campaign averted possible sanctions or fines from the board.
But the payments are a blow to the Dinkins campaign because they will reduce the amount of money the campaign has to spend in the crucial last days of a tight race, city officials and mayoral aides said.


3 BOSNIA FACTIONS IN PRISONER TRADE
After 18 months of prison camp abuses, the three warring armies in Bosnia began a prisoner exchange today involving more than 6,400 people, most of them civilian men who were seized as hostages, to prevent them becoming combatants in the war, or simply as targets for revenge.
The exchange, organized by the International Committee of the Red Cross, is designed to all but empty a score of prisons and detention centers across this former Yugoslav republic.
If successful, the operation would sharply curtail a pattern of abuses, including summary executions, beatings and near-starvation diets, that has been condemned by international human rights groups.


Arkansas Best Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Outside Spotlight's Glare: Other Cases From Riots
Damian M. Williams and Henry K. Watson are the final two members of what their supporters called the "L.A. Four," the first group arrested after riots and the ones whose fate has engaged the passions of the city.
But their cases are only the most visible of a half-dozen stemming from crimes against a white truck driver, Reginald O. Denny, and scores of other people on April 29, 1992.


Nets Sale? Discussions Reported Continuing
While the Nets are waging a public battle to persuade Derrick Coleman to sign a long-term contract extension, their fragile seven-man ownership board is struggling to determine what its own association with the National Basketball Association franchise is going to be.
Several N.B.A. sources have said that the majority owners running the Nets have had recent discussions about selling the team to at least one group, the Maloof family of Albuquerque, N.M., which formerly owned the Houston Rockets and last year lost out in a bid to reacquire the team.


Theater in Review
Fire's Daughters  Ubu Repertory Theater 15 West 28th Street Chelsea Through Sunday  By Ina Cesaire; translated by Judith G. Miller; directed by Ntozake Shange; set by Watoku Ueno; lighting by Greg MacPherson; costumes by Carol Ann Pelletier; music composed and performed by Mauro Refosco; casting by Adrienne Puntar Stern; production stage manager, Bethany Ford; assistant director, Saundra McClain.
Presented by Ubu Repertory Theater, Francoise Kourilsky, artistic director.
WITH: Darlene Bel Grayson, Alene Dawson, Harriett D. Foy and Cee-Cee Harshaw.
Laughter rings through the dialogue and the music of "Fire's Daughters" by the Martinican writer Ina Cesaire, but what the four women in this play are really talking about, under the playful jokes and teasing, is a bloody struggle of an entire people.


TCF Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Creative Team Rejoins BBDO
David Johnson and David Harner, the award-winning creative team who left BBDO New York a little more than two years ago to join Young &amp; Rubicam New York, said yesterday that they would rejoin BBDO.
The move had been expected.
At BBDO, Mr.
Johnson, 46, and Mr.
Harner, 34, were named to the new positions of senior creative director and creative director, respectively.
They will report to Michael Patti, who is an executive vice president and executive creative director, working on the Pepsi domestic and international accounts and Frito-Lay.
While at Y. &amp; R., the team worked on the A.T. &amp; T. account, but most recently had worked on new-business development.


Key Energy Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Head of Prado Quits After 30 Months in Job
The head of the Prado Museum, Felipe Garin, resigned unexpectedly today after only 30 months at his post.
The museum's board met quickly and nominated Francisco Calvo Serraller, a 45-year-old art history professor and renowned art critic, to succeed Mr.
Garin.
The nomination is expected to be confirmed by the Spanish Government in a Cabinet meeting on Friday.


Diamond Shamrock reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; Baseball's War Between The Leagues
NEVER before had the d.h. factor required such a momentous announcement during the World Series.
But never before had the d.h. factor involved a future Hall of Famer and a resident batting champion.
With 2,492 hits at age 37, Paul Molitor is almost sure to accumulate more than 3,000 hits, virtual automatic admission to Cooperstown's pearly gates.
John Olerud led the American League with a .363 average this season, perhaps the first of several titles for this sweet swinger.


Coachmen Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Paper Maker Turns a Cleaner Page
At a time when many in the paper industry are resisting environmentalists' calls for more recycled fiber and less use of chlorine in paper making, the Union Camp Corporation stands out as a company that has voluntarily taken these steps.
At the sprawling paper plant here on the bank of the sleepy Blackwater River, a few miles from the North Carolina border, a confluence of history, geography and economics has led to the "greening" of Union Camp.


DSI Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Capital Bancorp Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Film; East German Agitprop
"Strictly Propaganda" offers a virtual-reality-style voyage into a brave new world, a place where housewives tirelessly salvage bricks from bombed-out rubble and children sing sweetly about wanting to join the army some day.
If the effect of such scenes is disorienting, it ought to be, since this documentary consists entirely of excerpts from East German newsreels and educational material.
Promoting everything from sex education for teen-agers to steamer cruises on the Volga, each of these snippets has its own blunt agenda.
"Show us where children are not so well off," a teacher asks a student, spinning a globe.
"Yes! Where capitalism dominates! A good answer."
Using no narration, interruptions or other means of breaking the spell, Wolfgang Kissel has strung together a riveting series of vignettes, each of them intended to sway the audience in what now seem laughably clumsy ways.
Despite the dated, unbecoming light in which they now appear, though, these scenes are ultimately too sad and serious to play like anything out of "Reefer Madness." Spanning 40 years' worth of East German history, "Strictly Propaganda" documents endless deceptions, variously large or insignificant, that add up to a national tragedy.
Mr.
Kissel makes his film all the more disturbing by never stopping to contrast real events with their absurdly sunny, inspirational counterparts on screen.


Corrections
An article yesterday about accidents among teen-agers who emulated a daredevil stunt from a new movie misstated the day of the funeral for Michael A. Shingledecker Jr., who was killed by a car while lying on a highway in Polk, Pa.
His funeral was yesterday, not Monday.


Integra Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hefty Price for T-Shirt Auctioned by Waitz
A white T-shirt was auctioned off in Pulitzer Plaza across from the Plaza Hotel yesterday afternoon and brought $2,600.
The T-shirt was 100 percent cotton, but fabric accounted for only a fraction of the price.
It was a one-of-a-kind shirt with a clock and "116" on it, the number of days left until the opening of the XVII Winter Olympic Games in Lillehammer, Norway.
The Norwegian Olympians GRETE WAITZ, a silver-medal winner in the marathon, and STEIN ERIKSEN, a gold- and silver-medal winner in skiing, conducted the auction.
The shirts have been sold primarily in Lillehammer, one a day, to draw attention to the event.
But in the last two weeks the group has sold shirts in Seattle, Chicago and Minot, N.D., where the garment drew a record price of $3,700 at a Scandinavian fair.


States, G.M. Vie on Car Emissions
The General Motors Corporation and the air pollution officials of 12 Northeastern states are maneuvering warily in rival attempts to determine what emission standards will apply to cars sold in the region in the late 1990's.
The state officials, meeting yesterday in Mystic, Conn., took a step toward asking the Federal Environmental Protection Agency to require "low emission vehicles," similar to those mandated by California, in their region, which runs from northern Virginia through Maine.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
The Board of Regents of Higher Education of the University of Montana is offering $46.9 million of tax-exempt facilities improvement and refunding revenue bonds initially priced to yield a maximum 5.08 percent for a bond due in 2015 through underwriters led by Smith Barney Shearson.
Serial bonds with shorter maturities yield from 2.30 percent in 1994 to 5 percent in 2010.
Because all the bonds are insured by the Municipal Bond Investor's Assurance Corp., they are rated triple-A by Moody's Investors Service and Standard &amp; Poor's.


Springs Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


General Public Utilities Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sherrard's Spirit Is Strong Despite His Body's Faults
Mike Sherrard has endured so much pain, it's almost as if he expects it.
After breaking his right leg three times in the last six years, he has added a partly dislocated hip to his list of woes.
But it wasn't surprising that when he met the news media today, his spirits were upbeat and there was even a smile on his face.
Sherrard, who is expected to be on crutches for three to six weeks, was asked if he felt like, "Why me again?"


Great Western Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Antioch's Policy on Sex Is Humanizing
To the Editor:
Re " 'Ask First' at Antioch" (editorial, Oct. 11), about the college's sexual offense policy: you still don't get it.


INSIDE
More Suffering for Haiti
While sanctions against Haiti are sure to increase hardship, it is unclear whether they will force leaders to restore democracy.
Page A3.
Higher Bills for Governments
Local governments would have to pay more than private companies do to insure workers under the Clinton health plan, officials said.
Page A18.
Movie Stunt Dropped
The Walt Disney Company said it would delete a scene in "The Program" after a teen-ager was killed copying the stunt.
Page A21.
Drug Companies to Cut Jobs
Pfizer, American Cyanamid and Upjohn plan to eliminate a total of 7,000 jobs, with many of the cuts coming in New York and New Jersey.
Page D1.


TIME WARNER INC. (N)
Time Warner Inc. and the Time Warner Entertainment Company L.P. reported yesterday a cash flow before interest and taxes of $726 million for the third quarter, up 8 percent from $675 million in the corresponding period a year ago.
Revenues were $3.7 billion, up from $3.5 billion.
The company reported a loss of $41 million for the quarter before a one-time charge of $70 million as a result of the new income tax law's effect on the company's deferred tax liability and an extraordinary loss on the retirement of debt of $22 million, resulting in a net loss of $133 million.


Deposit Guaranty (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ornda Healthcorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


One Study Too Many?
To the Living Section:  I was bemused by Marian Burros's article about the controversy surrounding the theory that fat intake contributes to breast cancer.
There is apparently strong evidence to suggest such a connection, but two recent studies have been unable to prove it, and so a new one, involving 70,000 women, is under way.
Is this a good way to spend our research dollars?


Philip Morris Earnings Fall, But Marlboro Shows Gains
The cigarette price wars may still be raging, but Philip Morris has gained at least a faint indication that the pricing strategies for Marlboro cigarettes are working.
While third-quarter earnings for the Philip Morris Companies, which were announced yesterday, were 24.8 percent lower from a year ago, Marlboro's share of the market increased.
According to data from the A. C. Nielsen Company, Marlboro's market share edged up 1.4 percent, to 25.7 percent.


Citicorp's Earnings Tripled in Third Quarter
Citicorp, the nation's largest banking company, said yesterday that third-quarter net income had more than tripled, to $528 million, helped by reduced credit costs in both commercial and consumer lending and by strong trading revenues.
Citicorp, the parent of Citibank, is on track for its best year ever.
For 1988, Citicorp had net income of $1.86 billion, and for the first three quarters of this year it has earned $1.64 billion.


Cytocare Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Coalition Opposing Health Plan Is Called Front Group for Insurers
In the latest twist in an intense lobbying campaign over the Clinton Administration's health plan, a group that favors it accused an insurance industry trade group today of deceptively creating a front group to lobby against the plan.
The Families USA Foundation, a consumer group that specializes in health issues, said it had a copy of the health insurance lobby's plans.


O'Hare Airport Refunding
The largest negotiated municipal offering yesterday was a $642.97 million airport bond refunding by the City of Chicago, which was initially priced to yield a maximum 5.30 percent for a bond due in 2016 through an underwriting group led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company.
Proceeds from the bond sale of $323.2 million in general airport revenue refunding bonds and $319.8 million in general airport second-lien revenue refunding bonds for O'Hare International Airport in Chicago will be used to redeem bonds that were sold when interest rates were higher and to lower debt-service payments.


LCI International Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Fashion; A Mostly Minimal Look in London
While watching the parade of blank minimalist dresses in London, it's difficult not to fantasize that from behind the catwalk, a spiky-haired punk might emerge and paint graffiti across the wall of white slips.
Buyers say they have returned to London this season because of a combination of factors: the re-emergence of punk, the success in Paris of the ornate collections of the British designers Vivienne Westwood and John Galliano and the popularity of Edwardian and dandy looks.
What they found during the three days that made up London fashion week, though, was mostly the same squeaky-clean clothes that have emerged elsewhere.
If you had $:1 for every slip dress shown in London, you might actually be able to afford one.


McKesson Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Smith Corona Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Badger Meter Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Customs Overhaul Offered In Move to Aid Trade Pact
The Administration and Congressional supporters of the North American Free Trade Agreement today tied a sweeping revision of Federal customs regulations to the proposed pact after failing to resolve a dispute over how to pay for the agreement.
Today's proposed revision of customs regulations was part of an effort by the pact's supporters to mollify transportation industries.
The nation's airlines, cruise lines and trucking companies are vigorously lobbying against an Administration proposal to double customs inspection fees to offset $2.35 billion in tariffs that would be eliminated over five years under the agreement.


Evans &amp; Sutherland Computer Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Monsanto Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


F&amp;M Bacorp (Md.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Humana Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Healthsouth Rehabilitation Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Harland (John H.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BID TO LIMIT TERMS CAN BE ON BALLOT IN NEW YORK CITY
New York State's Court of Appeals ordered New York City yesterday to let voters on Election Day decide whether to limit the mayor, members of the City Council and other municipal officeholders to two consecutive four-year terms.
The ruling was a defeat for the city's political establishment, led by Mayor David N. Dinkins and the City Council Speaker, Peter F. Vallone.
They had been fighting for months to keep the term-limit referendum off the ballot through administrative and legal measures.


Keystone Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Prizes for Two Playwrights
The 1993 Kesselring Prizes for best new American plays were awarded yesterday to Anna Deavere Smith for "Fires in the Mirror: Crown Heights, Brooklyn, and Other Identities," and Han Ong, for "Swoony Planet." The cash prizes are awarded by the National Arts Club in Manhattan.
Ms.
Smith will receive $10,000; Mr.
Ong, $2,500.


For 'Deny Me' Decade, The Right Cookie
WHEN the world was young, babies teethed on zwieback.
Now, people dip a far more sophisticated version of these biscuits in vin santo or strong black coffee and call them biscotti.
Instead of cutting teeth, they're the cutting edge.
Biscotti, a generic term in Italian for all kinds of cookies, has a more specific meaning to Americans: biscotti are twice-baked cookies, elongated half-moons in shape, that are designed for dunking.
Because biscotti are traditionally a pretty abstemious-looking sweet, they seemed the perfect choice for the puritanical 1990's, when 16-ounce porterhouse steaks have been replaced by 3 ounces of chicken hidden in a sea of vegetables and pasta.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-14  LIMITED MISSION FOR U.S.
TROOPS  The top U.S. commander in Somalia said that additional American troops would help defend U.N. troops but would not join United Nations forces patrolling the streets or disarming the warring factions.
A1  ELITE ARMY UNIT LEAVING SOMALIA  President Clinton is withdrawing the elite Army Rangers from Somalia.
The move showed his intention to seek a political solution there, the President said.
A14


Hentgen At Home On Road
All it took was a one-way plane ticket.
All Pat Hentgen needed to rebound from a forgettable pitching performance was a timely journey across the border.
Once Hentgen leaves Canada and leaves the Skydome, he is a daunting pitcher.
Even in the World Series.
The pitcher who could exchange memorable road stories with Charles Kuralt created another wonderful baseball tale tonight with a superb game in his first visit to Veterans Stadium, a 10-3 Blue Jays victory over the Phillies in Game 3 of the series.
Once they boarded their charter flight in Toronto Sunday, the Jays probably knew that Hentgen would produce.
He did.


Yanks Demote Monteleone
The Yankees have demoted relief pitcher Rich Monteleone outright to Class AAA Columbus, where he can either accept the move or declare himself a minor league free agent.
The 30-year-old right-hander was 7-4 with a 4.94 earned run average in 42 appearances this past season and seemed uncertain about his future.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.88
3.03
2.97
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.04
3.06
3.02
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.12
3.14
3.23
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.80
4.81
6.45
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.84
5.84
7.64
TELEPHONE BONDS
6.93
6.94
8.70
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.36
5.35
6.55
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Integra Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Charity-Event Round to Regret
CHARLEY CAREY says he's "rotting in jail" three weeks after he was arrested for allegedly cheating on his score during a charity golf tournament near Indianapolis.
"It's been like living in Nazi Germany here," Carey said by telephone from the Hamilton County jail, where he has been since his Sept. 30 arrest.
"Things are getting worse and worse. I haven't been convicted of anything."


Openness or Isolation for North Korea
Talks aimed at opening North Korea's nuclear sites to international inspectors are getting nowhere.
A diplomatic resolution of the dispute is still possible, but time is running short.
North Korea is now on notice that if it fails to live up to its obligations under the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, the U.S. and others are prepared to seek economic sanctions.


Ex-Chief of State Fed Joins Goldman
Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company announced yesterday a prize catch: E. Gerald Corrigan, former president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Starting in January, he will become a high-profile Goldman executive and concentrate on lining up new business -- mostly overseas -- for the firm.
As the Fed's point man abroad, Mr.
Corrigan dealt frequently with foreign central bankers and ministers, developing relationships that will undoubtedly be useful to Goldman.


MAF Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


60-Minute Gourmet
WHEN I was a fledgling cook in Paris, rack of lamb, served on the bone or boneless, was one of the most popular dishes among the high-society crowd.
I could never add up all the racks of lamb I trimmed and deboned in those years, and as a result I can practically do it in my sleep.
I never lost my taste for lamb, though, and the recipe here is one of my favorites.
Whenever you are coating a piece of meat or fish, it is best to make your own bread crumbs, seasoned to taste, rather than relying on the store-bought version.
It is so easy, too.


Personal Health; Struggling for peace in the war against psoriasis.
LIVING with a chronic health problem is never easy.
The emotional difficulties of dealing with an incurable ailment are compounded when instead of eliciting compassion the disorder touches off feelings of revulsion, not just among casual acquaintances but often in the patients themselves.
For those who suffer from psoriasis, a chronic, incurable skin disorder that is rarely life-threatening and only sometimes physically disabling, the emotional impact can nonetheless be devastating.
In a poll taken recently among the more than 250 people attending the annual meeting of the National Psoriasis Foundation, 84 percent said that psoriasis had a negative effect on their moods, 43 percent said it adversely affected their social lives and 16 percent reported that it interfered with their work.


United Cos. Financial Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ornda Healthcorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Topics of The Times; Let There Be Light
In a welcome reversal, the White House has announced that future appearances by President Clinton at major political fund-raising dinners will be open to the press -- the same sound policy followed by Presidents Reagan and Bush.
The move responds to criticism of the press lockout imposed by the White House when Mr.
Clinton mingled with lobbyists and fat cats at the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee's recent $1,500-a-head fund-raising dinner.
This was an awkward stance for an Administration supposedly committed to open government.


Antioch's Policy on Sex Is Humanizing; Society's Unbounded Id
To the Editor:
" 'Ask First' at Antioch" (editorial, Oct. 11) fails to identify this latest legislative experiment as part of a broad social trend.
Our society is beset by ever more impulsive behavior, unbounded by the ordinary limits of conscience.
The inevitable reaction is to attempt to restore civility to human interactions by enacting more and more rules.
Society's id and, in response, its superego grow by leaps and bounds.
In the process a healthy ego gets squeezed out.
Unfortunately, legislation cannot substitute for human decency.
It will not save us.
RICHARD ALTABEF  Great Neck, L.I., Oct. 11, 1993 The writer is a First Amendment lawyer for CBS.


Arden International Kitchens Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


LTV Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wine Talk
WITH the peak wine-buying season coming up in the next few months, the wine industry in the United States shifts into high gear in October, with everyone from winery presidents to retailers asking the same question: will wine sales this year surpass those of 1992, the best year for sales since 1985?
The consensus is that, with the recession receding, 1993 should be slightly better than 1992.


FOOD NOTES
Meat Safety
Many labels on ground beef now carry information on safe handling and cooking procedures.
Not every package has the information, because there have been some last-minute court challenges to the Department of Agriculture's new rules on labeling.
But many labels had already been added in anticipation of the rules.
The guidelines, one of which indicates that ground meat should be cooked to 160 degrees, are meant to reduce the incidence of food-borne illness.
In many stores, retailers are also providing brochures suggesting that whole pieces of meat, like roasts, be cooked to an internal temperature of 145 to 170 degrees, except pork, which should be cooked to at least 160 degrees.
Poultry should be cooked to 165 to 180 degrees.


Easter Seal EDI Announces Winners
Six advertisers, three agencies, a magazine and a television station were among the winners last night at the 1993 National Easter Seal EDI Awards ceremony in New York, honoring communications judged to enhance the independence of people with disabilities.


7,000 Drug Jobs to Be Eliminated
Amid growing pressure to restrain health care costs, three large drug makers announced plans yesterday to cut 7,000 employees over the next three years, adding to tens of thousands of pharmaceutical-industry jobs eliminated in recent months.
Many of those jobs will be lost in New York and New Jersey, where large multinational drug companies maintain headquarters, research laboratories or factories.
But the three companies, Pfizer, American Cyanamid and Upjohn, declined to say how the cuts would be distributed across their worldwide operations until they tell the workers affected.


A Bigger Starks Aims for Bigger Things
Last season was a breakthrough for John Starks, who along with Patrick Ewing was instrumental in leading the Knicks to the Eastern Conference finals against Chicago.
His rousing dunk put the cap on a Game 2 victory that left his team just two games away from the N.B.A. finals.
But the Knicks never won those two games, and one reason was the play of Starks, who seemed worn down by the long season and by the man he was assigned to guard: Michael Jordan.


Sorbet: Correction
A recipe for mango sorbet last Wednesday in an article about quick desserts misstated the total time and the time for pureeing the mango.
The total time is 55 minutes, not 70; the time for pureeing the mango is 2 1/2 minutes, not 24.
Here is a corrected version.


Deposit Guaranty (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Allegheny Ludlum reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Elco Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Executive Changes
AMERICAN EXPRESS TRAVEL RELATED SERVICES CO., New York, named Steven W. Alesio executive vice president of the small-business services division, and Anne M. Busquet was named executive vice president of charge card marketing in the consumer card group.
LEHMAN BROTHERS, New York, a unit of the American Express Co., named Robert Kimmitt a managing director in charge of its Washington corporate finance office.


Benazir Bhutto Returns as Leader of a Poor and Troubled Pakistan
Benazir Bhutto, Pakistan's first woman Prime Minister, returned triumphantly today to the office from which she was banished in 1990 on charges of corruption and incompetence.
Assuming office a second time, Ms.
Bhutto faces a desperately poor Pakistan and confronts a hostile India and severe economic and military sanctions by the United States because of Pakistan's nuclear weapons program.


Humana Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; With a stock offering, LTV is looking for long-term investors.
THE LTV Corporation's emergence in June from one of the longest and most complex bankruptcies in United States history was only part of its journey.
It now has to regain investor interest.
Only months after its emergence, the reorganized steel corporation registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission to offer 20 million shares of its common stock to the public, presumably near its current price of $12.25 a share.
The underwriters, led by Salomon Brothers, expect the deal to take place sometime next month.


F&amp;M Bacorp (Md.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Monsanto Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Local Governments May Pay More in Health Plan
Administration officials disclosed today that President Clinton's health plan would require some state and local governments to pay more than private employers for workers' health insurance.
Private employers would not have to contribute more than 7.9 percent of their payrolls.
But no such limit would apply to public employers, the Administration officials said.


Mid-America Banc (Ky.) (A) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


DOLE WEAKENING HAITI RESOLUTION
Apparently lacking the votes to pass a resolution tightly restricting President Clinton's military options in Haiti, Bob Dole, the Senate minority leader, negotiated with the White House today about watering it down.
Lawmakers of both parties criticized the Administration's handling of Somalia, Haiti and Bosnia.
But even as they offered their own suggestions, a bipartisan consensus appeared to be growing against any attempt to make fundamental foreign policy decisions in the Senate in response to public opinion.


Briggs &amp; Stratton Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jackson Heights Tract Named Historic Area
New York City's Landmarks Preservation Commission took a major step yesterday toward protecting the Queens neighborhood that in the early decades of this century gave garden apartments their name by designating a tract of nearly 500 apartment buildings and homes in Jackson Heights as a historic district.


Jefferson Bankshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Plan Seeks Improvement Package for Financial District
A two-year study of lower Manhattan concludes that a broad package of renovation, construction and marketing is needed to improve the area that includes the Financial District, Battery Park City and the South Street Seaport.
The 96-page plan for the area, released yesterday by the city Planning Department, proposes bolstering the business community and the tourist industry through a combination of tax breaks, city financing, zoning changes and a special business tax to finance promotion of the area.


RAPE WAS WEAPON OF SERBS, U.N. SAYS
A United Nations war crimes commission has found evidence that rape was used by the Serbs as a weapon of terror in the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
But the commission says the number of provable cases of rape may be substantially lower than the 20,000 estimated earlier this year by the European Community.
The European report said in January said Muslim women were raped by Serbian soldiers as part of their campaign of "ethnic cleansing" in the civil war.


Harland (John H.) (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Healthsouth Rehabilitation Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Danaher Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


First Financial Management Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


At Issue: Hold a Baby or Hold That Line?
In a head-on collision between the family values of today's sensitive man and the macho work ethic of pro football, a citywide furor unfolded over the Houston Oilers' threat to discipline a player who missed a game last Sunday because he stayed with his wife for the birth of their first child the previous evening.
Callers jammed radio talk shows here to vent their views about the team's contention that David Williams, the starting offensive right tackle, should have tried harder to join the club for its game against the New England Patriots in Foxboro, Mass.
The vast majority of callers supported Williams, and the Oilers, apparently sensing a public-relations disaster in the making, had appeared today to be backing off their threat to dock Williams $125,000 and possibly suspend him for missing the game.
But tonight, the team announced that it was withholding Williams's pay for the game.
It did not make reference to any further disciplinary action.


City National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Smith Corona Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Average of 7 Polls Shows How Close Race for Mayor Is
Seven recent polls of New York City voters indicate a close contest between Mayor David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani, his Republican-Liberal challenger.
When the seven polls are averaged, Mr.
Dinkins has 45 percent to Mr.
Giuliani's 42 percent.
But when the polls are taken individually, the gap between the two candidates is within each poll's margin of sampling error.


LCI International Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dreyfus Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


You Call This Jam? Traffic Was Frozen in Place.; Nighttime Accidents in Greenwich, Conn., Turn Into Rush-Hour Gridlock on I-95
Shari Cardozo offered to help the paramedics, but they said things were under control.
She fiddled with the radio.
She snacked on junk food she found in the car.
She turned the engine on to keep warm.
She turned it off to save gasoline.
She kicked off her shoes and napped for a while.
Finally, nine hours later, she drove off, having spent the night stuck in a 30-mile-long traffic jam on Interstate 95 caused by two chain-reaction tractor-trailer pileups in Greenwich, Conn.
"Time kept going by and I kept saying, 'It's going to be soon, it's going to be soon,' " Mrs.
Cardozo, a night-shift nurse at Greenwich Hospital, said yesterday.
"If I'd known I'd be staying there until this morning, I'd have climbed in the back seat and gotten some real sleep."


Baxter International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New York Schools Are Suffering, and the Candidates Are Silent
To the Editor:
Despite the aftershocks of the asbestos crisis in New York City's schools, all of the politicians running for election this year, including the mayoral candidates, remain silent about plans to remedy the "mess" (news article, Oct. 12).
Not a single proposal for the renovation of the Board of Education's infrastructure has been featured in your newspaper or anywhere else recently.


Fleet Mortgage Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Irving M. Ariel; Surgeon, 82
Dr.
Irving M. Ariel, a surgeon, medical educator and specialist in radiation therapy for cancer, died on Saturday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 82.
The family said the cause was heart failure.


PARENT &amp; CHILD
FOR many high school seniors, this is the semester for filling out college applications, perusing course catalogues and glossy brochures, and watching promotional videotapes.
It is a daunting and emotionally charged task for both the students and their parents.
It is best begun with some introspection.
"The first step in evaluating a college is to evaluate yourself," said Carl W. Bewig, the director of college counseling at Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass.
He suggested that students begin by thinking about their strengths and weaknesses, the kinds of learning environments in which they do their best work, and the types of people with whom they like to associate.
"The biggest mistake students can make is not being honest with themselves about who they are," Mr.
Bewig added.


A Big Gain In Earnings At Compaq
The Compaq Computer Corporation, continuing to profit while much of the personal computer industry is struggling, said today that third-quarter earnings more than doubled and that sales reached record levels for the fifth straight quarter.
The results exceeded Wall Street's expectations and pushed Compaq shares up $2.50 today, to $64.875, on the New York Stock Exchange.


Chancellor Goes to Brooklyn to Meet With Parents Taking Over School
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines yesterday traveled to a Brooklyn elementary school that has been occupied for two days by parents protesting their students' treatment during the asbestos crisis, but he failed to persuade the parents to end the school takeover.
After meeting with parents inside Public School 156, Mr.
Cortines said he would continue his personal diplomacy today in meetings with the local superintendent and the community school board.


Bearings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


York International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


EAC Industries Inc. reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


Brinker International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Owens &amp; Minor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Election Board Fines Dinkins Over Spending
The New York City Campaign Finance Board fined the Dinkins campaign $320,000 last night for spending more than the legal limit during the Democratic Primary.
The ruling's impact on Mayor David N. Dinkins's spending in the final two weeks of the election is unclear.
It will not affect the $4 million he is allowed to spend for the election but may force his campaign to raise more money to compensate for the fine.
It also means his campaign will not receive any more public funds while it appeals the decision in state court, city and campaign officials said.


Essay; Laughter After Nafta
Anything that Ross Perot, Pat Buchanan, Ralph Nader and Jesse Jackson line up against -- I'm for.
But that is hardly a high-domed argument for Nafta, which offers the most stupefyingly boring acronym since MEGO (my eyes glaze over) itself.


Fruit of The Loom reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Under 18? Hand Over That Gun
The stray bullet from a gang shootout that hit 6-year-old Broderick Bell in the head on June 9 was the final straw for Colorado.
"There are rules even for gangs," a member of my cabinet said as we agonized over this Denver shooting.
"It isn't all right to hurt babies."


CUNY Suit Citing Bias Survives Test
A suit challenging the New York State system of financing higher education has passed a court test, with a judge's refusal to dismiss the suit.
The suit, filed by more than 250 professors and students at the City University of New York, contends that Albany favors the State University system at the expense of CUNY.
Because CUNY has a much larger proportion of minority students, the suit argues, the state is engaging in racial discrimination.


EAC Industries Inc. reports earnings for Year to Jan 31


Benchmark ElectronicsInc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Market Place; Mutual funds may provide no refuge from Wall St. bullies.
INDIVIDUAL investors have long been the market's weaklings, getting facefuls of sand kicked by big institutional traders with faster access to news and enough capital to move markets quickly.
So following the old adage that if you can't beat them, join them, individual investors have been pouring billions of dollars into mutual funds over the last decade, essentially betting that their money would be handled better by the pros.


Decision Is In: Whitaker Drops Protest
The protest by PERNELL WHITAKER of a judge's scoring in his controversial draw with JULIO CESAR CHAVEZ in San Antonio last month has been withdrawn, officials said.
JACK GARISON, an official of the Texas Department of Licensing and Regulation, which oversees boxing in the state, said yesterday in Austin that Whitaker's promoters did not have a legitimate complaint.
A spokesman for Whitaker's promoter, DAN DUVA, confirmed that the objection had been dropped.


Teradyne Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Sumitomo Bank of California reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dole Concedes to Clinton in Fight Over Right to Send Troops to Haiti
Senator Bob Dole, the Republican leader, backed off today from a proposal to restrict President Clinton's military options in Haiti and agreed to downgrade it to a nonbinding "sense of the Senate" resolution.
The watered down resolution, which even had White House support and was expected to pass easily, states simply that Congress should authorize in advance any United States military operation in Haiti.
But it upholds the President's broad foreign policy prerogatives as Commander in Chief to send in American troops if he deems that it justified by national security interests or that the safety of Americans living in Haiti is at stake.
Dole Effort Doomed to Defeat
The Kansas Republican's retreat came as he realized that his effort to restrict the President's authority to deploy American forces would go down to defeat.
Support for the proposal collapsed even among Republicans, as a consensus emerged on both sides that Congress was attempting to overstretch its authority in foreign policy.


Johnson &amp; Johnson reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Philanthropist Thanked for $100 million Gift


Constellation Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CorVel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Laclede Steel (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Massbank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


United Postal Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Teradyne Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Sumitomo Bank of California reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Landry's Seafood Restaurants Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


FINANCE BRIEFS
*
Alabama Public School and College Authority is offering $104.6 million in tax-exempt refunding bonds initially priced to yield a maximum 4.70 percent for an issue due in 2006 through Morgan Stanley &amp; Co.
The remainder of the serial bonds yield from 3.80 percent in 1998 to 4.60 percent in 2005, with all the bonds rated Aa by Moody's Investors Service and AA- by Standard &amp; Poor's. *
Chicago &amp; North Western Transportation Co., a subsidiary of Chicago &amp; North Western Holdings, is offering $124.8 million of 6 1/4 percent pass-through certificates due 2013 at 100 through Merrill Lynch.
With an average life of 12.5 years, the certificates are rated A-3 by Moody's and BBB+ by S.&amp; P.


Lake Shore Bancorp Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pop and Jazz in Review
Javon Jackson  Village Vanguard 178 Seventh Avenue South (at 11th Street) Greenwich Village Through Sunday
Javon Jackson, a young tenor saxophonist steeped in jazz classicism, has brought to the Village Vanguard a quintet that plays traditional ballads, blues and standards, and proves that the pleasure of improvisation doesn't necessarily have anything to do with innovation.
Mr.
Jackson has done something special: he has put together a quintet that mixes younger players, the pianist Jacky Terrasson and the bassist Chris Thomas, with veterans, Curtis Fuller on trombone and Louis Hayes on drums.
The result is a cross-generational band that stokes some heat from the first tune of the night.


Advo Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


FMC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Brands reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Family Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CyCare Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sybase Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Charter One Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Leetch Is the Latest Ranger to Feel the Wrath of Keenan
No one expected that Brian Leetch would be a problem.
He was supposed to be a savior, a player whose absence last season because of injuries could explain much of the Rangers' dreadful downfall.
Instead, he has become the latest -- and most visible -- inhabitant of Coach Mike Keenan's doghouse.
Leetch may be one of the top defensemen in the National Hockey League.
He may have been the Norris Trophy winner two seasons ago.
He is also spending a lot of time on the bench.


Ethyl Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Amsco International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Peoples First reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Will a Realignment Be Good for the Game?
The Toronto Blue Jays and the Philadelphia Phillies played Game 4 of the World Series last night.
Was it the last game the players would play with integrity?
It might be, major league baseball officials and owners believe, if the players received money for the rest of the games.
As long as the players play for nothing past Game 4, officials and owners have no fear about the legitimacy of any World Series games.
Players' post-season shares have always come from the net gate receipts of the first four games of a series, whether it be the league series or the World Series.
That way, they have no financial incentive to extend a series.


Information America
Shares of Information America Inc. rebounded yesterday.
The Atlanta-based company gathers information from government agencies and other sources and sells it through computer data bases that can be accessed by telephone.
Its stock had slumped this week after it broke off talks to buy three information services from Paramount Communications.


Flexible Rules for Children
To The Home Section:


The Turning of the Leaves Puts Senses at Their Mercy
I JUST wanted an excuse to drive up to Ithaca, N.Y., because a friend had told me it was my kind of place: intellectuals and cows all mixed up together.
So I decided to go take a look at the fall colors and talk to a few tree lovers at Cornell University about why the leaves change from green to gold to red.
But the conversation kept drifting away from chlorophyll and anthocyanins into memory.
"My grandfather was actually a forester for the extension service here," said Ed Cope, a taxonomist who spends most of his days on the fourth floor of the agriculture school's library, in a place called the Bailey Hortorium.
"His name was Joshua A. Cope, and he introduced the Scotch pine as a Christmas tree."


Republic New York Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Scana Corp.  reports earnings for 12mos to Sept 30


New Price Reports With Caveats
The next couple of reports on the Consumer Price Index could prove a little disturbing for the bond market because adjustments used to smooth out seasonal price variations could exaggerate an actual increase in prices.
The report that the index was unchanged in September was the factor that propelled long-term interest rates to new 25-year lows last week.


Ethyl Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Amsco International reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Ultramar Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Media Vision Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clorox Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Tuesday about a comet on a collision course with Jupiter misstated the estimated energy of the impact.
It is 100 million megatons, not 100 megatons.


Valley National Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Times Mirror Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


CHRONICLE
It seemed that half the city was at the frenetic opening of the Harley-Davidson Cafe on Tuesday evening, clogging the area around Avenue of the Americas and West 56th street with motorcycles, partygoers and onlookers.
But some people sought more bucolic socializing, in or connected with parks and nature.
During a party in Central Park, docents for the Central Park Conservancy took 100 or so neighbors of the park on tours of the newest improvement projects, most of them made possible by conservancy funds.


Classical Music in Review
New York Chamber Symphony  Gerard Schwarz, conductor 92d Street Y
Paul Sacher, the distinguished conductor and patron, was to have led Saturday night's performance by the New York Chamber Symphony, but if illness prevented Mr.
Sacher's appearance, his presence was manifest in Frank Martin's "Petite Symphonie Concertante" and the Bartok Divertimento for Strings.
Mr.
Sacher conducted the first performance of the Martin in 1946 and is its dedicatee, and he commissioned the Bartok shortly before World War II.


Tribune Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Review/Television; A 'Cheers' Spinoff, Set in Seattle
One guy is a bit of a slob, happy to plop into his vibrating Barcalounger with a can of beer; the other is a finicky esthete, partial to fine wines and Eames chairs.
Think Oscar and Felix in "The Odd Couple." The older one is working-class gruff; the younger upwardly-mobile sarcastic.
Think Archie and Meathead in "All in the Family." "Frasier," Thursdays at 9:30 on NBC, is not the season's most original concept, but it's one of the few new series likely to survive.
And deservedly, not just because it follows "Seinfeld."
Played with finely tuned pomposity by Kelsey Grammer, Frasier Crane, psychiatrist, is of course the character originally created for "Cheers." "Frasier" is the spinoff, developed by David Angell, Peter Casey and David Lee, the team that also lists "Wings" among its post-"Cheers" credits.


Snap-On Tools reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


LSI Logic Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


In 2 Towns, Main Street Fights Off Wal-Mart
It has been a tough autumn for Wal-Mart Stores.
An Arkansas judge has found the giant retailer guilty of selling merchandise below cost in an effort to drive local competitors out of business.
And now two Massachusetts towns have rebuffed Wal-Mart's efforts to open stores in their areas.
A Stop Wal-Mart Committee in Westford, a town of 17,000 people about 20 miles northwest of Boston, persuadedthe company last month to drop its plans to build a new store there.
And a group called We're Against the Wal in Greenfield, a Connecticut River town 90 miles west of Boston with a population of about 19,000, succeeded in having a referendum held on Tuesday to decide whether Wal-Mart should be allowed to build a 121,267-square-foot store on the outskirts of town.


Time Is Ripe for Single-Payer Health Reform; Cover the Disabled
To the Editor:
"Clinton Care Plan May Cut Benefits to Some Children" (front page, Oct. 11) touches on an essential issue that has been sorely neglected in the media's discussions of the President's health initiative: its impact on people with disabilities.


Economist Takes Reins at University of Chicago
Hugo F. Sonnenschein, an economist and former provost of Princeton University who almost flunked out of college as an 18-year-old undergraduate, was inaugurated today as the 11th president of the University of Chicago.
Speaking in the Rockefeller Memorial Chapel about the university's "especially fierce commitment" to ideas, including "uncomfortable" ones, the new president defended Robert W. Fogel, a University of Chicago economist who last week won the Nobel Prize in Economics.


Cerner Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Premark International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


HealthTrust, The Hospital Co.  reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


Destec Energy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Sets June Deadline for China to End Abuses
Secretary State Warren Christopher said today that unless China improved its record on human rights, weapons sales and trade practices, its preferential trade status would be in danger next year.
"I have to say I don't believe we can sustain the position beyond next June," he said, "unless we see continued improvement, improvements in the human rights field by the Chinese, as well reforms in connection with trade practices and progress in the non-proliferation front." Mr.
Christopher's comments came in a speech at the State Department to senior business executives.


American Air's Parent Shows Upturn in Profits
Investors, whose hopes for a strong rebound in the airline industry have risen and been dashed at various times in recent months, saw a third-quarter earnings report from the AMR Corporation that suggested simply that a modest recovery was under way.
The parent of American Airlines, whose stock is considered a bellwether for the industry, reported earnings of $118 million, compared with a loss of $100 million for the quarter a year earlier.
The results -- AMR's largest profit since the second quarter of 1990 -- were in line with analysts' expectations.
The company edged into profitability in the second quarter of this year, earning $47 million after losing $935 million in 1992.


HealthTrust, The Hospital Co.  reports earnings for Year to Aug 31


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
Federal agencies and the military must buy paper made from at least 20 percent recycled fiber by the end of next year, under an Administration order issued after months of wrangling between environmental groups and the paper industry.  [ Page A1. ]
The National Association of Manufacturers criticized President Clinton's health care plan.  [ A20. ]  The health insurance industry is spending millions on advertisements opposing the plan.  [ A1. ]


Union Bank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Union Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Russell Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Classical Music in Review
'Carmen'  New York City Opera New York State Theater Through Oct. 31
The City Opera's production of "Carmen," which went into its third cast on Saturday night, is suddenly a delight.
The principal reason is Robynne Redmon, who moves through the title role with wondrous elegance and expertise.
Her mezzo-soprano is in excellent form, dead on through the whole range, and she fills out her flippant characterization with a host of telling details.
This is not the most wild or dark-spirited Carmen ever, but no one should complain.


Union Pacific reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Georgia Gulf Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Menstruation Doesn't Promote Infection
To the Editor:
David A. Grimes, Nancy S. Padian and A. Eugene Washington contend that my research on menstruation lacks a "scientific or medical basis," evidently without having read my article in the current Quarterly Review of Biology (letter, Oct. 6).
If, as I argue, menstruation functions to defend the uterus against sperm-transported pathogens, the clinical implications could significantly affect women's health and fertility.


Baldor Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Geriatric &amp; Medical Cos.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


BANKAMERICA CORP. (N)
The BankAmerica Corporation, the nation's second-largest banking company after Citicorp, said yesterday that third-quarter earnings fell slightly from the preceding quarter and were only about 3 percent higher than a year earlier.
"They never had the immense buildup of bad loans a few years ago like many other large banks, so their profits have not had the benefit recently of sharply reduced expenses from credit problems," said James Rosenberg of Lehman Brothers.


First Financial Banc (Ohio) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Acxiom Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wheeling Pittsburgh reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Business Group Assails Scope and Cost of Clinton Health Plan
A leading business group that the White House had hoped to recruit as a major backer of its health care plan criticized many elements of the proposal today, saying it was far too ambitious and costly.
President Clinton had been hoping that the group, the National Association of Manufacturers, which represents 12,000 companies, would help convince the business world that his proposal was good for American corporations.
Mr.
Clinton contends that the proposal would produce a windfall for some large companies and would help them control health costs.


TRW Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sherrard Hospitalized for Clot
Routine tests yesterday revealed a blood clot in the hip of Giants wide receiver Mike Sherrard, and though the clot could have spread to either his heart, lungs or brain, the early detection prevented it from doing so.
Sherrard was admitted last night to the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan, where he will be monitored for the next several days.
He was expected to be released by the end of the week.
Giants officials and Sherrard's agent, Leigh Steinberg, confirmed Sherrard's admittance to the hospital.
Sherrard, 30 years old, suffered a partial dislocation of the left hip on Sunday against the Philadelphia Eagles after jolting it at the end of a 51-yard pass play.


Review/Theater: Pterodactyls; Mining the Humor From the Decline of a Class
Mom drinks, Dad is a lying adulterer, Junior has AIDS and Sis -- well, she's truly a mess, a pill-popping semi-amnesiac.
So, really, what else is new?
But as the young playwright Nicky Silver can testify, there's still plenty of dramatic life left in these stereotypes if the comic proportions are right.
His grimly witty play "Pterodactyls" recycles all the cliches of the unraveling all-American family and scales them up to the point that they become poignantly grotesque symbols of a species on the verge of extinction.


Landry's Seafood Restaurants Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
2.94
2.95
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.01
3.04
2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.11
3.12
3.13
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.78
4.80
6.29
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.82
5.84
7.60
TELEPHONE BONDS
6.92
6.93
8.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.35
5.36
6.56
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Two Photographers To Share Smith Award
James Nachtwey and Marc Asnin have won the 1993 W. Eugene Smith Grant in photography, it was announced yesterday by the W. Eugene Smith Memorial Fund.
The two New York-based photographers will equally share an award of $25,000.


Massbank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Acxiom Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


FMC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clinton Uses Japan to Sell Mexico Pact
Gearing up for the final weeks of an uphill battle to win Congressional support for the North American Free Trade Agreement, President Clinton has settled on a provocative strategy that treats Japan, not Mexico, as the most severe threat to American jobs.
The new approach emerged today at the White House, where Mr.
Clinton was joined by Lee A. Iacocca, the retired chairman of the Chrysler Corporation.
The two appeared under one of two giant tents erected on the muddy South Lawn for a sort of political yard sale showcasing businesses that support the trade agreement.


Laclede Steel (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Peoples First reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


United Postal Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tenneco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


MICROSOFT CORP. (NMS)
The Microsoft Corporation reported a 14 percent gain in earnings and a 20 percent gain in revenues for the first quarter yesterday.
But the results were near the low end of estimates by Wall Street analysts.
"The company had telegraphed that this wasn't going to be a great quarter," said Bruce M. Lupatkin, an analyst with Hambrecht &amp; Quist Inc.
"There are still concerns about pricing pressures," he said.


Eagles Sign Lofton to 1-Year Contract
The Philadelphia Eagles agreed to terms today on a one-year contract with 37-year-old wide receiver JAMES LOFTON, the National Football League's career leader in receiving yards.
Terms of the deal weren't given.


Tiffany Glass to Torah Pointers: Looking Beyond the Surface
TWO new shows in Manhattan -- one small and concentrated, the other ample and ambitious -- focus on the intrinsic esthetic appeal of exceptional handcrafted objects and spotlight the home as the keeper and embodiment of spiritual and social ideals.
Both shows -- "A Temple Treasury: Highlights From the Judaica Collection of Congregation Emanu-El" and "The Ideal Home: 1900-1920" -- present domestic and ceremonial objects, many on display for the first time.
They range from exquisitely detailed Torah pointers to the steadfast perfection of Roycroft wastebaskets, from spice containers used to celebrate the end of the Jewish Sabbath to the outstanding ode to nature embodied in Elizabeth Eaton Burton's copper and abalone shell lamp.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FROZEN FOOD EXPRESS INDUSTRIES, Dallas, said its board had approved a 4-for-3 stock split, payable on Nov. 10 to stockholders of record next Monday.
TESTDRIVE CORP., Santa Clara, Calif., a software concern, has sold a majority in the company to R. R. Donnelley &amp; Sons.
Terms were not disclosed.


Russia Threatens to Veto Any Sanctions West Seeks Against Libya
Russia has threatened to use its Security Council veto to block new sanctions that the United States, Britain and France want to impose on Libya for refusing to hand over two citizens accused of blowing up Pan Am Flight 103 in December 1988, United Nations diplomats say.
The strongly worded threat, made in a letter to Secretary of State Warren Christopher that arrived last weekend, surprised and angered Administration officials.
A total of 270 people died in the blast over Lockerbie, Scotland.


Johnson &amp; Johnson reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Sysco Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Italian Director Comes To Hollywood, to Reside In His Childhood Dream
Carlo Carlei is amused, amazed and maybe just a bit appalled that he is, at this very second, Hollywood's hottest director.
After all, the 31-year-old Italian only recently arrived in town, has made only one full-length film (in Italian) and isn't even confident that the movie critics or the public will enjoy it.
"I hope I won't lose my integrity," he said several times as he sipped mineral water in the lounge of a hotel a few miles away from his small apartment in Santa Monica.
"Making movies is my dream. I love American movies. I am living inside my dream."


Fruit of The Loom reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Taxpayers, Not Prisoners, Are Being Punished
To the Editor:
In "Force This Killer to Live" (editorial, Oct. 15), you make a case for denying Thomas Grasso, a two-time convicted murderer, the right to opt for an Oklahoma execution prior to fulfilling a 20-year sentence in New York.
Isn't it punishment for New York taxpayers to spend $35,000 a year for the next 20 years for someone who won't contribute to society and who will occupy a space that could be used to detain a reformable individual?


IBP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


BHUTTO STANDS BY NUCLEAR PROGRAM
In comments that seem certain to unsettle Pakistan's already fragile relations with Washington, the new Prime Minister, Benazir Bhutto, said today that her country would continue to pursue its nuclear program, which American intelligence officials maintain is devoted to the development of nuclear weapons.
"We will protect Pakistan's nuclear program and will not allow our national interest to be sacrificed," Ms.
Bhutto said in a recorded television address that was broadcast tonight.


BIC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Term-Limit Backers to Begin Ad Campaign
The day after New York State's Court of Appeals approved a referendum on limiting elected municipal officeholders to two terms, supporters of the measure said they would be able to mount a well-financed campaign that would include television and radio advertising.
Opponents conceded they would be heavily outgunned.
Ronald S. Lauder, the cosmetics heir who personally spent more than $800,000 hurtling legal and administrative roadblocks to get the binding proposal on the ballot, is prepared to invest at least several hundred thousand dollars more to persuade the voters to approve it Nov. 2.
A television and radio advertising campaign is to begin by early next week.


IBP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Wallace Lozier, 87, Physicist Who Won An Academy Award
Dr.
W.
Wallace Lozier, a physicist who helped the Union Carbide Corporation win an Oscar in the 1950's with his work on lighting techniques, died on Oct. 9 at a nursing home in Bay Village, Ohio.
He was 87 and, until last year, lived in Rocky River, Ohio.
The cause was a series of strokes, said his son, Dr. John W. Lozier.


BIC Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Owens &amp; Minor Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bearings Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Mayoral Campaign -- At Issue: Health Care; New York's Health Challenge
New York City's next mayor will confront alarming rates of infant mortality, tuberculosis and AIDS.
And he will need to re-invigorate public hospitals and clinics that are understaffed and underfinanced.
It will be a daunting challenge when the city must cut its budget.
Mayor David Dinkins and Rudolph Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal challenger, offer health care proposals that read like pages out of the same hymnal.
Both advocate neighborhood clinics, health maintenance organizations, preventive care and turning city medical facilities over to nonprofit groups.
The difference between the two is that Mayor Dinkins can also be judged by his deeds.
After a shaky start -- and up against the need to make large budget cuts -- Mr.
Dinkins has launched innovative programs to improve the health care of the city's poorest families.
The health effort may be his strongest program.


Fleet Financial Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reebok International Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Once Again, Burger King Shops for an Agency
Burger King, which changes advertising agencies practically at the flip of a Whopper, is doing so again.
The company, the No. 2 fast-food chain behind McDonald's, said yesterday it would put into review the bulk of its domestic advertising account, which has been handled by D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in New York.


New Arena for Campaign Ads: Health Care
It is a bright, sunny morning and Harry and Louise are discussing President Clinton's health care plan over breakfast.
Harry is glad the President "is doing something about health care reform," but Louise is concerned about the details.
"The Government caps how much the country can spend on all health care and says: 'That's it!' " she proclaims in an anguished tone.
Then the camera moves in for a tight shot.
"There's got to be a better way," she says, a Scarlett O'Hara glint of determination in her eyes.


Fremont General reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Baxter International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Union Bank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fleet Mortgage Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Promus Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Time Is Ripe for Single-Payer Health Reform; Let Them Eat Cake?
To the Editor:
"Let Insurance Avert Financial Catastrophe" by Robert W. Schewior (letter, Oct. 11) advocates a let-them-eat-cake solution to the financing of health care.
Many of us already have large deductibles because we cannot afford to pay for coverage with smaller deductibles.
This may benefit, as Mr.
Schewior puts it, the health care system, i.e., the insurance carrier, but it could be detrimental to the individual's health.


U.S. TO OFFER PLAN ON A ROLE IN NATO FOR EX-SOVIET BLOC
The United States has decided to support an expansion of NATO that could eventually include Russia, the countries of Eastern Europe and other former members of the Warsaw Pact, a senior aide to Secretary of State Warren Christopher said today.
As a first step, the official said, the Administration will propose new cooperative ventures in peacekeeping and military training and planning as a kind of apprenticeship to NATO membership for the armies of eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union.


Geriatric &amp; Medical Cos.  (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


DIGITAL EQUIPMENT CORP. (N)
The Digital Equipment Corporation reported an $83 million first-quarter loss yesterday that was worse than what most analysts had expected.
The loss was softened by a one-time $20 million benefit from a change in accounting for taxes.
The loss was still a sharp improvement from the comparable quarter a year earlier, when the company reported a loss of $261 million.
But Digital had a 9 percent decline in revenues from a year ago.
The company attributed the drop in revenues to a worse-than-expected performance in Europe and foreign currency fluctuations.


Knicks Romp for 3d in a Row
The Knicks (3-0) rolled to their third preseason victory last night, defeating the San Antonio Spurs, 95-75, at Madison Square Garden.
Several Knicks turned in strong efforts, including Hubert Davis (18 points) Patrick Ewing (17 points), Charles Smith (17 points) and Greg Anthony (10 points, 6 assists).
David Robinson (18 points, 10 rebounds) and Dennis Rodman (14 rebounds) led San Antonio (1-2).
Neither Tony Campbell (bursitis left elbow) nor Anthony Mason (sore left shoulder) played for the Knicks.
Rolando Blackman did not play, as Knicks Coach Pat Riley elected to take a long look at Davis.
Riley liked what he saw.


Russell Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Review/Dance; Bill T. Jones on Life and Death, Obliquely
Most of his dancers, male and female, have shaved heads this season.
Bare buttocks are also in style in his choreography.
Bill T. Jones's shrewd sense of stagecraft is never less than provocative.
But what truly makes Mr.
Jones a hot ticket on the international dance circuit is his unfamiliar treatment of familiar themes.
Love and death, and in the larger sense civil rights, are the issues that preoccupy him most.


On the Rebound, Spurs Take Gamble on Rodman
Dennis Rodman will say to your face what many people say behind his back.
"Off the court, I'm a nut," said Rodman, the San Antonio Spurs' talented, but eccentric, forward.


Constellation Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


As Bills Flourish and Symphony Suffers, Some in Buffalo Ask Why
Every autumn, as the first cold gusts whip off Lake Erie, this area begins to swagger.
During football season Buffalo is in the same league as New York and Los Angeles, and when the Bills win, Buffalo gets a chance to call those towns losers.
This year, however, some are asking whether Buffalo is deluding itself about how it stacks up with other big cities.
While the region cheers its team toward a possible fourth straight Super Bowl, its philharmonic orchestra is in danger of shutting down.


Brazil Leader's Offer to Quit Is Turned Down by Congress
President Itamar Franco's offer to resign if Congress would schedule early elections has been turned down.
During his year in office, Mr.
Franco has held one news conference and an average of one Cabinet meeting every three months, and Brazilians increasingly complain about a President who shows little interest in the job.


Nassau Clerk Declares End to Records Backlog
The Nassau County Clerk, Doreen Banks, announced today that she had eliminated the lengthy backlogs in recording deeds and mortgages that had plagued her office under her predecessor.
But Karen Murphy, a Republican who is challenging Mrs.
Banks, a Democrat, for re-election, immediately charged that she was claiming credit for work that began months before she took office.


Report Finds Shelter System Worsening
New York City's shelters for the homeless deteriorated in 1993 to their worst condition since 1986, a study to be released today has found.
Despite a new city plan for homeless families and a drop in the number of families seeking shelter for the first time, the report found that homeless centers became even more overloaded than they were a year ago, when a judge held four members of Mayor David N. Dinkins's adminstration in contempt of court for failing to shelter homeless families promptly.


Lutherans Asked to Decide On Blessing of Gay Unions
After four years of study, a group from the nation's largest Lutheran body has proposed a wide-ranging statement on sexuality, opening the way for the church to bless any relationship based on a loving, permanent commitment -- heterosexual or homosexual.
The draft statement does not specifically recommend that the church allow homosexual marriage.
Instead, it asks the 5.6 million Lutherans, who will be deciding the church's position over the next two years, to consider whether the church should recommend lifelong abstinence for homosexuals, tolerate homosexuality or affirmatively bless unions between people of the same sex.


Time Is Ripe for Single-Payer Health Reform
To the Editor:
Partisans of the Clinton health care reforms, most of whom are closet single-payer advocates, have given up on the latter, because they say it is not "p.r." (politically realistic).
They and the Clinton Administration might do well to heed the words of their own guru in the White House, Paul Starr, who in his "Social Transformation of American Medicine," wrote about the Medicare battle of 1964 as follows:


Corrections
An article on Tuesday about France's position in the talks on global trade liberalization rendered a French philosopher's name incorrectly.
He is Bernard-Henri Levy.


Heileman Narrows List of Finalists
The G. Heileman Brewing Company said yesterday that it had narrowed the review on its beer and malt liquor brands account, estimated at $20 million to $25 million in billings, to four finalists from nine.
Henry Gerfen, Heileman's executive vice president of marketing in Rosemont, Ill., confirmed a report of the review this week in Adweek.
He identified the finalists as Cramer-Krasselt and Eisaman, Johns &amp; Laws, both of Chicago, W.B.
Doner &amp; Company in Southfield, Mich., and the Richards Group in Dallas, which already handles advertising for Heileman's Rainier brand.


A New Policy On Donations
The Western States Treasurers Association said yesterday that the National Association of State Treasurers should consider a policy that would call on treasurers to refuse campaign contributions from those involved in the municipal bond business, including large Wall Street firms.
The policy was adopted at the association's annual meeting in San Diego.
It comes after a series of municipal bond scandals helped push big Wall Street underwriters this week to adopt a voluntary ban on contributions made to win municipal bond business.


Cerner Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Premark International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Hershey Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


At Flashpoint of Rioting, Now Banality Is Jarring
Nothing very remarkable happened today at the infamous corner of Florence and Normandie Avenues in South-Central Los Angeles.
The regulars came to get their chili dogs at Art's Famous Chili Dogs ("Since 1933"), neighborhood women got their hair done at Goldie's Beauty Salon, and all day long photographers and reporters came.
It was difficult to tell that this was the flashpoint, the epicenter where years of racial resentments exploded into the deadly disorders that rocked Los Angeles last year.
It was difficult, under a warm hazy sun, to visualize the terror of Reginald O. Denny and other white and Asian drivers who were pulled out of their vehicles that day and brutalized.


CHRONICLE
The novelist STEPHEN KING was initially invited to speak at a luncheon at the National Press Club in Washington on Halloween.
But the author of "Carrie," "The Shining" and other suspense and horror novels opted for the more benign date of Oct. 19, explaining that he did not want to be "stereotyped."
Not that he is superstitious, but he did tell the audience of 200 club members and guests on Tuesday: "I couldn't believe it when I arrived here to discover that we are on the 13th floor. They don't even joke around about it by calling the 13th floor the 14th floor. The elevator takes you right to the 13th floor. I have a thing about that."


Classical Music in Review
Consort of Musicke  Church of St. Mary the Virgin
The Consort of Musicke, represented by a minimal complement of two sopranos (Emma Kirkby and Evelyn Tubb) and one lutenist (the ensemble's director, Anthony Rooley), offered an elegant overview of early-17th-century Italian love songs on Saturday evening.


Tribune Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Review/Music; Of Rachmaninoff And the Dead: Russian Musings
The awkwardly named International Association of Sergei Rachmaninoff presented a concert of its namesake's music at Carnegie Hall on Monday evening.
The program commemorated the 50th anniversary of the composer's death in March 1943, and death was its thematic obsession.
The opening work, "The Isle of the Dead," describes the mythical Charon ferrying dead souls across the Styx.
It quotes the "Dies Irae" -- the plainchant for the dead -- which also figures prominently in the Rhapsody on a Theme of Paganini.
The chant is not quoted in "The Miserly Knight," a one-act opera that was given its American premiere, but the title character drops dead as the final chords are sounded.


Snap-On Tools reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


LSI Logic Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Flexible Rules for Children
To The Home Section:


Republic New York Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Media Vision Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clorox Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
Because of a transmission error, the Advertising column in Business Day on Tuesday, about the effectiveness of advertising for consumer products, misstated data supplied by Lorraine C. Scarpa, senior vice president for marketing services at Kraft General Foods.
Based on a survey of 12,000 households, she said, 50 percent of the company's sales volume in 61 product categories came from 20 percent of the nation's households, not from 2 percent.


Valley National Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


IN HARLEM WITH: Paul Robeson Jr.; Finding His Own Voice And Learning to Use It
AS the family archivist and proud son, Paul Robeson Jr., is dedicated to preserving his father's place in history, particularly for younger generations who might not know that Paul Robeson was an internationally acclaimed singer-actor and black radical who crusaded for human rights long before there was a civil-rights movement.
Now, after working most of his adult life as a translator of Russian, Mr.
Robeson is publicly presenting his own views as an advocate of African-American culture and economic justice.


Fervor Aside, Japanese Are Facing Cup Failure
For the last year, the Japanese have embraced soccer with the same kind of single-minded enthusiasm they once reserved for capitalism.
Inspired by the creation of the 10-team professional J-League this spring, Japanese have snapped up souvenirs, transformed a little-known striker nicknamed Kazu into a national hero and, in one overenthusiastic instance, attempted to solve the riddle of a sold-out stadium by counterfeiting tickets.


Schilling Tunes Out On Jays Videos
Curt Schilling studied videotape after videotape of Toronto's hitters before starting Game 2 of the World Series.
Schilling was trying to find some weaknesses in the powerful lineup and he thought his research was successful.
Schilling went to the mound with a batch of information and promptly allowed six earned runs in six and a third innings in an 8-5 loss.
So much for the videotapes.
"I had too many plans," Schilling said.
"I made some plans to go after their hitters. Maybe I went after them too much."


Scana Corp.  reports earnings for 12mos to Sept 30


Occidental Petroleum Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Empress Michiko Collapses Minutes Before Birthday Fete
Empress Michiko, a cosmopolitan monarch who has been the subject of some surprisingly harsh criticism recently for her modern ways, collapsed this morning in what some doctors speculated might have been a stroke minutes before she was to go to a 59th birthday party.
The Imperial Household Agency, which zealously shields the imperial family from public view, provided only sketchy information about the condition of the Empress.
This evening, the agency said that the Empress was walking and eating normally after regaining consciousness and spending much of the day in bed, but that her speech remained impaired.


American Management Systems Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


METRO DIGEST
BOARD FINES DINKINS CAMPAIGN The Campaign Finance Board fined the Dinkins campaign $320,000 for spending more than the legal limit during the Democratic Primary.
A1.
In stump speeches that he delivers several times a day, Mayor Dinkins has been working to shift the focus of the race from a referendum on his four-year term to one on Rudolph W. Giuliani's politics and ideology.
B10.


Aseco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Review/Music; Mourning and Mending: Reflections on War
Benjamin Britten's "War Requiem" is one of 20th-century music's rare public works.
In the vastness of its scale, in the breadth of its humanitarian aims and in the simplicity of its language, this is music intended to move large numbers of listeners at first hearing and at no sacrifice of original intentions to mass appeal.
The "War Requiem" marked the reopening of Coventry Cathedral in 1961, and the Philadelphia Orchestra, conducted by Wolfgang Sawallisch, played it eloquently at Carnegie Hall on Tuesday night.
Destroyed by German bombs, the cathedral had been rebuilt.
Britten's manipulation of the requiem format -- in which the generalized mourning of the Latin liturgy is alternated with the factual horrors of Wilfred Owen's war poems -- constituted a mending process of its own, a backward look at war that sighs with deep regret and offers bruised, tentative hopes for the future.


Liquori, Former No. 1 Miler, Has 'Mild Form' of Leukemia
When Marty Liquori noticed a lump on his groin after a tennis match near his home in Gainesville, Fla., a couple of years ago, he couldn't have been less concerned.
But Liquori, the 45-year-old former middle distance runner who was the last American to be No.  in the world in the mile, in 1971, soon found out otherwise.


Sealed Air Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CorVel Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


TRW Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BRISTOL-MYERS SQUIBB CO. (N)
The Bristol-Myers Squibb Company said yesterday that sales had slipped in its main pharmaceutical, consumer products and infant formula businesses in the third quarter.
But by aggressively squeezing costs, the company produced a 6.3 percent gain in after-tax profits from continuing operations.
Richard L. Gelb, the chairman and chief executive of the New York-based company, said the poor sales showings largely resulted from comparison with "very strong" pharmaceutical sales in the third quarter of 1992, as well as unfavorable foreign currency rates and tighter government cost controls in Europe.


Farmers Capital Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


German Schools Ban Book on Rise of Nazis
The experimental use of a book to help German high school students understand the roots of Nazism has been halted by a Government agency out of fear that it might unintentionally make neo-Nazis out of some of them.
"It was an embarrassing mistake," said Wolfgang Arnold, deputy director of the Federal Center for Political Education in Bonn.


Discovery Zone (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Barnes Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Accounts
*
General Motors Corp., Detroit, to CME KHBB Advertising, London, to handle the G.M. credit card introduction in Britain.
Billings were estimated at $20 million.


Barnes Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rabbis Criticize Dinkins For Passing Up Forum
The president of the 800-member New York Board of Rabbis, in the past staunch supporters of Mayor David N. Dinkins, criticized the Mayor yesterday for turning down an invitation to appear at a forum with Rudolph W. Giuliani.
The board's president, Rabbi Jeremiah Wohlberg, said the Mayor's campaign had pressed the board to include the Conservative Party candidate, George Marlin, in their forum and had finally "pleaded the presence of Vice President Al Gore" in declining the invitation to speak.


AMERITECH CORP. (N)
The Ameritech Corporation's better-than-expected 28.6 percent increase in third-quarter net income reported yesterday included a one-time gain on the sale of stock it owned in a New Zealand communication company.
Ameritech, one of the seven regional Bell telephone companies, said its third-quarter earnings were helped by $62 million, or 23 cents a share, from the sale of 109 million shares of Telecom Corporation of New Zealand Limited.
Ameritech still owns about 24.9 percent of Telecom's outstanding shares.


Blowing Up the Dunes
To The Home Section:
To make a spectacle of the demolition of the Dunes Hotel ("In the City of Change, Is 'Las Vegas Landmark' an Oxymoron?" Oct. 7) reminds me of a Jonathan Winters monologue of some 20 years ago: "And now we have on Stage One . . . the greatest show on Earth, the A-bomb!" The monologue was a satire of Las Vegas extravaganzas, but the blowing up of the Dunes seems dead serious.


Bridge
The fifth annual game to benefit the People With AIDS Coalition of Long Island was highly successful, and $9,250 was raised for the charity.
Play Sunday evening was at the Grand Club in Franklin Square, L.I., whose premises were donated by Audrey Kurlander.
The organizers were Enid Horowitz and Sue Farino.
Thirty-six tables took part.
The winners were: Flight A, Rob Gordon of Northport, L.I., and Art Brodsky of Huntington Station, L.I.; Flight B, Stanley Green of Muttontown, L.I., and Elaine Kahn of Lawrence, L.I.


Mary E. Clark, 37; Won a Florida Law On Health Coverage
Mary E. Clark, a lawyer who successfully campaigned for a change in Florida law so that people with major illnesses would not lose a large part of their medical insurance coverage, died here on Saturday.
She was 37.
The cause was colon cancer, said her husband, Keith Westerberg.


Omnicom Stake In Media Buyer
The Omnicom Group said yesterday that it had bought a stake in Aegis, the London holding company that owns Carat Espace, one of Europe's largest media buying services.
Omnicom, which owns agencies like BBDO Worldwide, DDB Needham Worldwide and TBWA Worldwide, bought 75 million Aegis shares, or 9 percent of the company, for $22 million under a capital restructuring by Aegis.
Advertising executives who spoke on condition of anonymity said they expected Omnicom eventually to raise its stake in Aegis to much higher levels.


Greg Manning Auctions Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Aseco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Gaston, Fregosi Ask: Who'll Stop the Rain? Not Their Pitchers
The scoring rules don't exactly provide for the dreadful circumstances that developed in the fourth game of the World Series tonight, but a slight improvisation could have determined that no pitcher in the game should have been credited with the victory.
"Do not credit a victory to a relief pitcher who is ineffective in a brief appearance," rule 10.19 (c) (4) reads in part.
For the most part tonight, that one description fit all, relievers and starters.


Playing on Uncertainties About the Health Plan
SPONSOR: The Coalition for Health Insurance Choices, financed by the Health Insurance Association fo America.
ON THE SCREEN: A couple, Harry and Louise, is sitting over breakfast.
He is reading a newspaper, she a published version of the President's health care plan.
The camera angle changes, and we see the health care plan from above as Louise underlines a passage with a yellow marking pen.
At the end of the ad, an 800 number appears along with a tag identifying the sponsors.
THE SCRIPT: Harry: "I'm glad the President's doing something about health care reform."....Louise: "He's right. We need it."...
Harry: "Some of these details--"...
Louise: "Like a national limit on health care?"...
Harry: "Really." ...Louise: "The government caps how much the country can spend on all health care and says, 'That's it!"'...Harry: "So what if our health plan runs out of money?"...Louise: "There's got to be a better way." ACCURACY: The implication of the ad is that under the President's plan, only a certain amount of money can be spent on health care, and after that, patients will be out of luck.
The President has proposed a complicated set of regulations to limit the rate in increase in health care spending to the inflation rate.
Among other things, these regulations would limit the amount that health insurance premiums could rise each year.
Many health care providers are concerned that the limits would adversely affect the quality of care and that some health care plans might actually run out of money.
The President's proposal also calls for each state to set up contingency funds to bail out insolvent plans.
SCORECARD: The ad purports to reflect the concerns of average citizens, and it effectively appeals to a generalized sense that the Clinton Administration's plan doesn't quite add up.
But the ad has an melodramatic, overacted quality that may make viewers suspicious.
And once they learn the ad is sponsored by the insurance industry, these suspicions are only likely to increase.
ELIZABETH KOLBERT


Connecticut Store Owner Sentenced in Tax Fraud
Stew Leonard Sr., whose circuslike Connecticut dairy stores made him a folk hero of American retailing, was sentenced today to more than four years in prison and fined $947,000 for his role in a sophisticated tax-fraud scheme.
The prison sentence, five months shy of the maximum recommended by Federal guidelines, cemented a remarkable fall for Mr.
Leonard, whose reputation was shattered this summer when he and three executives pleaded guilty to skimming more than $17 million in sales from the family's Norwalk store.


Sharm el Sheik Journal; Who Needs Pyramids? Sinai Coast Lures Tourists
In a tiny office in a shopping mall buzzing with tourists, Marina Legnani was marketing the last of three $230,000 luxury villas that had been built on a beautiful bay at the tip of the Sinai Peninsula.
"I can't guarantee it will be here next week," Ms.
Legnani said of the house, which was still under construction.
It was a typical hard sell, but the pitch by the Italian commercial representative was no exaggeration .


Militant Japanese Rightist Kills Himself
In a chilling echo of Japan's violent political past, a prominent far-right militant shot himself to death during a meeting with the president of a newspaper that had ridiculed his nationalist political movement in its editorial cartoons.
The rightist, Shusuke Nomura, 58, shot himself with a pair of pistols at the end of an hourlong meeting with executives of the daily Asahi Shimbun at the newspaper's headquarters in Tokyo.
While the meeting was taking place, Asahi executives were across town making a carefully negotiated apology to Mr.
Nomura's supporters, including at least one member of Parliament, for offending his small splinter party in its coverage of an election campaign last year.


Odd Couple: Iran and Iraq in First Talks Since 1990
Deputy ministers from Iran and Iraq ended two days of official talks in Baghdad today, the first between the Persian Gulf antagonists since 1990, when they agreed on a limited exchange of prisoners of war.
The negotiations, which took place in the context of much talk in both Teheran and Baghdad about a new alliance to confront "American hegemony," have aroused some anxiety in Israel and a few Western capitals.


Sudden Synergy Among Communications Rivals
Not long ago, it would have been inconceivable.
But today, at the first industry gathering after last week's announcement of the biggest communications merger in history, longtime rivals, many of them accustomed to accusing each other of monopolistic tendencies, met for a two-hour love fest.


Ethan Allen Interiors reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fleet Financial Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


3 Congressmen Seek to Change Senate Filibusters
Three House liberals today called on talk show hosts and editorial writers who have demanded changes in House procedures to join them in demanding an end to the Senate filibuster rule that permits unlimited debate.
Raising an issue that House rules forbid them to mention in floor debate, Representatives Barney Frank of Massachusetts, David R. Obey of Wisconsin and Mike Synar of Oklahoma, all Democrats, said at a news conference that Americans wanted changes in procedures not for their own sake but so that Congress could deal with their problems.


Chesapeake Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


York Journal; A Flicker of Empathy for 110 Chinese
Beneath the autumnal crimson and gold of a maple tree, two dozen men and women gathered on Sunday for a candlelight vigil outside the county prison at dusk, as they do each week.
Schoolteachers, computer programmers and secretaries, they came on an unusual mission: to plead for the freedom of 110 Chinese immigrants inside the prison, men most had never met, from a land none had ever seen.


Wet. Sloppy. Gray. Must Be Aqueduct.
New York switched its racing from Belmont Park to Aqueduct yesterday, and it was wet, it was sloppy, it was gray and it was symbolic of all the things New York would like to cure in winter racing.
It was also almost empty, with only 6,408 customers braving the rain.
And their discomfort was deepened when glitches in the tote board caused a delay of 24 minutes in starting the ninth race so the betting pools could be straightened out.
The track estimated that the disruption had cost it about $125,000 in unplaced bets and about $25,000 in offtrack bets.


Cavalier Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
The Great One and the Young One  Gretzky versus Gretzky was no match.
The Kings versus the Lightning was.
Wayne Gretzky scored one goal and assisted on two others last night to lead Los Angeles to a 4-3 victory over the Tampa Bay Lightning and his younger brother Brent in St.
Petersburg, Fla.
It was the first meeting in a pro game between the nine-time National Hockey League most valuable player and the younger Gretzky, a rookie playing in only his second N.H.L. game.
Brent Gretzky, 21, attempted only one shot and barely missed scoring when the puck hit the left post of an unprotected net. (AP) TENNIS  Becker Is Eliminated by Delaitre in France  Second-seeded Boris Becker of Germany was eliminated from the Lyons (France) Open in the first round yesterday.
Olivier Delaitre of France beat Becker, 7-6 (9-7), 6-7 (4-7), 6-4. (AP)


Salvador Lopez, 82, Ex-Filipino Official And College Leader
Salvador P. Lopez, a former Foreign Minister of the Philippines and president of the University of the Philippines who played a key role in helping to reduce tension in Southeast Asia, died on Tuesday in Manila.
He was 82.
His family said the cause was a heart attack.


A Shadow In Germany: A special report.; Germans Begin to Recognize Danger in Neo-Nazis' Surge
Kurt Muller, a retired nurseryman with a brown toupee and a distinctive pair of metal-frame glasses, has served time in prison for expressing virulent Nazi views.
But for years his neighbors in this Rhineland state capital were inclined to dismiss him as a harmless and irrelevant nuisance.
Recently that attitude has changed.
When Mr.
Muller, 63, and his wife, Ursula, 59, tried to enter the Dorfschanke restaurant a few blocks away from their house in Gonsenheim the other day, the bartender blocked the door.
"You can't come in here," he told the couple.
"If I let you in, all my other customers will boycott the place."


In His Own Words
Excerpts from Mayor David N. Dinkins's stump speech:
"So I want folks to know just who Rudolph Giuliani is. It's difficult, I admit, because he changes his positions a lot. I say he's running for weather vane: he's got to see which way the wind is blowing to decide his position.


Crompton &amp; Knowles Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Southwest Airlines Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lake Shore Bancorp Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Europeans Select Head for Monetary Panel
Central bankers of the members of the European Community have nominated Baron Alexandre Lamfalussy of Belgium to be the first head of the community's interim monetary authority, the Belgian Government disclosed today.
The nomination of the 64-year-old baron, currently general manager of the Bank for International Settlements in Basel, Switzerland, still requires the approval of the heads of state of the 12-member community as well as the European Parliament.


Maytag Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Summit Bancorp (N.J.) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reviving the Roar of an Antic Era
The frenzy and the innovation of the Roaring Twenties -- and the Marx Brothers -- were explored this weekend at the annual Classics in Context Festival at the Actors Theater of Louisville.
During three days of plays, films, lectures and colloquies, more than 100 theater professionals and academics sampled and analyzed the performing arts of the period, a decade bookended by two cataclysmic events: World War I and the Great Depression.
One panelist compared American theater in the 20's to the stock market, "a joy ride" destined to crash.
In her keynote speech, the director Anne Bogart commented on the astonishing productivity of Broadway, where in 1927 alone there were 268 openings covered by critics from the 24 New York City daily newspapers.
While recognizing the contribution of musical theater, she was quick to add that it was paralleled by experimentation in drama: Eugene O'Neill and Sophie Treadwell shared a spotlight with Rodgers and Hart.
At the same time, Martha Graham and others were revolutionizing dance and jazz was giving its name to an age.


Garden Q. &amp; A.
Uglynest Caterpillar
Q.
There are hideous-looking webs at the ends of my hawthorn trees.
What should I do?
Doreen O'Donnell, Weehawken, N.J.


Parents' Rights
To the Editor:
I find "Weighing a Teacher's Rights" (editorial, Oct. 9) totally unbelievable and unacceptable.
That a self-admitted pedophile can claim First Amendment rights of free speech in order to keep his job as a schoolteacher is a perversion.
He is not losing his rights to free speech if fired, just the ability to associate with children in an official capacity.


S&amp;T Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Official and 3 Journalists Arrested in Newark
Tensions between state education officials and the Newark school district erupted today when a state education commissioner and three journalists for The Star-Ledger were arrested after refusing to leave an elementary school.
Hilda Hidalgo, an assistant commissioner for professional development and licensing, Robert J. Braun, education editor for The Star-Ledger and two photographers, Joe Gigli and John O'Boyle, were arrested at the Morton Street School after a fracas with school guards and Newark police officers.


Tenneco Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hockey; No Joy in Duckburg as Mighty Ducks Shut Out
Patience was Jacques Lemaire's message to his Devils in the dressing room between the second and third periods tonight at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.
The Devils were the better team for the most of the first two periods, but appeared to be on the verge of frustration against the expansion Mighty Ducks of Anaheim because they led by only 1-0.


York International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Trustco Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Inland Steel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Parker Hannifin Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


INSIDE
Teheran and Baghdad Talk
The first talks between Iran and Iraq since 1990, when they agreed to a limited exchange of prisoners of war, worry Israel and the West.
Page A3.
Stakes Rise for Haitian Junta
American diplomats announced a tough series of conditions that they said must be met before sanctions on Haiti can be lifted.
Page A7.
A Lutheran View of Sexuality
A Lutheran study group proposed a wide-ranging statement on sexuality that leaves room for any loving, permanent relationship.
Page A16.
Fabled Retailer Is Sentenced
Stew Leonard Sr., the Connecticut retailer, was sentenced to four years in prison in a tax scheme.
Page B1.


Provident Bankshares Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Charter One Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Source Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Southwest National reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Where to Find It
"YOUR outfit will be gray when you leave here," warned Augustine Jochec (pronounced JOE-check), as a visitor settled in at Glass Restorations, his Manhattan repair shop.
Good glass is as clear as, well, crystal, but repairing it can be a messy business requiring grinding wheels, pumice and other dust-inducing materials.
Yet, when the dust settles, mended glass often looks almost as good as new.
Chips can be ground out, weblike cracks can be planed and broken bits can be attached with colorless adhesives.
"Sometimes the repair line is visible," Mr.
Jochec said, holding a Steuben dish with a subtle line where a curlicue had been reattached.


Phelps Dodge Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Theodore Robertson, Pathologist, 75, Dies
Dr.
Theodore Robertson, a pathologist and medical educator at Cornell Medical College for more than 30 years, died on Monday at a nursing home in Stamford, Conn.
He was 75 and lived in Locust Valley, L.I., for most of his life.
He had had a long illness, said his daughter, Victoria Benson.


Group Assails Health Plan
The National Association of Manufacturers, which the White House hoped would back its health care plan, criticized the proposal as too costly.
Page A20.


First Source Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rochester Telephone reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fort Wayne National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


G. E. Wiedenmayer, Company Chairman And Ex-Banker, 85
Gustave E. Wiedenmayer, who spent 44 years with Midlantic Banks Inc. and helped build it into New Jersey's biggest bank holding company, died on Sunday at his home in Dorset, Vt.
He was 85 and also had a home in Boca Raton, Fla.
The cause of death was cancer, his family said.


American Colloid (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Matters of Heart, Physical and Emotional
With Luther Wright, it has always been about heart.
His was too small at Seton Hall, his mother's was enlarged at home and then, here two weeks ago, his palpitated.
Because the memory of Reggie Lewis is so fresh, and because his own mom needs a pacemaker, Wright's new employer, the Utah Jazz, pointed him toward a doctor's treadmill.
Wright had felt the palpitations after lifting weights at home, and they continued on the basketball court.
So the physicians had him walk practically to New Jersey and back, and their diagnosis might shock Wright's critics.


Advo Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


U.S. and Albania Sign a Military Agreement
The Pentagon has signed an agreement, the first of its kind with a former Communist country, that provides for United States military cooperation with Albania.
The agreement, a memorandum of understanding that is not legally binding on either side, was signed on Oct. 8 in Washington by Defense Secretary Les Aspin and on Oct. 14 in Tirana by Albania's Defense Minister, Safet Zhulali.
It affirms "the readiness to broaden and expand defense and military relations between the two countries" with training programs for Albanian officers and meetings on "the international security environment."


Calendar: Bonsai And the Falling Leaves
Bonsai Bounty  Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, off Eastern Parkway, Prospect Heights; (718) 622-4433.
The Tri-State and Mid-Atlantic Bonsai Societies are sponsors of a show of more than 60 indoor and outdoor bonsai plants that starts Saturday and continues through Oct. 31.
A plant sale will be held from noon to 4 P.M. each day.
On Sunday and Oct. 31, bonsai demonstrations will be given from noon to 2 P.M., and tours of the garden's collections at 1 P.M.
Open Tuesday through Sunday, 10 A.M. to 4 P.M.
No charge.


Cavalier Homes reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


CyCare Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


For U.S. Rangers in Somalia, Boredom Replaces the Chase
No one has bothered to take down his photograph, so Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid still gazes from the walls of some American command posts.
At Task Force Raven, the headquarters for army helicopters, the faction leader's forehead is marked with a precise X.
But the rangers who hunted General Aidid and failed were preparing to go home today, and the abandonment of the chase has given way to a dull sense of ennui.


Philips and Agency Agree to Split
The Philips Consumer Electronics Company in Knoxville, Tenn., and its agency, Backer Spielvogel Bates in New York, said yesterday that after seven years, they had mutually decided to part company, citing "operational difficulties." The split, effective Jan. 1, places Philips's account, estimated at $20 million to $30 million, in review.
The company, an American unit of the Dutch consumer electronics giant Philips Electronics N.V., markets products under brands including Magnavox.
Jon Kasle, a spokesman for Philips, would not elaborate on the reason for the split.
He praised the agency, noting that under Backer Spielvogel, which produced campaigns for Magnavox starring the Smothers Brothers and the comedian John Cleese, sales grew.


UST Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lois Kibbee Is Dead; Actress of Television And Stage Was 71
Lois Kibbee, a stage actress, director and writer who became known late in life for her decadelong role as the matriarch Geraldine Whitney Saxon on the daytime television serial "The Edge of Night," died on Monday in Memorial Sloane-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan.
She was 71 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was a brain tumor, said a friend, Carrie Nye Cavett.


Virginia First reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Federal-Mogul Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Trinity Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


White House Backs Work of Somalia Envoy
The White House expressed support today for Robert B. Oakley, the envoy to Somalia whose private business activities are under investigation by the State Department.
"The President has been more than satisfied with Ambassador Oakley's performance," said the White House spokeswoman, Dee Dee Myers.
"The President believes he's done good work and hopes he'll continue."


Southwest Airlines Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Crompton &amp; Knowles Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


Fremont General reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CoreStates Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Electric Power Co. reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


There Were 27 Runs in Between as Blue Jays Win Again


Baldor Electric Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Peter G. Nash, 56; Lawyer Specialized In Labor Relations
Peter G. Nash, a former general counsel for the National Labor Relations Board and top lawyer for the Department of Labor, died on Tuesday at his home in Gaithersburg, Md.
He was 56.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Dean Witter's Quarterly Earnings Rise Sharply
Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Company said yesterday that it earned $171.6 million in the third quarter, as the two mainstays of its business, credit cards and mutual funds, both reported strong growth and record profit.
The Discover credit card business earned $101.5 million, up 48 percent from the similar period a year earlier, while Dean Witter securities earned $70.1 million, up 58 percent.


Ethan Allen Interiors reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


White House Issues An Order to Bolster Recycling of Paper
After months of wrangling between environmental groups and the paper industry, the Clinton Administration yesterday issued an executive order requiring Federal agencies and the military to buy paper made from at least 20 percent recycled fiber by the end of next year and 30 percent by the end of 1998.
Although the Federal Government buys less than 2 percent of the 22 million tons of printing and writing paper produced in this country each year, the order is expected to have a more widespread impact by serving as a model for procurement by state and local governments.
Used-Paper Market Weak
One national environmental group that had lobbied aggressively for the Federal order, the Natural Resources Defense Council, announced yesterday that it was beginning "a campaign for state and local recycled paper purchases to follow suit."


Brinker International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 29


Hershey Foods reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Southwest National reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BB&amp;T Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sealed Air Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Provident Bankshares Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


FMC Gold Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hillary Clinton Talks at Florio Rally
Gov.
Jim Florio kicked off the final two weeks of his re-election campaign yesterday from the same friendly environs where Bill Clinton began and ended his bid for the presidency last year.
And for good measure, Mr.
Florio had Hillary Rodham Clinton at his side.
After a series of ostensibly nonpolitical visits to New Jersey in the last six weeks from the likes of President Clinton and several of his senior Cabinet members, Mrs.
Clinton left no doubt at a Democratic Party rally in Cherry Hill yesterday that she was there for partisan purposes.


Iowa National Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Electric Power Co. reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


Cray Computer (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Wary Reply to South Africa's Call
Sprung from its economic shackles after more than a decade of sanctions, South Africa is seeking foreign investment to help cushion its transition to a multiracial democracy.
But many American companies are so leery of the country's volatile politics that they are staying away and, it now appears, will not play a major role in shaping the start of this new era.
Despite recent pleas from leaders like President F. W. de Klerk and Nelson Mandela, president of the African National Congress, who last week shared the Nobel Peace Prize for their efforts to end the apartheid state, many of these companies say they face a host of obstacles to doing business in South Africa.
And some point out that they are wary of entering the country not only because of conditions there, but also because of concerns about the reaction in the United States to such moves.


Rochester Telephone reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Yeltsin's Situation Is Not Unlike Kerensky's
To the Editor:
Few Americans remember what the United States did to Russia in 1917, which in effect helped bring on the Bolshevik phase of the Russian Revolution.
Early that year the nobles had overthrown the Czar and put in Alexander Kerensky as head of the Duma, or parliament.


Germantown Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Promus Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Events: About History, Landmarks, Ceramics
Fairs Past  New York School of Interior Design, 155 East 56th Street; (212) 753-5365.
"The Great Age of Fairs," an exhibition of photographs, posters, memorabilia and plans, starts Wednesday and continues through Dec. 21.
It surveys seven events that showcased the latest developments in architecture, design and technology, starting with the Great Crystal Palace Exhibition in London in 1851 and ending with the Louisiana Purchase Exposition in St.
Louis in 1904.
Open Monday through Thursday, noon to 6 P.M.; Friday, noon to 5 P.M.
No charge.


Franklin Electronic Publishers Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Settlements Are Expected In Prudential's Fraud Cases
Prudential Securities Inc., which grew in the 1980's from a third-tier firm into one of the largest and best capitalized brokerage firms in the country, is expected to settle Federal and state charges as soon as today that it violated a raft of securities laws in that decade, people involved in the case said yesterday.
The settlement of securities fraud charges involving the firm's sales of limited partnerships will be the largest ever by a retail brokerage firm for violating the law in its dealings with individual investors.


Lageman Says Report on Neck Could Endanger Him in Field
Jeff Lageman, the Jets' most intimidating defensive lineman, expressed concern today that questions about the severity of his neck injury had been made public.
Lageman complained that such medical information was privileged and could pose a danger to him if opposing teams found out.
"Speculation on somebody's health, or if that rumor gets around, can jeopardize my career," he said.


Inland Steel Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Parker Hannifin Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Farmers Capital Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Occidental Petroleum Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lemieux Sets Return to Penguins' Lineup
MARIO LEMIEUX, progressing on schedule from his second off-season back operation in four years, plans to return to the Pittsburgh Penguins' lineup next Thursday against Quebec.
Lemieux has missed the Penguins' first eight games, and will miss at least two more, after surgery July 28 to repair a damaged muscle in his lower back.
Scar tissue from his 1990 operation to partly remove a herniated disk was also scraped away.


Kroger Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 9


Fathers Who Want Time Off for Families Face Uphill Battle
DAVID WILLIAMS missed work on Sunday to stay with his wife after the birth of their first child, and that will cost him $111,111.
The response of his employer, the Houston Oilers, reflects a broader social problem: Is there really any support for a man who wants to be a New Dad?
According to most experts on fatherhood and employers' family policies, the Houston Oilers were out of step in one sense: Most employers now allow men some time off, at least a day or two, to be with their wives when they give birth to a child.


Review/Music; A Pop Master Delivers A Parade of Hits From Before Rock
Near the end of Tony Bennett's opening-night concert at the Long acre Theater on Tuesday, the singer acknowledged that his career has reached a golden moment late in the game by singing a medley of "Autumn Leaves" and "Indian Summer."
For Mr.
Bennett, who recently turned 67, these are indeed balmy days.
A performer who was dismissed as a relic by the generation that had turned its back on pre-rock pop music, he has seen his reputation soar over the last decade, as that generation has discovered the riches of the past.
Among those still living who are considered custodians of the pre-rock canon, Mr.
Bennett now ranks just under Frank Sinatra and Ella Fitzgerald in reputation.
And in his show, "Steppin' Out on Broadway," which plays through Saturday at the Longacre (220 West 48th Street, Manhattan), he shows how richly he deserves that status.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Steve Vai  The Academy
Steve Vai's sold-out show at the Academy on Saturday night was a good example of how tough a time guitar gods have in the 1990's: they get no critical respect but a decent audience.
Given the current reign of post-punk rock, with its suspicion of professionalism, the whole idea of rock virtuosity, created in the 1960's, seems hopelessly archaic today.


Summit Bancorp (N.J.) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reno Chastises TV Networks On Violence in Programming
Attorney General Janet Reno told the television industry today that unless it moved immediately to stem the tide of shootings, stabbings and other mayhem beamed daily into the nation's homes, the White House and Congress would seek laws to do it for them.
It was the bluntest Government condemnation of broadcast violence since the Surgeon General linked television to aggressive behavior 21 years ago.
And it drew anguished protests of innocence from some of the industry's most visible executives.


CoreStates Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Transactions
Football  National Football League
ATLANTA FALCONS -- Announced the retirement of Eric Dickerson, running back.
Signed Lemuel Stinson, cornerback.
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Signed Clarence Williams, running back.
Waived Thomas McLemore, tight end.


Texaco's Profit Fell 55.1% in Quarter
Texaco Inc. reported yesterday that earnings fell 55.1 percent in the third quarter.
On an operating basis, however, the decline was much smaller.
Earnings fell to $142 million, or 45 cents a share, from $316 million, or $1.12 a share, in the third quarter last year, the company, based in White Plains, N.Y., said.


American Management Systems Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Economic Scene; A giant in the profession gives a lift to economic history.
CRACK just about any college history text, and you'll find it is full of economics: hardly anyone these days would write about, say, the decline of Spain in the 17th century without paying obeisance to economic causes.
But try the converse experiment with most introductory economics texts, and you might be left with the idea that the world was created somewhere around 1950.
Movers and shakers in economics, it seems, just aren't accustomed to pondering the past.


Thorn Apple Valley (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 17


Editorial Notebook; The War of the Flags
An early test of the startling detente between Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization will involve a combustible swatch of cloth.
Since 1967, thousands of Palestinians have been chased and jailed in a deadly game of "capture the flag" in which youngsters challenge Israeli rule by hoisting the outlawed P.L.O. banner.
Flying that flag in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip may soon be no more unthinkable than, say, Yasir Arafat shaking the hand of Yitzhak Rabin.
Yet the significance of that flag is too little known.
The passion it ignites is rooted in a common tradition that divides Israelis and Palestinians -- a circumstance rarely acknowledged by either.


Cadence Design Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Acquittal and Deadlock End The Trial of 2 in Riot Beating
After three days of deadlock, a jury today acquitted Damian M. Williams of attempting to murder a white truck driver during last year's riot, a verdict that left the city exhausted and torn by racial and social divisions.
The jury remained undecided on one count of assault against the second defendant, Henry K. Watson, after convicting him on Monday of one misdemeanor assault charge.
Judge John W. Ouderkirk of Los Angeles County Superior Court immediately declared a mistrial on the deadlocked charge and released Mr.
Watson on his own recognizance in consideration of the time he had already served in jail.


No Headline
"Let's put our anger aside and let's look to the future." -- MAYOR RICHARD J. RIORDAN, of Los Angeles.  [ D23:1. ]


Trinity Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; 'Best Ever Win, Worst Ever Loss'
BEFORE the top of the sixth inning, the Philly Phanatic, resplendent in his red-and-green costume, danced in black rain boots in front of the Blue Jays dugout while the public-address system boomed the music and lyrics to "These boots are made for walkin."
Walkin' around the bases, as Lenny Dykstra and Darren Daulton had after their home runs in the Phillies' five-run fifth.
Walkin' to first base as four Phillies had done in their four-run first in what evolved into the highest-scoring game in World Series history.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Meshell Ndegeocello  The Supper Club
Meshell Ndegeocello likes all kinds of grooves: easy jazz vamps, thumb-popping funk, chunky hip-hop, slow-motion reggae.
And she doesn't like to keep them apart.
On Monday night at the Supper Club, Ms.
Ndegeocello and her band, the Watermelon Philosophy, turned songs from her debut album, "Plantation Lullabies" (Maverick/Sire/Reprise), into rhythm rambles, strut dissolving into swing, float shifting to stomp.
Her vocals are just as mutable, from recitation to rap to melody, in a low voice reminiscent of Joan Armatrading's.
Ms.
Ndegeocello got her start as a bass player in Washington go-go bands, and with or without a bass in her hands her syncopations are supple and sure.


New Proposal From Cuomo For Yankees
A $150 million plan to keep the Yankees in the Bronx through 2032 will be offered in the next few days to George M. Steinbrenner 3d, the team's principal owner, Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said yesterday.
The new offer follows a far less detailed project proposed by the Governor last month, which offered the Yankee owner a 50,000-seat stadium on Manhattan's West Side at a cost of $530 million.
That proposal was quickly opposed by city officials and community leaders as too extravagant and impractical given the traffic congestion in the area.


Times Mirror Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Virginia First reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Federal-Mogul Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


United Financial (S.C.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Progressive Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Destec Energy Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


'You Don't Have to Be a Genius' to See What Happened
The hot television lights bore down on Lenny Dykstra and caused him to squint.
The probing questions about what he described as the toughest loss of his career caused him to remember over and over a game he desperately wanted to forget.
With tobacco juice on his lips and pain in those squinty, hurting eyes, Dykstra tried to explain how a night that could have been the most magical of his baseball life had turned so quickly and so horribly.
Dykstra had belted two homers and scored four runs and the Phillies had a five-run lead against Toronto going into the eighth inning.
Then everything crumbled around them.


U.S. TELLS HAITIANS OF EMBARGO TERMS
Sharply raising the stakes for the Haitian military, United States diplomats announced a stringent series of conditions today that they said must be met before international sanctions placed on Haiti this week can be lifted.
The conditions, which begin with the retirement of Haiti's army commander, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, include an end to political violence and human rights abuses and call for the army to get rid of the fearsome police auxiliaries, known as attaches, who roam the streets here terrorizing neighborhoods.


Discovery Zone (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Brands reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BB&amp;T Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chesapeake Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


From Aidid's Supporters, Three Main Demands
Since the Somali civil war began three years ago, the Ala Aamin restaurant has moved about 20 times.
Most recently, in June, when United Nations bombing attacks forced it out of the neighborhood controlled by Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, it moved about half a mile down Mogadishu's main avenue.
At first it was only a handful of wooden chairs clustered on the dirt sidewalk.
But now the sandy floors and two trees are boxed in by cement walls protruding into the road, and the Ala Aamin is a gathering ground for supporters of General Aidid and his party, the Somali National Alliance, as well as merchants, clan elders and war-hardened teen-age militia fighters.
All come for the politics, the sugared black tea and the occasional bowl of spaghetti.


Iowa National Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pop and Jazz in Review
Fourth Cabaret Convention  Town Hall 123 West 43d Street Manhattan Through Sunday
Because cabaret is a form of entertainment kept alive by performers and promoters who do it more for love than from any expectations of fame and fortune, it always seems on the verge of dying out.
But as Monday's opening night concert of the Fourth Cabaret Convention at Town Hall proved, there is a supportive audience and an abundance of talent to keep this most fragile and intimate of entertainment forms afloat for the foreseeable future.
And the outstanding performances of Jeff Harnar, Phillip Officer and Tom Andersen -- three young New Yorkers who are emerging as stars of the genre -- showed a field normally dominated by women being refreshed with potent male voices.


First Financial Banc (Ohio) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  U.S.
BACKS NATO EXPANSION  The United States has decided to support an expansion of NATO that could eventually include Russia and other former members of the Warsaw Pact.
A1


20 New York Schools to Lose U.S. Grants
The Federal Government said yesterday that it would no longer give grants to 20 schools in New York that focus on Hasidic religious studies because of widespread fraud in their grant applications.
Federal officials said yesterday that the schools, in Brooklyn, Queens and Monsey in Rockland County, would be disqualified from recieving assistance through the Pell grant program.
The 21-year-old program, which supports college-level vocational training, has been marred in recent years by a series of scandals across the nation.


Dinkins Message: Despite Problems, a City on the Mend
As he circulates around New York City in search of a second term, Mayor David N. Dinkins these days seldom uses Rudolph W. Giuliani's name, deliberately mislabeling his opponent as a "Republican conservative candidate" and describing him as a man without compassion for the homeless or appreciation for the city's diversity.
In stump speeches that he delivers several times a day, everywhere from centers for the elderly in Bushwick to catering halls in Bay Ridge to Harlem churches, the Mayor has been working to shift the race from a referendum on his four-year term to one on Mr.
Giuliani's politics and ideology.


Envoys Press Aristide
American and United Nations envoys have suggested to Father Aristide that he consider including in his Cabinet some of the business executives and political parties who had opposed him in the past.
The proposal was rejected by Father Aristide and his aides.


Ultramar Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Greg Manning Auctions Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to June 30


Witnesses Identify Shards From Bomb Site at Trial
They went by the dry names of Government exhibits 346, 399 and 464, and as the gnarled metal fragments were passed from hand to hand in the jury box yesterday, they were described only as parts of compressed gas containers.
In fact, according to the prosecution case being painstakingly -- and often painfully -- assembled at Federal District Court in Manhattan, they were recovered components of the World Trade Center bomb.


Dow Up 9.78 in Mostly Lackluster Session
A mood of caution enveloped the stock market yesterday as investors appeared reluctant to press forward on the rally that propelled many issues to new records in recent weeks.
Some stocks moved sharply because of reports of third-quarter earnings, but most of the broad indicators were sluggish.
Transportation, pharmaceutical and cable issues pushed the market forward, making up for declines in the casino, tobacco and waste-management companies.
Though the blue chips were generally up, weakness in stocks of small and medium companies once again broke the market's momentum.


Franklin Electronic Publishers Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Public &amp; Private; Williams 1, Oilers 0
Last month the television program "Day One" ran a profile of Jimmy Johnson, the coach of the Dallas Cowboys.
Jimmy put life and work in perspective for those of us watching at home; he admitted that when he was offered the job with the Cowboys, his commitment to the team was so total that he ditched his wife of 26 years.
"Put your wife on waivers?" asked the interviewer, Forrest Sawyer, and Jimmy did not demur.
And his kids?
"I know if it came down to life or death, me or football, I think he'd choose me," said Brent Johnson, one of his sons.


QVC Shows Frustration Over Bid Silence
Executives who are involved in the $9.5 billion bid by QVC Network for Paramount Communications emerged from a QVC board meeting yesterday unable to hide their frustration.
Reports circulated in the industry yesterday that QVC might begin a hostile tender offer for Paramount shares as early as this week.
But a QVC executive declined to comment.


Germantown Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Study Says Flight Attendant Infected 23 With TB
Federal health officials said today that they had compelling evidence that a Continental Airlines flight attendant with active tuberculosis infected 23 crew members who worked with her last fall on several long international flights.
The Center for Prevention Services, which studied the case, also tested passengers but could not conclude that any had been exposed by the flight attendant.


Losses Force Lloyd's Into New Funding
Battered by nearly $9 billion in losses over the last three years and with more to come, the Lloyd's of London insurance market today adopted the most radical change since its founding three centuries ago -- an effort to attract new financing and renewed confidence.
After a stormy meeting, the members of Lloyd's, known in British insurance and finance as "names," voted overwhelmingly to approve a previously announced proposal to allow institutions, other insurers and corporations to invest for the first time in underwriting policies issued through the venerable insurance market.
Diversion for British Aristocrats
Until now, all of Lloyd's capital was provided by these "names," affluent individual investors who before a recent series of heavy losses had come to regard putting their money in Lloyd's as part upper-class British social rite and part annuity.


Cray Computer (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kroger Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 9


FMC Gold Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Wheeling Pittsburgh reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Progressive Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


It's Raining, It's Pouring, Runs Keep On Scoring
The pitchers couldn't be blamed if they thought they were in Transylvania instead of Pennsylvania, so spooky and scary has the World Series become at Veterans Stadium.
For a second straight night, the fog rolled in, the rains came and so did the runs.
Relentless and in buckets, drenching earned run averages, bloating batting averages.
And, oh, yes, giving the Blue Jays the sloshing as well as slugging rights over the Phillies in a 15-14 war of attrition otherwise known as Game 4 of the World Series.


Phelps Dodge Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
Morton Gould Program  Queens Chamber Symphony Maurice Peress, conductor Queens College Concert Hall
In anticipation of Morton Gould's 80th birthday, which is on Dec. 10, Maurice Peress presented a program on Sunday afternoon that steered clear of this prolific composer's most popular showpieces (the "American Salute," for example) yet left no doubts about why his music has an enthusiastic following.
Mr.
Gould can seem to be a trend surfer: From the 1930's on, he steeped many of his scores in the textures and harmonies of various kinds of jazz.
At other times, he drew on the popularity of musical Americana and wove folk songs and spirituals into his music.
And his latest work, a children's piece, involves a rapper and is about dinosaurs.


Maytag Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Family Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Union Camp Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Books of The Times; An F.B.I. Success Story On the Mob and a Mole
Gangland  How the F.B.I.
Broke the Mob  By Howard Blum  349 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $23.
In its final 100 or so pages, Howard Blum's new book, "Gangland: How the F.B.I. Broke the Mob," finally becomes an absorbing report on how a special unit of the Federal Bureau of Investigation eventually gathered enough evidence to convict John Gotti, the seemingly indestructible crime boss; on how the unit ferreted out a mole who was feeding Mr.
Gotti information on the F.B.I.'s strategy, and on how Mr.
Gotti's second in command, the violent Salvatore (Sammy Bull) Gravano, was eventually induced to testify against his compatriots.


Union Camp Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


American Colloid (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fort Wayne National Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reebok International Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Subdued Start for Tokyo Car Show
The gargantuan Tokyo Motor Show began today with the theme of "ecolution," a Japanese-coined combination of ecology and evolution that is meant to refer to cars that do not harm the environment.
But the environment Japanese auto makers really worry about these days is not the earth's but that of their business.
"The current business environment is like nothing we have ever experienced," Nobuhiko Kawamoto, president of the Honda Motor Company, said Tuesday.


Course Gets Tougher In '94 Tour de France
Joop Zoetemelk described it as "a true Tour de France." Stephen Roche predicted it would be more interesting.
Bernard Thevenet said it would favor climbers and Miguel Indurain said it would be different.
All of them, winners of the Tour de France, agreed that the 81st edition of the bicycle race would be difficult.
The big unanswered question was whether the difficulties of the 1994 route, which was made public today in this suburb of Paris, will help or hinder Indurain as the Spaniard seeks to win the Tour for a fourth successive year.


Clinton Altering Nation's Tactics In Drug Battle
The Clinton Administration issued a national drug strategy today that echoed the President's campaign promises to increase drug rehabilitation but provided no details about how the plan would be paid for or carried out.
While acknowledging that the plan was short on specifics, the President's senior drug policy aide, Lee P. Brown, defended it as a blueprint of the Administration's intentions that would be refined in a new drug budget next February.


UST Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Executive Changes
EON CORP., Reston, Va., appointed R. Michael Sheridan president and chief executive, to succeed David A. Lehman, who will retire after a short transition period.
GENVEC, Rockville, Md., a gene therapy company, named Thomas W. D'Alonzo chief executive.


United Financial (S.C.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Clean-Air Minuet
General Motors and the air pollution chiefs of 12 Northeastern states are engaged in a double-or-nothing gamble over what emission standards will be applied to cars in the region at the turn of the century.
The car company is rolling the dice in the courts and lobbying in legislatures for weaker rules, as state officials consider running to the Clinton Administration to lay down the law to enforce the strictest standard available.
But for the first time in a long battle between Detroit and the state capitals, the two sides are approaching negotiations.


Georgia Gulf Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cadence Design Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Assembly Vote Reaffirms Colonial-Era Land Deals
The General Assembly, bowing to pressure from people whose homes and businesses have been the targets of Indian tribal land claims, voted today to reaffirm the legality of land transfers by Indians to early colonists.
Critics said the measure was an empty and perhaps racist gesture, in singling out for legal blessing the rights of one group of residents over another on a matter that is still in court.
But supporters, even while conceding that the measure may have little effect, said the state had the responsibility to make a statement supporting the system of property ownership as it has evolved through history, regardless of who may have been victimized at one time or another.


Benchmark ElectronicsInc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Trustco Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sysco Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Yanks' Abbott Honored for Achievements
Making it to the majors with a hand deformed from birth was an impressive enough achievement, but it was the no-hitter he pitched for the Yankees against Cleveland on Sept. 4 that clinched JIM ABBOTT's selection to receive the Freedom Forum's Free Spirit Award at a dinner at the New York Public Library last night.


Term Limits Limit Voters' Rights
Cities and towns all over America have adopted term limits for their elected officials.
In the past few years, 15 states have also put limits on the number of years their senators and representatives may serve in Washington.
The idea has an irresistibly popular ring to it: Force the rascals out!
But it is profoundly wrong.
Barring a last-minute hitch, New York City voters will decide on Election Day whether to limit their elected officials to two consecutive four-year terms.
Suffolk County on Long Island has looser limits on its ballot, and Maine -- which already holds its governors to two terms -- will vote on limits for other state officials and the legislature.


Thorn Apple Valley (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 17


S&amp;T Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sybase Inc. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Film; Eccentrics At Play In a French Chateau
"Chasing Butterflies" ("La Chasse aux Papillons") is the new French film by Otar Iosseliani, a director from Russian Georgia who's proud of it.
He resents being identified as Russian and describes most of the directors who flourished in the former Soviet Union as whores and hypocrites.
This may be why Mr.
Iosseliani, who was born in Tbilisi in 1934, has been making films in Western Europe since 1984.
"Chasing Butterflies," which opens at the Lincoln Plaza Cinemas today, is my second encounter with Mr.
Iosseliani's work, the first being his lugubriously surreal "Favoris de la Lune," released here as "Favorites of the Moon" in 1985.
He's a taste I've yet to acquire.


On My Mind; A President Like Us
Like all Presidents, Bill Clinton is just a human being, the same as the rest of us.
The trouble is that he is acting like it.
Most human beings are quick to take credit when things go well, wriggle out of responsibility when they go wrong, talk big, act small, try to bluff their way out of trouble and look put upon when cornered -- oh, the injustice of it all.


Long Island Introduces an Anti-Drug-Mobile


Franchise Swap Proposed To Owner of the Patriots
The owner of the New England Patriots wants to sell the team or, if that does not happen, perhaps move it.
He is also a minority member of a group trying to get a National Football League expansion franchise for St.
Louis.
Yesterday, he was offered a solution to both goals -- a swap of teams.
He would get 66 percent of a St.
Louis expansion team that does not yet exist for 100 percent of a team that does.
Coach Bill Parcells and his players would remain with the Patriots.


For Children
Children's Concerts
Little Orchestra Society  Avery Fisher Hall  (212) 721-6500 (Center Charge)
Recommended ages: 6 to 12  Tomorrow
Leonard Bernstein, in his New York Philharmonic children's concerts, won over the audience with his passion, charm and genius.
Indeed, to entice children to classical music, equal consideration must be given to the music, how it is presented and who is presenting it.
If the piece is too long or undramatic, children moan and groan.
Children's concerts are also helped by nonmusical diversions, like puppets.
And the conductor should like listeners under 12 (they can tell).


Mayhem in Los Angeles
The final verdicts from the Reginald Denny beating case in Los Angeles will dishearten many Americans who saw, with their own eyes on videotape, the ferocious attack on an innocent truck driver by gleefully vicious rioters.
Damian Williams, the principal assailant, was convicted of felony mayhem on Mr.
Denny and four misdemeanor assaults on other victims.
His co-defendant Henry Watson is guilty on only one count of felonious assault.
Both were found innocent of the most serious felony charges, carrying life sentences.


Software Maker Reports Strong 2d Quarter
Computer Associates International Inc., a big supplier of the software that runs on mainframe computers, surprised Wall Street yesterday by reporting an 86 percent jump in its quarterly profits.
The company's performance shows that while the makers of mainframe machines like I.B.M. and Amdahl are struggling, the software side of that business can be profitable.


Not Your Usual Sorts of Antiques
The largest assortment of Americana ever shown at the Fall Antiques Show will be on view through Sunday at the Hudson River pier at 52d Street in Manhattan.
"Today there are many more categories of art and antiques to focus on than anyone dreamed of when we began in 1979," said Sanford L. Smith, the show's producer.


Philadelphia Wins to Stay Alive in Series


Du Pont Reassigns Lycra Fiber Account
E.I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company said yesterday that it had consolidated its worldwide Lycra fiber account at Young &amp; Rubicam Inc. in New York, which has handled the Spandex brand in South America.
Billings were previously estimated at $20 million, but were estimated yesterday at $40 million.
Y.&amp; R. was awarded the worldwide account after a two-month review that also included McCann-Erickson Worldwide and Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, which had handled Lycra in Europe and Asia.
BBDO Worldwide in New York, which had handled the account in North America, had withdrawn from the review because handling Lycra worldwide would have conflicted with the International Wool Secretariat, which it handles in 13 Asian-Pacific and European countries.


CATERPILLAR INC. (N)
Powered by an 18 percent jump in domestic sales, Caterpillar Inc. reported yesterday that its third-quarter net income from operations was $96 million, far ahead of the year-earlier quarter's $5 million and the $50 million to $65 million generally projected on Wall Street.
Caterpillar also booked a $300 million after-tax benefit from settlement of a long-running dispute with the Internal Revenue Service and a one-time $36 million tax credit, lifting total net income for the quarter that ended Sept. 30 to $432 million.


RESULTS PLUS
GOLF  Elkington Beats Daly  Long-hitting John Daly threw his club after missing a five-foot putt on the first hole of the world match play championship yesterday in Virginia Water, England and sent a 5-iron approach over the green and out of bounds on 12 in losing, 5 and 4, to Australian Steve Elkington.
In other first-round matches, five-time champion Seve Ballesteros lost, 7 and 6, to David Frost; Corey Pavin beat Peter Baker, 4 and 3, and Colin Montgomerie birdied the last two holes to top Yoshinori Mizumaki in 37 holes. (AP) Bogey Thwarts Morgan: A lapse on the last hole cost Gil Morgan sole control of the lead after the second round of the five-day Las Vegas, Nev., Invitational.
Morgan's bogey-6 from the water dropped him into a share of the 36-hole lead with Bob Lohr, Keith Clearwater and Blaine McCallister.
Fourth-seeded Brad Gilbert beat Patrick Rafter of Australia, 7-6 (7-3), 4-6, 6-2. (AP) BOXING  Gamez Gains Title  Leo Gamez of Venezuela won the vacant World Boxing Association junior flyweight title last night in Tokyo by twice flooring previously unbeaten Shiro Yahiro of Japan and stopping him in the ninth round. (AP)


The Art-Law Center of the Universe
For the last month, several gray-suited men have trooped to a witness stand at State Supreme Court in Manhattan to argue the provenance of 14 works of ancient Roman silver.
The treasure, supposedly dug up in Lebanon decades ago, belongs to an English nobleman and was to be sold at auction in Switzerland.
But the Governments of Croatia and Hungary sued, each declaring that the silver had instead been taken from its soil and exported illegally.


Papers Show Greed, Calculation and Betrayal in Stew Leonard Fraud Case
To the world at large, Stew Leonard was the smiling face on posters at his Connecticut dairy store, the man who made sure customers got what they wanted and who sometimes roamed the aisles in a cow costume, giving them warm hugs.
But court papers filed by the Government this week in Mr.
Leonard's $17.1 million tax-fraud case show that he played another role behind the scenes.
As mastermind of the scheme, he directed his top managers to bundle stacks of cash into $10,000 piles and place them in a safe hidden in his office fireplace.
He then carted the money off to the Caribbean stashed in suitcases or camouflaged as baby gifts.


Bye-Bye, Rabbit Balls: The Dead-Ball Era Is Back
For the better part of four games in the World Series, the stage belonged to the big boys.
The record 65 runs scored by the Toronto Blue Jays and Philadelphia Phillies indicated as much.
Sometimes, though, when the home runs don't fly, when the doubles don't pierce the gaps routinely, little ball and little guys can mean the difference between winning and losing.


Former Reagan Aide Endorses Florio and Democrats in New Jersey


American General reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Aristide Team, With Help, Blocks the Sale of Gasoline
Haiti's civilian Government, acting in concert with international oil companies, blocked gasoline sales throughout the country today in a move that could force a showdown with the nation's military leadership.
The announcement early today that local sales and deliveries of gasoline would be banned as part of the United Nations-ordered embargo on oil sales to Haiti, set off last minute panic buying in the capital this morning as gas stations received instructions from oil companies to lock their pumps.


CHRONICLE
The editors of Aufbau, the German language newspaper that served as the voice of the Jews who had escaped Nazism during World War II, could think of no better way to pay homage to their guiding light, Manfred George, than with his own words.
So today, on what would have been his 100th birthday, Aufbau will reprint an article by Mr.
George, who died in 1965 after serving as its editor in chief for 26 years.
He transformed Aufbau, which is now published every other week in New York, from a club newsletter into an international publication with an advisory board that included Albert Einstein and Thomas Mann.
The article, written in 1948, dealt with Mr.
George's vision for the newly established state of Israel.


P.L.O. Moderate Shot Dead, Raising Fears on Pact
A leading moderate in the Palestine Liberation Organization was shot to death today in Gaza, intensifying fears that violence within the Palestinian movement could threaten the agreement to begin the transfer of authority in the occupied territories from Israel to the P.L.O.
The shooting of Assad Saftawi, 58, occurred several hours before Israeli and P.L.O. negotiators announced in Egypt that they had come to terms on a release next week of some Palestinians held in Israeli prisons -- probably several hundred, Israeli officials said.


Kelly Moves A Monitor To a New Job
A top official of the New York City Police Department's Internal Affairs Bureau was transferred by Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly yesterday, three weeks after the bureau fell under sharp criticism during a mayoral commission's hearings on police corruption.
The official, Chief Robert J. Beatty, who was the second in command and the former head of Internal Affairs, will take charge of a new bureau, overseeing the department's 911 emergency communication system, as well as its efforts to modernize its computer technology.
He will not be replaced at Internal Affairs; rather, his responsibilities will be assumed by his boss, Walter S. Mack Jr., the deputy commissioner for Internal Affairs and a former prosecutor who was brought into the department in May as the first civilian to head the bureau.


Anxious Haitians Start Building Boats Again
Colbert St.
Vil sat under a wooden boat with a chisel, carving the last touches on a vessel he said he was building to transport bags of rice and cement from ships docked at a nearby port to this coastal town.
This fishing hamlet, however, is one of the villages from which many Haitians have fled in rickety boats, trying to reach the United States and appeal for asylum from the military Government that overthrew President Jean-Bertrand Aristide two years ago.
And Mr.
St.
Vil's new cargo boat could quickly become a passenger boat.


Mere 90 Minutes Dwarfed by Eight Years of War
For eight years they waged the longest conventional war of this century.
For the last two weeks they have shared the same pool table and dining room.
But don't think for a minute that the Iran-Iraq rivalry has lost all of its edge.
The two countries will play a soccer match here Friday in this final round of Asian World Cup qualifying.
It will be their first official international match in 17 years, and although players and coaches have done their utmost to minimize the history, there is little doubt that this game still holds special meaning.
Both teams need a victory to maintain a reasonable chance of qualifying for the 1994 World Cup in the United States.
Iran is 1-1, losing to South Korea but defeating Japan.
Iraq lost to North Korea and tied South Korea. 'We Can Never Forget'
"You must remember," said midfielder Hamid Derakhshan, the Iranian captain.
"Face to face, we are friendly now and say hello, but inside, we can never forget what happened between us."


2 Youths Are Held in Series of Robberies
Two Brooklyn teen-agers have been arrested in a series of robberies of homes in affluent neighorhoods in eastern Queens, and the police said yesterday that the arrests had ended the crimes.
A third suspect remained at large.
Sgt.
William Nevins of the Queens Robbery Squad said a fingerprint left at one of the houses had led investigators to Rashawn Brown, 17, of 2950 West 23d Street in Coney Island, Brooklyn.
A housing police officer, Edward Rosado, who knew what Mr.
Brown looked like, saw him in the street on Saturday and arrested him, Sergeant Nevins said.


Tax-Credit Financing to Aid In Building Housing Units
New York City should get enough money from a Federal tax-credit program to help build at least 6,000 new housing units for the poor over the next five years, housing advocates said yesterday.
Earlier this year a delay in Congressional renewal of the tax-credit program slowed scores of public-private housing projects throughout the city that had been depending on the money.
But in August the program was made permanent as part of the Clinton budget package, paving the way, proponents said, for even greater participation from corporations.
The program allows corporations to donate money toward a fund to build housing in exchange for reductions in their Federal tax bills.


Corrections
An obituary last Friday about the actress Ruth Gilbert misstated the place of her death.
She had been a patient at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan, but she died at a hospice at Calvary Hospital in the Bronx.


CONGRESSMEN KILL THE SUPERCOLLIDER
A Congressional panel officially killed the $11 billion Superconducting Supercollider today, but not before a final bitter wrangle between the members of the House and Senate conference committee over how lavish to make the burial.
The House members prevailed, just as they had Tuesday, when the House voted for the third time in 16 months to delete the supercollider's budget from an annual water-projects bill.


Austin E. Smith, 81, Drug Firm Executive and Journal Editor
Dr.
Austin E. Smith, the first president of the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, vice chairman of the Warner-Lambert Company and editor of the Journal of the American Medical Association, died on Oct. 9 at his home in Fort Myers, Fla.
He was 81.
A graduate of the Queens University Faculty of Medicine in Kingston, Ontario, Dr.
Smith joined the A.M.A. staff after completing his residency, becoming the organization's director of therapy and research.
After writing "The Drugs You Use," (Revere, 1948,) a practical guide to the proper use of drugs, he was made editor of the organization's journal in 1949.


Legal Memo; Juries Lose a Lofty Aura In Glare of Instant Fame
In its day, no court proceeding was more celebrated or scrutinized than the espionage trial of Ethel and Julius Rosenberg.
But the 12 ordinary New Yorkers who convicted the Rosenbergs blended back quietly and quickly into obscurity.
Though any enterprising reporter could have tracked them down, years passed before they were ever debriefed.
The trial of two black Los Angeles men charged with beating a white truck driver named Reginald Denny, as notorious as it was, has not so monopolized the public consciousness.
But a court concerned for their safety nonetheless granted anonymity to the 12 men and women hearing the case.
This did not entirely ease the jurors' lot, judging from the various psychological, cardiovascular and gastrointestinal problems they encountered while deliberating.


Tokyo Journal; Red-Light District, Fortunes Dimmed, Is Gloomy
When the Tokyo Metropolitan Government opened a big commercial complex this year next to a warren of peep shows, strip clubs and massage parlors known as Kabukicho, it was regarded as a cleansing shaft of light that would refurbish the hard-bitten area.
The new building had well-lighted plazas, a hospital, a large health club and a store that symbolizes the purer virtues of fresh air and good clean fun to Japanese as well as Americans -- L. L. Bean.


COMPANY BRIEFS
FIAT S.p.A., Turin, Italy, will merge the construction and public works activities of its Cogefar-Impresit subsidiary with those of two privately owned construction companies, Lodigiani and Girola.
NORTHWEST AIRLINES INC., St.
Paul, and KLM Royal Dutch Airlines will merge their Dutch cargo operations, combining the marketing, sales and handling services under KLM Cargo.


Pitney Bowes Inc.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


'Unemployed Architects Don't Make Good Waiters,' Workers Say


Market Place; Amid bleak quarterly estimates for I.B.M., some optimism.
WAITING for the turnaround at I.B.M. is going to take patience.
And almost no one expects to see the evidence of a recovery on Tuesday, when the International Business Machines Corporation reports its third-quarter financial results.
The estimates of 16 Wall Street analysts tracked by Zacks Investment Research range from break even to a loss of $354 million, with the consensus seeing a loss of $160 million.


Body and Dreams Trampled, a Riot Victim Fights On
The verdicts in the Reginald O. Denny case are in, and this bruised city anticipates a new beginning.
But for at least one victim of the mayhem at Florence and Normandie Avenues, who is now broke, sick and scared, the spiral of misery has no end.
He is Fidel Lopez, a Guatemalan immigrant, who after 20 years of toil had seized the American dream for his wife and three daughters, a dream that was dashed in seconds when he drove his pickup truck into an intersection just blocks from his home where fires roared and bedlam reigned.


Czech Leader Pushes for Open NATO
In a sharp retort to what are regarded here as disappointing proposals by the United States for Eastern Europe's relationship with NATO, the Czech President, Vaclav Havel, declared today that associate membership in the alliance could not be a substitute for future security guarantees.
"Any dialogue on associate or observer status is welcome but cannot exclude our eventual full membership," Mr.
Havel said during an official visit to Poland.
"We will continue to express our opinion at the top of our voice."


Pacific Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for 12mos to Sept 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; For Lintas, the cruelest month: Diet Coke is lost, now an upstart swipes the IBM PC account.
IN a second big dose of bad news this month, Lintas Worldwide was dropped by I.B.M.'s personal computer division just 16 days the agency lost the Diet Coke account.
I.B.M. named Merkley Newman Harty as its new agency for personal computer advertising the United States.
A cousin agency, DDB Needham in Paris, won the account for Europe, which had been shared by Lintas and GGT/GGK in London.


NATO Favors U.S. Plan for Ties With the East, but Timing Is Vague
European defense ministers today embraced a Clinton Administration plan that offers former Soviet republics and East European countries closer cooperation with NATO but not early membership in the alliance.
The plan, which Secretary of Defense Les Aspin outlined here at a meeting of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, raised the possibility of eventual assimilation of the former Warsaw Pact countries into NATO.
The plan is also a gesture to Germany, which has pressed to expand the 16-nation alliance to include nations of the former Warsaw Pact.


Genuine Parts reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


On Stage, and Off
A Joint Adventure?
In an unusual, if not unique, joint venture tying Hollywood to the New York stage, Steven Spielberg has agreed to underwrite up to 10 playwriting commissions over the next two years for plays to be produced and developed by Playwrights Horizons.
The commissions of between $7,000 and $12,000 each will go to young, emerging playwrights, the recipients to be chosen by and agreed upon by Don Scardino, artistic director of Playwrights Horizons, and Mr.
Spielberg.
For his investment, Mr.
Spielberg is assured a first look at the play as a potential film property.
That is, his production company, Amblin Entertainment, will have a chance to bid on each play's film rights.
If Amblin does make the film, the playwright is assured the assignment of writing the first and second drafts of the screenplay, and in addition, Playwrights Horizons will be involved, as associate producers, in the production, contributing to the creative development of the project and, just as important, participating in the profits. (The traditional arrangement is that the developing theater gets 40 percent of the writer's share.)


A Reluctant Parting With an Old Reliable; Competition Leads Goodwill Industries of Greater New York to Give Up Collection Bins
Goodwill Industries, which has relied for 40 years on charitable donations of used clothing to finance aid to the disabled, is reluctantly giving up its collection bins in the New York area.
Donations are dropping, it says, because of competition from businesses that salvage and resell clothing.
In many cases, these businesses set up bins, labeled with the names of groups supposedly using the donations for charity, right beside Goodwill bins in parking lots at malls or supermarkets.
And donors, often as concerned with getting clutter out of their closets as with doing a good deed, tend to drop off donations at the first collection spot they find.





COMPANY REPORTS; Times Company Reports Loss in Quarter
The New York Times Company said yesterday that it lost $3 million, or 4 cents a share, in the third quarter, down from a loss of $35 million, or 44 cents a share, for the comparable period last year.
The company said that the increase in corporate tax rates lowered the quarter's results by 7 cents a shares, and that one-time items accounted for the loss in the 1992 quarter.
Otherwise, earnings would have totaled 3 cents a share in each quarter.


U.S. Peacekeeping Arrears Could Reach a Billion
The United States faces arrears approaching $1 billion for United Nations peacekeeping operations in the coming year after both houses of Congress passed a bill greatly reducing the budget contributions to the United Nations.
The compromise bill, hammered out between the House and Senate, reflects hostility toward the mounting cost and complexity of United Nations peacekeeping operations, a belief that Washington's share of these bills is too large and a concern about waste and corruption at the United Nations.


Historic Church in Chelsea Gets a Make-Over


Art in Review
Elliott Puckette  Paul Kasmin 74 Grand Street SoHo Through Oct. 30
In her solo debut, Elliott Puckette seeks an 18th-century solution to a late-20th-century problem: how to claim as one's own the all-over abstract painting that Jackson Pollock helped to introduce into modern art.
Ms.
Puckette's method relies on old-fashioned penmanship, as well as suggestions of the wood-block print.
Working with a razor blade on wood panels painted with dark gray ink and pigment, she covers the surface with airy yet elaborate cursive thickets of curls and loops and spirals, giving center stage to the decorative flourishes with which a talented penman might surround a text.


Marshall and Sacks Have Become Strangers
This is a fragile time for the Jets, especially for their pass rushers.
The defense has recorded 10 sacks this season, but Jeff Lageman is the only lineman to have one.
The Jets face Jim Kelly and the Buffalo Bills on Sunday at Giants Stadium, the first of a difficult three-game stretch that includes the Giants and the Miami Dolphins.
But this is no time for Coach Bruce Coslet to demean his sad non-sackers, particularly Leonard Marshall.


Art in Review
Lewis Hine
Robert Mann Gallery  42 East 76th Street  Manhattan  Through Nov. 13
What unites Lewis Hine's best work is his passionate interest in the lives of the people he photographed.
As this small but valuable survey demonstrates, Hine brought this fascination to all of his subjects, from his early portraits of immigrants arriving on Ellis Island, to his famous pictures of children working in coal mines or spinning mills, to the thrilling images he made in the 1930's of workers constructing the Empire State Building.


Home Video
Studios are always looking for reasons to recycle old movies on videotape, especially big old movies.
Usually a major anniversary will do, but this fall there is a fresh promotional theme for special editions: new tapes made from master prints that come from original film negatives.
On Wednesday, Fox will reissue "The African Queen" (1962).
Earlier this month, Columbia Tri-Star released new tapes of "The Bridge on the River Kwai" (1957) and five other prominent old films, including "Mr. Smith Goes to Washington" (1939).
And on Nov. 17, MGM/UA will release another edition of "The Wizard of Oz" (the last one being the 50th-anniversary edition in 1989), a $99.98 package called "The Ultimate Oz."


Restaurants
When you walk into the room, your first impression is warmth and laughter.
All around the restaurant, people are huddled over grills, drinking and talking and gesturing wildly as great gusts of fragrant steam go billowing toward the ceiling.
Men scurry about with buckets of blazing coals, replenishing the fires at each table, and waitresses walk past bearing trays laden with vegetables as bright as jewels.
The air smells of smoke and sugar and chilies and garlic, and the whole atmosphere is so inviting that you are irresistibly drawn into the center of the room.
Why hasn't Korean food become more popular in New York City?
This is a puzzle because of all the Asian cuisines, Korean is most accessible to the American palate.
Long ago we rose above our distrust of garlic and began our continuing romance with Chinese cooking.
Then we overcame our fear of raw fish and learned to love Japanese.
When Thai food came along, it seduced half the country.
But most of us have yet to discover Korean cooking, which offers a great many things we already love (beef, barbecue, the opportunity to graze) and presents very few obstacles. (Well, you do have to love garlic and chilies.)


Missing in Tokyo: Chrysler's Japan-Fighter
As the United States presented demands this week for Japan to open its market to foreign automobiles, the American car considered to have one of the best chances of succeeding here was conspicuously absent from the Tokyo Motor Show.
The Chrysler Corporation is not exhibiting its new Neon subcompact, a vehicle specifically intended to compete with small Japanese cars, because the company has no immediate plans to sell the model in Japan.


Schools Pension Money Diverted, Auditors Say
The director of a Board of Education pension fund improperly diverted up to $1.2 million a year from a special fund to pay for the agency's operating expenses, including meals, air fare, parking and hotel costs, according to a confidential management audit.
The audit, by KPMG Peat Marwick, depicted the Board of Education Retirement System as being "mired in conflict" and in disarray.
It found that the money was diverted for years without the knowledge of the fund's board of directors -- including all seven members of the Board of Education.


Laggards in Hands of Angry Keenan
In his most dramatic act of anger in this young season, Rangers Coach Mike Keenan broke a hockey stick over a crossbar at the Rye Playland rink yesterday morning and ordered his players off the ice less than 15 minutes into practice.
Keenan, who said his players weren't working hard, held a 10-minute closed-door meeting with them in the team's locker room before resuming practice, which lasted approximately 20 more minutes.


Panel Tells Cancer Institute to Stop Giving Advice on Mammograms
An advisory panel to the National Cancer Institute took an unusual stance today in the debate over guidelines for breast cancer screening: instead of giving advice, the institute should lay out the scientific data and let others draw their own conclusions.
That means, for example, that the institute would no longer recommend whether women in their 40's should have mammograms, a particularly sticky issue.
Nor would it advise whether older women, who studies have shown benefit from mammograms, should have the test every year or every other year.
Instead, the institute would publish information so that women could draw their own conclusions.


General Dynamics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Doctor's Bid To Sue Times Is Reinstated
The state's highest court yesterday reinstated a libel action by Dr.
Elliot M. Gross, a former Chief Medical Examiner of New York City, who accused The New York Times of defaming him in a series of articles that quoted pathologists and others and criticized his work.
In a 5-0 ruling overturning two lower courts that had dismissed the action, the Court of Appeals held that the articles contained enough statements presented as facts to warrant at least pretrial proceedings.
The Times had argued, and the lower courts agreed, that the articles reported expressions of opinion about a public official and were protected by constitutional guarantees of freedom of the press.


Big Board's Open Positions on Short Sales Drop
Even though stock prices are high and merger activity is strong, the number of shares sold short and not covered on the New York Stock Exchange fell this month, the Big Board reported yesterday.
The 2.8 percent drop, to 1.19 billion shares, came on the heels of a 12 percent rise in short interest in September, the biggest gain in recent years.


BellSouth Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Irene Sharaff Memorial
A memorial tribute to Irene Sharaff, the costume designer, is to be held on Monday at 5 P.M. at the John Houseman Theater, 450 West 42d Street, Clinton.
Ms.
Sharaff died in August at the age of 83.
The speakers are to include Leo Lerman, the writer and editor; Gray Foy, the artist, and the theatrical designers Donald Brooks, William Ivey Long and Barbara Matera.
Film clips illustrating Ms.
Sharaff's work for "The King and I" and "An American in Paris" are to be shown.
The tribute is open to the public.


Man Is Shot to Death And 2 Are Wounded
A man was shot and killed and another man and a youth were wounded last night when an unidentified man walked up to a crowd on a Brooklyn street and started shooting, the police said.
One man was shot twice in the head and killed immediately, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.
The second man, Patrick Grant, 18, was struck in the left wrist and treated at Woodhull Medical and Mental Health Center.


CHRONICLE
There ought to be enough de Menils assembled at the Pierre today to satisy admirers of the family of art patrons.
DOMINIQUE DE MENIL is to receive the Hadrian Award from the World Monuments Fund for leadership in the preservation of art and architecture at a luncheon at the hotel.
Some 300 guests are expected to hear words about her contributions from Agnes Gund, the president of the Museum of Modern Art, and in letter or videotape form, from former President Jimmy Carter and Gov.
Ann W. Richards of Texas.


Russia Halts Nuclear Waste Dumping in Sea
Bowing to protests from Japan, the United States, and other countries, Russia said today that it had suspended plans to dump low-level nuclear waste into the Sea of Japan this weekend.
But Russia coupled the suspension with an appeal for foreign financial help to speed construction of a nuclear waste-processing plant, and said that if it took more than 18 months to build one the Russian Navy might be forced to resume disposing of the waste at sea.


Enhanced Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Schlumberger Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
2.94
2.95
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.01
3.04
2.90
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.11
3.12
3.13
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.78
4.80
6.29
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.82
5.84
7.60
TELEPHONE BONDS
6.92
6.93
8.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.35
5.36
6.56
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Daimler Raising $510 Million
Daimler-Benz A.G., which early this month became the first German company to list its stock on the New York Stock Exchange, yesterday priced $510.2 million of asset-backed securities for sale to the public.
The certificates are being sold by the Daimler-Benz Auto Receivables Corporation through its Daimler-Benz Auto Grantor Trust 1993-A.
They are backed by loans made by the Mercedes-Benz Credit Corporation, which provides financing for dealers for cars distributed by the Daimler-Benz North America Corporation.


In REM Sleep? You Missed All the R.B.I.
Never before had a World Series game taken so long to complete.
Never before had so many runs been scored in a World Series game.
Never before had a losing team scored 14 runs.
Never before had so many emotional twists and turns been packed into one stadium on one drizzly, foggy night.
Never before.
Maybe never again.
The strange and charming fourth game of the 90th World Series Wednesday night between the Blue Jays and the Phillies left one Toronto pitcher, Todd Stottlemyre, bloody after he tried to run the bases; left the entire Philadelphia team bloodied after its closer disintegrated; left Lenny Dykstra groping for words to explain what happened after his virtuoso offensive performance was denied, and also left Toronto one victory from its second straight championship.
The Jays won, 15-14, but not before several stunning, game-turning events were packed into 4 hours 14 minutes of sometimes radiant, sometimes rancid, baseball.


Mead Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


8-0 Leafs Triumph in Overtime To Tie Start-of-Season Record
Maple Leafs 4, Panthers 3
The Toronto Maple Leafs last night became the third National Hockey League team to start the season with eight consecutive victories via a 4-3 decision over the expansion Florida Panthers on Rob Pearson's goal 2 minutes 17 seconds into overtime in Miami.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Cyprus Minerals Co., Englewood, Colo., priced $250 million of 6 5/8 percent notes due in 2005 at 99.392 to yield 6.70 percent through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
The nonredeemable notes are rated Baa-2 by Moody's Investors Service and BBB by Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. and are priced to yield about 140 basis points, or hundredths of a percentage point, more than a 10-year Treasury security. *
New York State Energy Research and Development Authority priced $147 million of tax-exempt facilities-refunding-revenue bonds on behalf of Consolidated Edison Co. of New York through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
The bulk of the financing consists of a bond due in 2020 priced to yield about 5.276 percent.
The rest is a bond due in 2022 that is priced to yield 5.375 percent.
The offering is rated Aa-2 by Moody's and AA- by S.&amp; P.


TV Weekend; A Vigilante Mayor for Rome, Wis.
Tonight at 10, CBS's "Picket Fences" returns for a second season and wastes no time showing why it won this year's Emmy Award for best drama.
Initially somewhat flaky, as if hung over from too many rounds of "Twin Peaks," the series has gradually fastened on an astute mix of drama and low-key humor, cleverly draped around one family and a small Wisconsin town named Rome.
This evening's tale, written by David E. Kelley, the show's creator, begins with a murder.
The town's mayor, Bill Pugen (Michael Keenan), is warned by a knife-wielding and obviously unstable carjacker that if arrested, he'd return some day for revenge.
The Mayor puts a bullet in the thug's head, even after the knife is dropped, explaining that "I could tell from the look in his eyes he'd be back, and I have a family."


Making Schools Serve Children
Both Mayor David Dinkins and Rudolph Giuliani have offered wish lists for New York City's public schools.
But most of their proposals skirt the edges of what happens in classrooms.
That's because, under the current system, the mayor has little direct responsibility for schools.
Mr.
Dinkins is at least willing to assume more responsibility.
He wants to appoint a majority of an expanded central Board of Education, giving voters a target for their approval or disapproval of the board's actions.
Mr.
Giuliani, his Republican-Liberal challenger, wants to eliminate the central board and create five borough boards.
That new structure would probably mire the system even more in politics and bureaucratic entanglements.


Review/Film; A Child's Search for a World Where Blood Feuds Vanish
"Flight of the Innocent," an Italian film by Carlo Carlei, is about the desperate attempt of a wide-eyed, remarkably self-sufficient 10-year-old Calabrian boy named Vito (Manuel Colao) to escape his southern Italian heritage.
In an opening sequence, Vito is the terrified witness to the massacre of his entire family by the members of another Calabrian family that wants to cut itself in on the profits of a kidnapping.
It seems that Vito's father and older brothers, made destitute by a social system that ignores them, have turned to crime.
They have kidnapped the son of a rich Roman couple and have been holding the child for ransom.


End the Grim Harvest
The United Nations General Assembly turned its attention this week to the legacy of death from 100 million land mines sown across the globe.
Calling for a report by next year on improving international mine-clearing efforts, for the first time the Assembly formally recognized the need to assist the estimated 62 countries afflicted by this scourge.
Land mines have turned large areas of the world into a permanent no man's land.
Mostly mines lie buried and unmarked, part of a deliberate strategy to terrorize civilians, continuing to kill innocent people long after wars end.


Spectrum's 'Orderly' Session
At its annual meeting of shareholders at the convention center in Pasadena, Calif., Wednesday night, the management of Spectrum Information Technologies Inc. went over a selective menu of business items.
Spectrum, which named John Sculley, former chairman of Apple Computer, as its chief executive on Monday, banned the news media from the meeting and declined to allow shareholders to ask questions at a microphone.
But some shareholders knew to write down questions before the meeting began.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
KANSAS CITY ROYALS -- Named John Mizerock manager of the Rockford Royals of the Midwest League and Mike Jirschele manager of the Wilmington Blue Rocks of the Carolina League.
Midwest League
PEORIA CHIEFS -- Announced the resignation of Scott Krusinski, general manager.
Named Greg Ayers acting general manager.
Basketball  National Basketball Association
ORLANDO MAGIC -- Waived Chris Jent, guard-forward. Hockey  National Hockey League
SAN JOSE SHARKS -- Signed Vlastimil Kroupa, defenseman, to a contract with Kansas City of the International Hockey League.
Colonial Hockey League
UTICA BULLDOGS -- Signed Chris O'Brien, defenseman and John Massoud, forward.
Waived Bruno Umbro, defenseman and Dave Wright, forward.
Soccer  National Professional Soccer League
CHICAGO POWER -- Signed Ed Puskarich, defender; Nick Berbari, midfielder and Danny Yonan, forward.


Can't We Afford a Little Music in Our Lives?
To the Editor:
I went to see the Martha Graham Dance Company last week.
The dancing was superb and this heightened my sadness and distress at having a third-row seat, perched above an empty orchestra pit, listening to the music pumped through a rather tinny sound system at New York's City Center.
The music is an integral part of the dance and I find this state of affairs appalling.
At first I thought my reaction was the embittered response of a musician struggling to make a living in one of the many American orchestras that hover at bankruptcy's gate.
But upon reflection, I think that any educated listener would respond as I did.


It's Tough To Keep Stevens Off the Ice
The Devils are so happy at work these days, they look for any excuse they can to leave home and go to the rink on optional days of practice.
Scott Stevens has the best excuse.
His 30-month-old son, Ryan, keeps begging to go to the rink every day and Stevens, the Devils' captain, is happy to oblige.


Tyson Tells Newspaper He May Settle in Africa
MIKE TYSON, the former world heavyweight champion who has been in prison since last year on a rape conviction, has said he may settle in Africa to escape racism against blacks in the United States.
"Maybe I should consider settling there since America has become an asylum, especially for blacks," he told The Herald newspaper in Harare, Zimbabwe.


Prison for Driver Who Killed 5 Children


Queens Arrests In Kidnapping Include Victim
When officers burst into a hide-out rented by Asian gang members in Queens at 4 A.M.
Wednesday, the police said, they found 12 young men and women and the tools of their trade: three machine guns, a couple of handguns and several shackles attached to the wall.
Several gang members were cooking a meal when the police surprised them, and among them was a kidnapping victim, an officer said.
But the victim has so far refused to implicate his 11 captors, the police say, and he is apparently afraid of what the gang members or their friends might do to his family in China.


Art in Review
Markus Lupertz  Michael Werner Gallery 21 East 67th Street  Manhattan Through Oct. 30
For those who have always been cool to Markus Lupertz's dandyish art, with its ambiguous evocations of Nazi power in some instances and, in others, its ironic borrowings from modernism, the German painter's latest efforts may offer something to warm to.
They depict large heads painted in rich yet subdued tones in a direct, awkward manner that is a welcome departure from the artist's characteristically suave, almost illustrational painting style.


Review/Film; Microcosms: 2 Jewish Retreats
"The Shvitz," Jonathan Berman's rambling documentary history of New York steam baths, is only 50 minutes long.
But so much of the film is devoted to showing pot-bellied, hairy-chested men over 50 waddle around in towels and drip sweat that watching it is not unlike sitting in a steam room too long.
You are likely to leave the film feeling wrung out rather than energized.
The film, the longest part of "New York in Short," a double bill at the Cinema Village exploring Jewish life in New York City, wants to be a jolly celebration of a healthful tradition that Eastern European Jews brought with them to America.
At one time, New York City had more than 200 steam baths, many of them in Brighton Beach in Brooklyn.
"The Shvitz" tours Brighton Beach and the Lower East Side of Manhattan, weaving vintage film and photographs with interviews with longtime patrons of the baths.


Gillette Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Zoo Story: A Q.-and-A. Stroll in Queens
MANY people love the zoo, but no one wants to see a bunch of disaffected animals stuck in tiny, dirty cages clearly wishing they were doing something else, like sprinting across the plains.
I still think with horror about a zoo I visited a couple of years ago whose main features were a wrinkled, one-tusked elephant (he looked for all the world like the elephant who ate something bad and died in the Babar story) and some bedraggled, mangy bison lying in a heap.
But zoos are undergoing a metamorphosis, paying more attention than ever to living conditions and in some cases becoming refuges where almost-extinct species are collected and resuscitated.
In New York City, where the New York Zoological Society/Wildlife Conservation Society tried to banish the word "zoo" early this year in favor of the fancier "wildlife conservation park," the zoological society is pouring money into three of the zoos it operates: in Central Park, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in Queens and Prospect Park in Brooklyn.
The idea is to make them easier on the animals and on anthropomorphically inclined people like me. (The society also operates the Bronx Zoo.)


Revolution in Lawyers' Fees: The Meter Is Being Shut Off
It has been the bedrock of the lawyer-client relationship for decades: the billable hour.
Lawyers have charged for their services by the hour, many with little inhibition about the number of hours accumulated, and clients have paid, often without a second thought.
But now the ground is shifting in response to increased competition among law firms and to diminished revenue among law firms and clients alike.
And that shift, particularly in corporate law, has begun to bury the hourly rate.
Cost-cutting alternative billing schemes are on the rise, and in some cases firms are even being forced to bid for corporate business.


Scientologists Report Assets of $400 Million
The Church of Scientology, the secretive and combative international organization that recently won a decades-long drive for Federal tax exemption, counts assets of about $400 million and appears to take in nearly $300 million a year from counseling fees, book sales, investments and other sources, according to documents filed with the Internal Revenue Service.
The financial disclosures are in documents the church was required to file with the I.R.S. in applying for tax-exempt status, conferred on 30 or more entities of the church on Oct. 10.
The documents, 12 linear feet of them in eight cardboard boxes, formed the basis for the I.R.S.'s decision and became a matter of public record when tax exemption was granted.


Today's TV Listings
The Home Video column and television and radio news, listings and advertising appear today on pages B18-20.


Tear Gas and Chaos as Belts Tighten in France
Two European crises -- unemployment and the airline industry's poor financial condition -- converged today to produce a third day of chaos and violent clashes at the two major Paris airports and on the roads leading to them.
Air France, like other European and American carriers facing increasingly stiff global competition, has been trying for three years to slash costs.


Sports of The Times; The '93 Imperfect Classic
IF Don Larsen pitched a perfect game in the World Series, then the Blue Jays' 15-14 victory Wednesday night was the imperfect game.
But they're equally memorable.
As dominant as right-hander Curt Schilling was in the Phillies' taut victory last night, people will cherish or curse the fourth game of this World Series the way they do the other classic games in Series history.
The word there is "games."


U.S. Drops Test Plan at Bomb Waste Site
The Department of Energy abandoned plans today to put the first plutonium-contaminated bomb waste into underground storage in New Mexico to test the site's suitability.
Instead, it will conduct laboratory tests of the project and seek further Federal review of its environmental merits.
Hazel R. O'Leary, the Secretary of Energy, called the decision "a major break with the last Administration's approach."


On Night After, Schilling and Phillies Stifle Jays
Curt Schilling, saddled with a depleted bullpen and the prospect of an early start on winter, turned off the Toronto Blue Jays' run faucet tonight.
After watching the Blue Jays batter eight of his fellow pitchers for 25 runs in the previous two games, including 15 in a wild and wacky game Wednesday night, Schilling stymied the American League champions on five hits as the Philadelphia Phillies stole a 2-0 victory.


American General reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
There was a distinct Canadian flavor at the Jewish Museum reception Wednesday night, and that was no surprise considering that it was a celebration for a show called "A Coat of Many Colours: Two Centuries of Jewish Life in Canada." Some three dozen Canadians, including former Prime Minister BRIAN MULRONEY and his wife, MILA, were among the more than 100 guests.
The show, a blend of artifacts and videotapes, opened three and a half years ago in Ottawa.
Since then it has toured Canada and been seen in Tel Aviv.
New York is its last stop.


Man Tied to Crime Family Is Shot to Death in Queens
A former union official whom the authorities described as a high-level boss in the Colombo organized-crime family was shot to death Wednesday night by several hooded gunmen in front of his house in Queens as he was returning from dinner with his nephew and future son-in-law.
The murder of Joseph Scopo, 47, signaled a resumption of hostilities in a bloody civil war between factions loyal to Carmine Persico, the imprisoned boss of the family, and Victor J. Orena, who Mr.
Persico named as his temporary successor but who is also in prison.


Burlington Northern reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. Freezes Assets of 41 Haitians
The Clinton Administration stepped up its campaign against Haiti's military leadership today by giving American banks a list of Haitian military and police leaders whose bank accounts, real estate and other assets are to be frozen.
The list includes 41 Haitians who have worked to keep the military in power or have tried to prevent the return of Haiti's President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Plan Opens More Data To Public
In the clearest indication yet of the Clinton Administration's willingness to offer broader public access to Government information, the National Science Foundation is financing a project that will make corporate filings to the Securities and Exchange Commission available free via a computer network.
The decision to support the project, which will provide access to the S.E.C.'s on-line data base of financial data from America's public corporations, is a shift away from the Federal information policies under Presidents Ronald Reagan and George Bush.
Those Administrations favored letting private companies sell printed and electronic versions of Government data.


Dickerson Is Finished
ERIC DICKERSON, the National Football League's second-leading career rusher, has decided to retire.
"I know I'm not going to play again; I mean, that's obvious," Dickerson said from his California home Wednesday night.
"It's still tough to say the word 'retirement,' but I'm a realistic guy. I'm a great believer that everything happens for a reason, and this is something I've been thinking about anyway. My mother's been telling me for years to get out, so now she'll be happy."


Corrections
The caption yesterday with a photograph of Vice President Al Gore and Mayor David N. Dinkins listening to a speech misstated the circumstances.
They were at the installation of the America-Israel Friendship Grove at Flushing Meadows Corona Park in Queens, not a meeting of the Jewish Community Relations Council.
The caption also misidentified Abraham Hecht, the man sitting behind them.
He is president of the Queens Jewish Community Council, not a member of the Jewish Community Relations Council.


Aftershocks of Verdicts Rumble Across the Nation
Far from Los Angeles, the verdict reverberated across the United States today, playing out like a Rorschach test of gaping racial divisions.
On talk shows and in interviews in several cities, many whites saw a judicial breakdown in the trial of two black men charged with beating a white truck driver at the start of the Los Angeles riots.
Some linked it to an outdated and hypocritical national discourse on race that, they said, has turned criminal issues into civil rights ones.


Amoco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Finding a Solitary Pursuit in a Crowded City


Fallon Management Buys Back Agency
After long trying to gain its independence from the WPP Group, Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis said yesterday that its top managers had succeeded in buying back the agency.
"We're more comfortable as owners of a house, rather than renters of a room in the WPP house," said Bill Westbrook, the president and creative director of Fallon.
"It allows us to control our own destiny." He added that serious negotiations began five to six months ago between WPP and Fallon's management, which includes himself; Pat Fallon, the chairman; Irving D. Fish, the chief financial officer, and others.


ITT Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ammunition in Tax-Rebate Scare
With little warning, debate has been rekindled over New Jersey's homestead tax-rebate program -- a touchy subject with one of the most powerful groups in the electorate: the elderly.
Assembly Speaker Garabed (Chuck) Haytaian, a Republican, charged yesterday that the administration of Gov.
Jim Florio, a Democrat, had either manipulated or mismanaged the distribution of this year's rebate checks and touched off what the Speaker described as panic and anger among thousands of elderly people.
The tax rebates are sent annually to homeowners and tenants.


Art in Review
'Ann Hamilton'  'Tropos'  Dia Center for the Arts 548 West 22d Street Chelsea Through June 19
In "Tropos," Ann Hamilton's latest installation-performance work, the artist once more orchestrates several emotionally charged elements in the vicinity of a meaning that remains tantalizingly yet irritatingly vague.
One of the most Minimal and least melodramatic works Ms.
Hamilton has created, it is also one of the most effective, but that doesn't make it problem-free.


Sounds Around Town
Jimmy Scott Returns
Jimmy Scott, the Blue Room at the Supper Club, 240 West 47th Street, Manhattan, (212) 921-1940.
Jimmy Scott's singing career seemed to be off to an auspicious start 45 years ago when he was singing and recording with Lionel Hampton's band.
But he had to wait until he was in his late 60's, after 20 years of virtual retirement, before he found the audience that had slipped through his fingers earlier.
He was lured back to performing in the early 90's by the encouragement of fellow singers like Ruth Brown, who had also gone through a period of rejection after early success.
He made a widely acclaimed debut at the Supper Club last spring, and is back for an engagement through Nov. 20.
His shows are at 8 and 10 P.M. tonight and tomorrow night.
There is a $20 cover charge and a $12 minimum.
JOHN S. WILSON Gently Dueling Guitars
Jim Hall and Peter Bernstein, Tishman Hall at the New School, 66 West 12th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 229-5690.
In the mid-1950's Jim Hall was a member of the Chico Hamilton Quintet, and then the Jimmy Giuffre Three.
Since then he has been associated for varying lengths of time with such distinctive jazz musicians as Sonny Rollins, Art Farmer, Ron Carter and Paul Desmond.
His latest colleague is the guitarist Peter Bernstein, a graduate of the New School Jazz Program, in which Mr.
Hall is a faculty member.
They first played together at a JVC concert a couple of years ago and will be together again tonight at 6 as part of the "Jazz at 6" series.
Tickets are $10 and can bought at the door.
J.
S.
W.
This Voice for Hire
Judy Barnett, Town Hall, 123 West 43d Street, Manhattan; box office: (212) 840-2824 Don't Tell Mama, 343 West 46th Street, Clinton, (212) 757-0788.
After eight years of running her own club, J's, at Broadway and 97th Street, the singer Judy Barnett closed it in June when faced with a stiff increase in rent.
She is now freelancing at other clubs around town.
Tonight she will be doing a doubleheader: appearing early in the evening at the Fourth Annual Cabaret Convention, which the Mabel Mercer Foundation is putting on at at Town Hall, then moving on to Don't Tell Mama for a performance at 10 P.M. with her band (Andy Tuck on piano, Bill Miller on bass, Grisha Alexiev on drums and Marshal Rosenberg on percussion).
Tickets at Town Hall are $10.
She'll be there through Sunday.
The cover charge at Don't Tell Mama is $10 and there is a two-drink minimum.
Reservations are suggested.
J.
S.
W.


Political Memo; Abortion and the Health Plan: Hard Questions in Both Camps
Abortion rights groups are finishing a season of legislative struggle on Capitol Hill that carries some grim omens for their next great battle: the attempt to have abortion services, for rich and poor alike, covered under a national health care plan.
Recent votes in the House and Senate upholding strict curbs on the Federal financing of abortion suggest that the center of political gravity has not shifted as much as many expected after the election of a President sympathetic to the cause of abortion rights.


Can't We Afford a Little Music in Our Lives?; New York Leads
To the Editor:
" 'Art' Is No Luxury" (editorial, Oct. 14) makes short shrift of New York State financing for the arts.


BellSouth Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


It May Be Nafta or Japan, A Clinton Aide Argues
Picking up a theme pursued by the Clinton Administration this week, Roger C. Altman, the Deputy Secretary of the Treasury, warned yesterday that if Congress rejected the North American Free Trade Agreement, a backlash in Mexico might lead the Government there to sign a trade deal with Japan.
"One could readily imagine a backlash if Nafta does not pass," and that could prompt Mexico to negotiate favored-nation agreements with Japan and European countries, Mr.
Altman said in answer to questions after a speech at the Japan Society in New York.


Bishops and Health Care
To the Editor:
It is incorrect that I have spoken for the National Conference of Catholic Bishops against the Administration's health care plan, in its entirety, because it mandates abortion coverage (news article, Oct. 4).
This error is repeated in an Oct. 14 letter.
Neither in the interview with me nor in any public statements have I or anyone else at the conference done so.


New Rules on Satellite Paging
The Federal Communications Commission adopted rules today under which it will license new satellite-delivered paging and message services.
The new rules set the stage for companies to launch fleets of small satellites that circle a few hundred miles over the earth and can relay signals to and from low-powered portable paging devices.
The satellites could also be used to offer positioning information, so people carrying communications devices could instantly determine their own locations in remote regions of the country.


No Headline
"If he does not return, we'll take matters into our own hands. I don't mean on land; I mean the ocean. It's our only way out." -- COLBERT ST.
VIL, building a boat on the Haitian coast, in referring to President Jean-Bertrand Aristide.  [ A1:3. ]


Amoco Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Du Pont Sells Remington Gun Maker
The Remington Arms Company, one of the nation's oldest continuous manufacturers, was sold yesterday by its parent, E. I. du Pont de Nemours &amp; Company, to Clayton, Dubilier &amp; Rice Inc., a New York investment firm.
Terms of the deal were not disclosed, but an industry analyst estimated it at $300 million.


Sponsors Are Skate Issue
The continuing marriage between Olympic sports and corporate sponsorships has led to an awkward relationship in the world of figure skating.
This week's Skate America, the only international skating competition in the United States and an important prelude to the 1994 Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway, is sponsored by Sudafed, the cold relief medicine that contains stimulant properties and is thus contained on the International Olympic Committee's list of banned substances.
Another related development that raised some eyebrows was the unveiling of Korbel Champagne Cellars as a figure-skating sponsor in the United States.
This comes at a time of increased debate about the propriety of supporting athletic endeavors on the flow of alcohol.


Ingersoll-Rand reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Somali Faction Leader Warns U.N. to Disarm Aidid, His Foe
The chief Somali rival to Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid warned today that his faction could be forced to take up arms again if the United Nations did not press ahead in seeking to disarm General Aidid.
Mohammed Ali Mahdi, whose supporters control the northern half of Mogadishu, Somalia's divided capital, also said he and his representatives would not take part in peace talks in which General Aidid himself was present.


The Victory Column Is Empty for Guzman
Juan Guzman had just lost his first World Series game, he had just lost the delicious chance to be remembered as the pitcher who had secured Toronto's second straight championship, but he still burst into a mammoth grin in front of his locker after the game.
Why was this man smiling?
Guzman is a realist.
Curt Schilling pitched a brilliant game, shutting out the imposing Blue Jays one night after they had scored 15 runs.
Guzman pitched an adequate game.
He surrendered one earned run in seven innings.
But Guzman still lost to the Phillies, 2-0, at Veterans Stadium.
He lost to a better pitcher.
He knew it.
He accepted it.


At the Bar; With a chance encounter her only weapon, a judge's wife may have K.O.'d a former champ.
Hiring a lawyer like Alan Dershowitz has its advantages.
The mediagenic Harvard law professor is one of the few lawyers as effective on cathode ray tube as in court.
But one Dershowitz client, the former heavyweight champion Mike Tyson, has learned that sometimes a lawyer can be just too recognizable.
In fact, Mr.
Tyson languishes in jail, Mr.
Dershowitz contends, because an Indiana judge could not control his talkative and star-struck spouse.


Senate Opens Debate on Measure To Increase Grazing Fees in West
The Senate began debate today on compromise legislation that would raise grazing fees on Federal land in the West, but some senators from the region who oppose the plan said they would filibuster the measure.
Their threat to use interminable debate to kill the bill, which would provide money for the Interior Department, deepened the political divisions over the Clinton Administration's policies over public lands.


PRUDENTIAL AGREES TO PAY INVESTORS FOR FRAUD LOSSES
Prudential Securities Inc. agreed today to repay hundreds of thousands of customers for huge losses they suffered because of widespread fraud at the firm for more than a decade.
The agreement is the largest settlement ever involving abuse of individual investors by a brokerage firm.


SEARS, ROEBUCK &amp; CO. (N)
Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company yesterday reported continuing improvement in the profitability of its retailing operations and in Allstate Insurance, in which it has an 80.1 percent stake, during the three months that ended on Sept. 30.
Income from those operations and from Homart, Sears's real estate development subsidiary, was nearly $453.9 million, in contrast to a loss of $992.3 million a year ago when Allstate was reeling from $1.14 billion in losses related to Hurricane Andrew.
Excluding the impact of the hurricane, the recent quarter's earnings from continuing operations were triple those of a year earlier.


Lawrence R. Hafstad Dies at 89; Helped to Develop Nuclear Power
Dr.
Lawrence Randolph Hafstad, a physicist who played an important role in the development of nuclear power plants, died on Oct. 12 at his home in Oldwick, N.J.
He was 89.
He had lived in Washington most of his life.
The cause was a stroke, his family reported.


Dinkins Sees a Double Standard in Campaign Finance Fine
Mayor David N. Dinkins yesterday bitterly condemned a fine imposed on his campaign by the New York City Campaign Finance Board, calling the action unfair and suggesting that the board applied a double standard by not imposing strict sanctions against the campaign of Rudolph W. Giuliani.
But Mr.
Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate, said the Democratic Mayor has made a "farce" out of campaign finance laws.


54 Years of Talent
The next American teen-aged tennis phenomenon, 13-year-old VENUS WILLIAMS, will team up with the evergreen phenom, 41-year-old JIMMY CONNORS, tomorrow night in Baltimore for the First National Bank Tennis Festival.
The event is sponsored by the tennis player PAM SHRIVER to assist children's charities in her hometown.


Watching the Bottom Line, Investors Trim 8.94 Off the Dow
Investors took most of their cues yesterday from reports of third-quarter earnings, creating small ripples throughout the stock market that failed to converge into big waves.
Most of the broad indicators zigzagged through the session in a narrow range, though a sharp drop in bond prices touched off a selloff of blue chips just before the closing bell.


James Leo Herlihy, 66, Novelist Who Wrote 'Midnight Cowboy'
James Leo Herlihy, a playwright and an actor and the author of the novels "All Fall Down" and "Midnight Cowboy," died yesterday at his home in Los Angeles.
He was 66.
He took an overdose of sleeping pills, said Joe Frazier, a friend.


Administration Drops Plan To Merge Justice Agencies
The Clinton Administration reversed itself today and dropped its proposal to try to save money by merging the Drug Enforcement Administration into the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The decision was a significant setback for Vice President Al Gore's plan to trim the Federal bureaucracy.
Plans to merge the two agencies have circulated in Washington for years.
But they were taken seriously this time because Mr.
Gore had made the consolidation a cornerstone of the efficiency program he announced two months ago.


Mayes Retires Again
RUEBEN MAYES's second retirement from the N.F.L. will apparently be his last.
Mayes, 30, announced he was retiring for good Wednesday after Seattle Coach TOM FLORES decided to put him on the Seahawks' injured reserve list. (AP)


Phone Companies in Possible Cable Deal
Southwestern Bell Corporation and U S West, two Bell operating companies hungry for an alliance with a cable operator, are vying to acquire Cablevision Systems Corporation, several executives with knowledge of the talks said yesterday.
Cablevision Systems, which serves 19 states, is based in Woodbury, L.I.
It is the nation's fifth-largest cable concern and has more than 2 million subscribers.


Molitor Even Gets Hits After Games Are Over
Paul Molitor, the sizzling Toronto Blue Jays' designated hitter-turned-infielder, started out on a good note tonight even before stepping to the plate.
That's because Molitor was credited with a double one game after the fact.
A team of official scorers changed the decision from the night before, removing the error charged to Phillies third baseman Dave Hollins and rewarding Molitor with an eighth-inning double on a grounder that took a tricky hop past Hollins


COLLEGE FOOTBALL REPORT
Princeton
The unbeaten Tigers go after their sixth victory, against Harvard in Cambridge, Mass., tomorrow.
Coach Steve Tosches's team has developed several assets other than running back Keith Elias.


Sherrard Listed As Satisfactory
The medical condition of Giants wide receiver Mike Sherrard was good yesterday.
Doctors at the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan, where Sherrard was being treated for a blood clot in his left hip, listed him in satisfactory condition.
Sherrard, who entered the hospital Wednesday night, put things this way: "I'm fine." He expressed hope that efforts to break up the clot would be successful and that he would leave the hospital today.


A New Party in Western Canada Growing on Protest and Populism
Prairie populism, fed by economic disgruntlement, disenchantment with mainline politicians and hostility to power in Ottawa, is energizing a new political party that promises to give the Canadian West a greater say in the way the country is governed.
Attesting to the appeal of the Reform Party in the Oct. 25 elections are poll results, showing it could overtake the New Democrats as this country's third party, with as many as 50 of the 295 seats in the House of Commons.
The party now has only one House member.


Professor Testifies at Menendez Trial on Sexual Abuse


In Hungry Belgrade, a Yen for Peace
In the central square here, Vida Milivojevic took out a knife.
Brandishing it in her right hand as she stood over a 70-pound side of pork propped on a bench, she began hacking the meat into pieces small enough to fit into her bag.
Beside her another bank employee, Vesna Perazic, had just finished tying her flank of pork to the top of her small car.
Her two children, 12 and 10, looked on in dismay.
Across Toplicin Venac square, beside children playing soccer in the dusk, hunks of pink meat lay on benches as people tried to arrange ways to bring them back to their homes.


CSX Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kasparov, Drawing, Wins the Match
Gary Kasparov won his world championship match with Nigel Short yesterday in London by making a draw in Game 20.
He thus reaffirmed his ascendancy in chess, where for the moment he stands alone in his prime.
Kasparov's decisive 12 1/2-to-7 1/2 score in the 24-game series, which started on Sept. 7, earned him a $1.43 million share of the $2.55 million purse. (There has been a recession in the chess world, too. In 1990, after winning the last championship match, he collected $1.7 million, along with a diamond-encrusted trophy.)


Colgate-Palmolive reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Southwestern Bell Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Message From Florida on Nafta


Review/Dance; Bill Jones Troupe, in an Elegy for Departed Friends
The Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company is one of this country's most provocative and interesting modern dance troupes, even when operating at something less than full capability as it did on Wednesday night at the Joyce Theater (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea).
The new dance on this second program of a two-week season was relatively minor.
But the performing was as impressive as ever.
And Mr.
Jones and dancers still provide one of the few occasions when today's modern dance addresses social issues of the time theatrically, and does so with a cathartic passion.
"There Were So Many" takes its name from a haiku-like elegy for departed friends and for blossoms that have fallen from a tree that was concealed in the once-crowded landscape.
Set to John Cage's "Six Melodies for Violin and Keyboard," the new piece, which looked unfinished, managed to suggest a cast of hundreds, all dressed in soft white fatigues designed by Linda Pratt and Jean Claude Mastroianni.
Ranged in lines, at four corners and in converging circles throughout the piece, the 12 dancers moved through their paces like robots trained in Baroque dance.
The look was formal and ornamental.
A few duets flecked the milling landscape like nubbles in woven fabric.


BANKERS TRUST NEW YORK CORP. (N)
The Bankers Trust New York Corporation earned a record $310 million profit in the third quarter as all of its leading lines of business grew and provided more earnings than they did a year earlier.
The profit was equal to a 30 percent return on shareholder equity, a level that is about twice the target set by other banks and similar to recent returns for securities firms.
As Bankers Trust continued to emphasize its securities business, its trading account grew 46 percent, to $43.6 billion, while loans on its balance sheet fell 12 percent, to $15.2 billion.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-10  EUROPE BACKS U.S.
NATO PLAN  Reaffirming NATO's view, European defense chiefs embraced Washington's plans to offer former Soviet republics and East European nations closer ties with NATO but not early membership.
A1  The Czech President criticized associate membership in NATO.
A8


Kuriles Were Ceded To Soviets by Treaty
To the Editor:
You may be remiss in not repeating an explanation of the history of the dispute between Russia and Japan over the Kurile Islands ("Timing (i.e., Wisdom) of Yeltsin's Trip to Tokyo Is Stirring Anxiety," Oct. 11).


Reviews/Film; Drifting With a $20 Bill Among the Human Tides
Endre Bohem wrote his draft of the screenplay for "Twenty Bucks" in 1935, but it wound up on the shelf.
It sat there for nearly 50 years, at which point Mr.
Bohem turned the idea over to Leslie Bohem, his son.
In the early 80's the younger Mr.
Bohem was a bass player for the rock band Sparks, but he was in the market for a career change.
So he picked up the abandoned script and made it the basis for Keva Rosenfeld's first dramatic feature, a charming, offbeat tale shaped whimsically by the hand of fate.
In the process of writing their screenplay, the Bohems provided a prime example of the kind of gentle coincidence that governs their story.
"Twenty Bucks" follows a single $20 bill from birth (at a cash machine) to death (torn, tattered and returned to a bank for shredding).
And it stands by bemusedly as the currency passes from owner to owner.
This conceit has great potential for ponderousness, but Mr.
Rosenfeld (whose previous films have been documentaries) succeeds in reading almost nothing into the money's movements.
It simply drifts through the lives of different people, sometimes pausing long enough to alter their luck.


Sounds Around Town
Swinging a Small Room
Eric Reed, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 473-9700.
Mr.
Reed, a young pianist best known for his role in Wynton Marsalis's band, plays with enormous grace and real swing.
He'll be joined by the bassist Reginald Veal, also from Mr.
Marsalis's band, and the drummer Carl Allen.
It will be a rare chance to hear some of Mr.
Marsalis's bandmates in a different context, a small club.
Shows on Sunday are at 10 P.M., midnight and 2 A.M.
There's a $12 cover and an $8 minimum.
PETER WATROUS Lawyer on the Traps
Pete (La Roca) Sims, Yardbird Suite, 35 Cooper Square, Third Avenue at Sixth Street, East Village, (212) 228-5800.
Mr.
Sims, a furious, interactive drummer, is best known from his recordings on the Blue Note label; he became a lawyer and his jazz activity has been irregular.
He has recently been leading a group that includes the trumpeter Jimmy Owens and the saxophonists Joe Ford and David Sanchez, and they have been drawing the jazz cognoscenti.
Sets on Sunday night are at 9:30, 11 and 12:30.
There's a $10 minimum and a $10 cover.
P.
W.


Irish: Success, Injuries, Questions
From the instant the football left his right hand, Ron Powlus knew what was wrong.
Last Sunday, in his first practice since breaking his right collarbone on Aug. 28, Powlus was throwing in a routine drill, without any contact, when he felt as if his right shoulder was temporarily too far ahead of his body.
The collarbone that had snapped under the weight of two tacklers in a preseason scrimmage had been broken again by the force of a simple 18-yard pass.
The freshman season of Notre Dame's quarterback prodigy, which had maintained a sense of anticipation as intense as his recruitment, was over before it started.


Memorial for James Peck
A memorial tribute to James Peck, union organizer, pacifist and civil rights worker, will be held at 6 P.M.
Saturday at the Friends Meeting House at 15 Rutherford Place in Manhattan.


The Spoken Word
THE REPUBLIC OF VERSE: A MARATHON OF 19th-CENTURY AMERICAN POETRY AND SONG, 92d Street Y, at Lexington Avenue, Poetry Center.
Twenty-three writers will read works by writers of the 19th century and musicians will present songs from the period; those taking part include Harold Bloom, Roy Blount Jr., Cynthia Ozick, Garrison Keillor, Calvin Trillin, William Bolcom, Joan Morris and Oscar Brand.
Sunday, from 1 to 9:30 P.M.
Tickets are $15.
Information: (212) 996-1100.
STAGED READING AND MUSIC, Franklin Furnace, 112 Franklin Street, TriBeCa.
A reading of David Mamet's "Frog Prince," featuring members of the Atlantic Theater Company, and a performance by the composer and pianis William Bolcom and the mezzo-soprano Joan Morris.
Today at 6 P.M.
General admission tickets: $20; reserved seats, $50.
Information: (212) 925-4671.


Big Brother Presumes to Deny Marijuana's Medical Efficacy
To the Editor:
I read of a 79-year-old woman named Mildred Kaitz who was arrested for cultivating marijuana in the backyard of her home in upstate New York (news article, Oct. 11).
She was doing so, she told police, because her 49-year-old son, Barton, is suffering from multiple sclerosis and she has observed that the most effective way to ameliorate the loss of appetite which that disease brings on is through marijuana intoxication.


Chancellor Tries to Resolve Parent Protest
Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines sought without success again yesterday to mediate between parents occupying a Brooklyn elementary school and their local community school board, which wants the parents and students to leave.
Mr.
Cortines visited with the parents holding Public School 156 at 104 Sutter Avenue yesterday morning -- less than 12 hours after his visit to the school Wednesday night.
Later he met with the local board in District 23, which includes Ocean Hill and Brownsville.


SALOMON INC. (N)
Salomon Inc.'s $20 million third-quarter profit, announced yesterday, was lower than expected because of a $173 million pretax loss that its SaloBrothers unit had trading for its own account.
It was the second time in the last three quarters that Salomon, one of the most aggressive trading firms on Wall Street, lost money trading its own account.


Gangs in Sarajevo Spread Terror, Unchecked by the Cowed Leaders
One evening this week, Swiss officials of the International Committee of the Red Cross, driving in a vehicle marked with the organization's distinctive red and white insignia, were followed through Sarajevo's darkened streets by a car carrying two armed men in the uniforms of the Bosnian Army.
Outside the Red Cross's sandbagged headquarters, the gunmen robbed the Swiss representatives of their flak jackets and their two-way radios, then drove off.
As events are measured in Sarajevo, where 12,000 people have been killed in the last 18 months by artillery and sniper fire, the robbery was a minor incident.
But it was part of a growing pattern of robberies, killings and other lawlessness that threatens to overwhelm the shaky structures that pass for a government in this besieged city.
Dozens Killed by Gangs
More and more, the residents of Sarajevo are speaking of the city as a "new Beirut," a place once celebrated for its cultured ways that is descending into chaos.
As in the Lebanese capital, armed gangs have profited from the disorder of war to turn whole neighborhoods into personal fiefs.


Review/Film; Fencing as Metaphor for Honor and the Lack Thereof
"By the Sword" is a half-baked little movie about modern fencing as a sport and a way of life.
F.
Murray Abraham and Eric Roberts star in the film, which was directed by Jeremy Kagan and written by John McDonald and James Donadio.
It opens today at the Loews 34th Street Showplace.
Mr.
Abraham plays Maximilian Suba, a once-ambitious fencing wizard who has spent the last 25 years in prison, atoning for the murder of his mentor during a fencing match.
Mr.
Roberts is Alexander Villard, the murdered man's son.


India Growth
Shares in the India Growth Fund, which invests in the Indian stock market, have risen steadily since May.
Stuart B. Goldberg, an analyst at Merrill Lynch, said investors seemed encouraged by economic changes initiated by the Indian Government.
But he cautioned that funds tied to markets of developing countries can be volatile.


Quaker Oats Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


3 Are Injured In Wild Spree By Students
A violent midafternoon spree by students at feuding Brooklyn high schools spread from a schoolyard to two nearby subway stations and finally to a city bus yesterday, the authorities said.
Three people were injured: a 15-year-old student who was seriously hurt when he was stabbed with a machete, and two other students who were beaten.


The Brothers Gretzky
BRENT GRETZKY couldn't look his brother in the eyes.
"I was too nervous," the Tampa Bay rookie said Wednesday night, describing the first face-off of his pro career against his older brother and nine-time National Hockey League most valuable player, WAYNE.
"The second time I got him with a stick, and the third time, I think he knew what I was going to do," Brent said.
"After that, I was able to look at him."


Make a Left on Andre
ANDRE AGASSI's name will soon be appearing on Las Vegas, Nev., maps.
Clark County commissioners have approved the naming of two streets after Agassi that border the player's southwest Las Vegas enclave: Andre Drive and Agassi Court.
Agassi had requested that the two streets, which run past his four lots, be named Agassi Avenue and Agassi Lane.
But county officials opposed that request because it conflicted with a policy that requires streets be given different names when they are at right angles to each other.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  LAWYERS' VERDICT ON GIULIANI
In picking their next mayor, New Yorkers will choose between an incumbent whose work they have watched closely for four years and a challenger, Rudolph W. Giuliani, whose professional career is far less familiar to most of them.
But one group of New Yorkers undoubtedly knows Mr.
Giuliani best: the lawyers who have seen him work.
A1.


Ukraine to Keep Chernobyl in Operation
The Ukrainian Parliament voted today to continue nuclear energy production at the Chernobyl power plant, reversing its decision of two years ago to shut the power station down by the end of 1993 because of safety concerns.
Chernobyl is the site of the world's worst civilian nuclear disaster in 1986, an explosion that forced the evacuation of tens of thousands of people and contaminated hundreds of square miles.
Estimates of the death toll range from 32, the official figure, to thousands of people who some authorities say may die prematurely.


Nynex Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A.T.&amp;T. and MCI Show Increases in Net Income
The nation's two largest long-distance carriers yesterday reported higher third-quarter earnings and revenues.
But the MCI Communications Corporation, the No. 2 carrier, reported a stronger performance than A.T.&amp; T., and analysts increased their earnings projections for MCI.
The American Telephone and Telegraph Company said quarterly earnings increased 11.4 percent and revenue was up about 3 percent.


Washington Talk; Dole Tries To Rein In President, But Slips
In foreign policy as in domestic policy, Senator Bob Dole of Kansas can play good cop / bad cop with President Clinton.
As a good cop, Mr.
Dole has offered to work with the Administration to overhaul the health care system, and he helped orchestrate a compromise resolution on Somalia last week that averted a collision between the President and Congress.


If You Have a Good Game, They Will Watch, and Stay
If World Series viewers must stay up past midnight, they apparently prefer a competitive game to keep their eyelids from drooping.
The viewing pattern for Game 3 Tuesday night showed a nation falling asleep as Toronto and Philadelphia slow-danced to the Blue Jays' 10-3 victory.


Samuel Lerner, 85, Professor at Brown
Samuel Lerner, a former professor of engineering and director of construction planning for Brown University, died on Wednesday at his home in Providence, R.I.
He was 85.
The cause was complications from cancer, his family said.


Officer Cleared in Main Tailhook Case
The Marine Corps dropped all charges today against a Marine captain who had been charged with sexually molesting the admiral's aide and Navy aviator who first spoke out about the debauchery that occurred at the 1991 Tailhook Association convention.
In essence, the Marine Corps decided that the aide, Lieut.
Paula Coughlin, might have identified the wrong man, and it dismissed the most celebrated case that arose out of the Tailhook affair.


Masur Makes Music With Old Friends
IF it's Friday, this must be New York.
And yes, that's Avery Fisher Hall.
But no, that isn't the New York Philharmonic onstage.
Kurt Masur might be forgiven, these days, for not quite knowing if he's coming or going.
As music director of the Philharmonic, he led the orchestra last December in concerts commemorating its 150th anniversary and took it on an anniversary tour of Europe in the spring.
On April 7, the Philharmonic played in the Gewandhaus in Leipzig, Germany, less than a month after the Gewandhaus Orchestra, of which Mr.
Masur has been music director since 1970, celebrated its 250th birthday.


Yolanda Serrano, 45, Organizer Of Anti-AIDS Needle Exchanges
Yolanda Serrano, the head of a private addiction and AIDS prevention organization in New York City that fought for the distribution of free needles and syringes to prevent infection, died yesterday at St.
Vincent's Hospital and Medical Center.
She was 45.
Her associates said the cause was cancer.


Reassuring Eastern Europe, Christopher Praises Hungary's Reforms
Secretary of State Warren Christopher cast himself in the role of diplomatic booster today, praising Hungary's economic and political reforms in Budapest and signaling his staunch support for President Boris N. Yeltsin of Russia.
In Hungary, Mr.
Christopher's first visit to an Eastern European country in his nine months as Secretary of State, the Secretary sought to assuage Hungarian fears that the United States does not care sufficiently about the problems facing Eastern Europe.


Conner Peripherals Has $372.4 Million Loss
Conner Peripherals Inc., the troubled computer disk drive maker, reported today a third-quarter loss of $372.4 million and said it was laying off 12 percent of its work force.
It said the loss included $330 million in special charges for the layoffs, a restructuring and other items.
Among the charges, $78 million is associated with the layoff of approximately 1,100 employees, 450 of whom have been released in the last two months.
The rest will be laid off over the next several months.


Review/Theater; Family Genetics With a Background of Wagner
"The Twilight of the Golds," Jonathan Tolins's calculatingly topical play, which opened at the Booth Theater last night, would like us to consider a multitude of big questions: eugenics, the true breadth of tolerance among self-defined liberals and the limits of family love.
But the principal moral to be gleaned from it is of a different order altogether: If you're writing a small, facile comic melodrama -- which, in spite of its painfully lofty ambitions, is all this play is at best -- it's definitely not a good idea to drag in Wagner's "Ring" cycle as your central point of reference.
Weighted with this cultural baggage, what might otherwise have seemed merely slight becomes embarrassingly infinitesimal.
And in the wake of similarly themed, more successfully ambitious plays, like "Pterodactyls" (let alone "Angels in America"), it shrinks all the more.


A Candidate's Colleagues Render a Mixed Verdict
In picking their next mayor, New Yorkers will choose between an incumbent, David N. Dinkins, whose work they have watched for four years and a challenger, Rudolph W. Giuliani, whose professional career is far less familiar.
But one group of New Yorkers would seem to know Mr.
Giuliani best: the lawyers who have seen him work for much of the last 20 years.
They saw him develop as a young assistant Federal prosecutor in Manhattan and watched him during his short stints in private practice.
Like everyone else, they remember him most vividly from his years as United States Attorney in Manhattan.


Adventures in Daveland (and Not Just at Night)
SOMETIMES television viewers begin to think of the characters they watch as real people.
Psychologists have a term for this.
The viewer, they say, has entered into a "parasocial relationship" with the figures on the small screen.
The psychologists do not have a term for what has happened to the people who work near the Ed Sullivan Theater on Broadway and 54th Street in Manhattan, the new home of "Late Show With David Letterman."


Blast Prosecutors Making Case, Shard by Shard
A piece of a brake drum, some shreds of burned tire, a hinge with flecks of yellow paint, the twisted wreckage of a wheel, pieces of manifold and an alternator -- these were among the items displayed to the jury yesterday as prosecutors, testing the patience of the judge and risking losing the attention of the jury, continued, slowly and methodically, to build their case against the four men accused of blowing up the World Trade Center last Feb. 26.
The prosecution's theory, outlined in the opening statement of the chief prosecutor, J. Gilmore Childers, when the trial opened three weeks ago, is that the bomb was brought into the underground parking garage of the trade center in a yellow Ford Econoline van that had been rented three days earlier at a New Jersey Ryder rental agency by one of the defendants, Mohammed A. Salameh.


Don't Leap to Conclusions About Genius
To the Editor:
"An Old Idea About Genius Wins New Scientific Support" (Science Times, Oct. 12) reviews fascinating new evidence for the hypothesis that "madness" and genius are associated.
It appears that a disproportionate number of great artists have suffered from various psychological disorders.
Furthermore, exciting new neurological discoveries suggest that the brain activity characteristic of these disorders may well provide the basis for the creative process.
That is, it is proposed that the disorders cause the genius.


Diner's Journal
Culinary Melting Pot
In restaurants, fusion, the melding of more than one cuisine, seems to be the latest style.
Starting Nov. 1, New Yorkers can find it at Shin's, 109 West 56th Street in the Parker Meridien Hotel, (212) 708-7444.
The restaurant's opening, originally scheduled for last week, was delayed to permit last-minute fine-tuning.
Shin offers Japanese food with a Western spin, with dishes like smoked salmon salad with a mint vinaigrette, grilled scallops with Japanese mushrooms and truffles, and a Japanese-style lobster bouillabaisse.
The menu is long and complex.


Missing the Glory
After months of drift, this could have been a time when President Clinton basked in the glory of a national drug strategy that answered the prayers of the country's drug experts.
Instead, he is being hammered from all points of the political compass.
A consensus appeared to be developing on Capitol Hill and elsewhere that after years of failures and frustration, it would be wise to put a lot more effort into drug rehabilitation and anti-drug education, and that is what President Clinton seemed to be promising in the strategy he issued on Wednesday.
But he refused to say whether he was willing to commit money to make it happen.


Bernard Smith, 70, Ex-District Attorney And State Legislator
Bernard C. Smith Sr., a former State Senator and District Attorney for Suffolk County, died on Tuesday at Kingston Hospital in Kingston, N.Y.
He was 70 and lived in Northport, L.I.
The cause was an inoperable brain tumor, his family said.
Mr.
Smith, an outdoorsman and hunter, was vacationing with two of his sons at their summer retreat in the Catskills.


No Settlement, or Deadline, For G.M. and Auto Workers
The delicate labor contract negotiations between the United Automobile Workers union, which is trying to preserve an industrywide pact, and the General Motors Corporation, which is pressing for concessions, have reached a strangely upbeat standoff with no agreement but also no strike deadline.
Both sides have been predicting an imminent settlement for a week.
So far, G.M. has agreed to most of the basic package of wages and benefits in the pattern-setting contract negotiated with the Ford Motor Company last month, Owen F. Bieber, the U.A.W. president, told union leaders today in a closed meeting.
But G.M. is still haggling over two expensive and complex issues: pension benefits and job security funds.





Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "HOLLY NEAR: FIRE IN THE RAIN," Union Square Theater, 100 East 17th Street.
An autobiographical play with music by Holly Near, starring Ms.
Near and co-written and produced by Timothy Near.
Through Sunday.
Performances: today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 7 and 10 P.M.; Sunday at 3 and 7 P.M.
Tickets: $30.
Information; (212) 307-4100.
"OEDIPUS THE KING," Pearl, 125 West 22d Street, Chelsea.
Sophocles' drama, directed by Ted Davis.
Through tomorrow.
Performances: tonight at 8; tomorrow at 5 and 9 P.M.
Tickets: $16 to $20.
Information: (212) 645-7708.
PHOTOS BY RODDY MCDOWALL, Nikon House, 620 Fifth Avenue, at Rockefeller Center.
Celebrity photographs by the actor.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 586-3907.
ALFRED STIEGLITZ, Pace/MacGill, 32 East 57th Street, Manhattan.
Vintage photographs from the collection of Georgia O'Keeffe.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: Today, 9:30 A.M. to 5:30 P.M.; tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 759-7999.
"FOOD FOR THOUGHT," St.
Marks Church, Second Avenue at 10th Street, East Village.
A Dancspace Project presentation.
Through Sunday.
Performances: tonight through Sunday at 8:30 P.M.
Tickets: $10, or $5 with two cans of food.
Information: (212) 674-8194.
ROBERT DOISNEAU, Witkin Gallery, 415 West Broadway, at Prince Street, SoHo.
Photographs.
Closes tomorrow.
Hours: today and tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 925-5510.
Closing Next Weekend  "NEW YORK SCHOOL," Long Fine Art Gallery, 24 West 57th Street, Manhattan.
Drawings and paintings by Motherwell, Francis, Pollock and Frankenthaler.
Through Oct. 30.
Hours: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; closed Sundays and Mondays.
Free.
Information: (212) 397-2001.


Perot Ad to Attack Trade Pact
United We Stand America, the political group of Ross Perot, said today that it had produced a half-hour television commercial criticizing the North American Free Trade Agreement that will be broadcast in large cities on Sunday.
Only one station, in Chicago, has so far agreed to broadcast the advertisement, but negotiations have begun with other stations, the group said.


MCDONALD'S CORP. (N)
The record third-quarter financial performance reported by the McDonald's Corporation yesterday was much stronger than the figures indicated, analysts said.
"A lot of their results are masked by lower currency rates and the effects of the new tax law," said Barry D. Ziegler, an analyst with A. G. Edwards &amp; Sons.
The effective income tax rate for McDonald's increased to 35.7 percent for 1993, compared with 33.8 percent the previous two years.


Cable Rates Have Risen For Many, F.C.C. Says
Preliminary results of a new Federal survey indicate that about one-third of all cable television customers saw their rates rise rather than fall after new pricing regulations went into effect on Sept. 1.
But the Federal Communications Commission, which carried out the survey, said the data were so complicated and confusing that the agency would not be able to figure out the bottom line for consumers until some time next month.


Review/Art; An Expanded Sense Of Pollock's Vision, Rendered in Miniature
Jackson Pollock's greatness is not an unknown quantity, but there are aspects of it that even today, nearly 40 years after his death, can still be dramatically illuminated.
Just such a drama unfolds in a small, stunning show of the artist's paintings on paper at C&amp;M Arts, a gallery that occupies the generous foyer and dining room of the Upper East Side town house belonging to Robert Mnuchin, an art collector turned art dealer.
The 15 works on view were made by Pollock in 1948 and 1949, when he was creating, on canvas, some of his greatest and most influential drip paintings.
The selections at C&amp;M Arts are also drip paintings, and also great, but they are relatively small, executed for the most part on paper measuring no more than 22 by 30 inches.
At first they seem a little overwrought and precious, even miniaturized, like the Pollock equivalent of Faberge eggs, although this analogy may be encouraged by their luxe surroundings.


Janet Reno's Heavy Hand
This week a new film called "The Program" that got so-so reviews -- and so-so attendance -- got an unexpected jolt of publicity.
Because they emulated a scene in which several drunken football players lie in the middle of a busy highway, one teen-ager is dead and two are critically injured.
The kids forgot that "The Program" was only a movie, and as such only a simulacrum.
In real life, people who play chicken with cars court death.
As they did.
Today an expurgated version of "The Program" arrives at the nation's theaters.
The Walt Disney Company, whose subsidiary Touchstone produced the film, has deleted the scene.
The decision is thoughtful, even pious, but it sets a terrible precedent.
Having to worry about attracting an audience is tough enough.
Having to worry that somebody in the audience might confuse shadow with substance and behave accordingly is devastating, because self-censorship is a sure-fire way to smother imagination.


Books of The Times; The (Once and Future?) Kings of the Court Reflect
Rare Air
Michael on Michael
By Michael Jordan
Photographs by Walter Iooss Jr. 112 pages.
Collins Publishers San Francisco.
Hardcover, $50; paperback, $25.
Shaq Attaq!
By Shaquille O'Neal with Jack McCallum
Illustrated. 202 pages. Hyperion. $22.95.
There is a Walter Iooss photograph in Michael Jordan's new book that sums up our collective memory of this dazzling athlete's basketball career.
It is a photo from one of the Chicago Bulls' playoff games against the Knicks last spring, and it shows Jordan elevating toward the basket, over the heads of every other player on the court, propelled toward the rafters of Chicago Stadium and the pantheon of athletic immortals by some magical combination of talent, will and grace.
In the stop action of the shutter, he is caught forever suspended in midair: the man who learned to defy gravity and fly.


Abroad at Home; The Road to Panic
Of all the recent setbacks for American foreign policy, none is as damaging to President Clinton's credibility as the humiliation in Haiti.
Events there raise urgent questions -- for him as for us -- about the quality of the advice he is getting, and of his own leadership.
The excuses offered for failure in Bosnia and Somalia are not available in Haiti.
One cannot say, as is said of American inaction on the Bosnian genocide, that the first responsibility is Europe's.
Mr.
Clinton did not, as in Somalia, inherit an ill-thought-out policy from President Bush.


MOBIL CORP. (N)
The Mobil Corporation said yesterday that its 40 percent rise in third-quarter operating profit was the result of higher international oil production, strong margins in refinery operations, and increased sales of its petroleum products.
These gains, as well as a rise in natural-gas prices and increased oil production in Nigeria, more than offset a $4-a-barrel drop in worldwide crude oil prices, to the lowest level in five years.


Autopsy Tape Gets at Unvarnished Truth
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 17 news article discusses the possibility of some homicide convictions being reversed because of the failure of prosecutors to provide defendants with a copy of the medical examiner's tape recording of the autopsy.
The article highlights a prosecutor's quip that trials are no longer about a search for truth but about a search for paper, referring to the requirement that the defense be furnished with a copy of all police reports and prior statements of witnesses.


Coleman Calls Off Talks Until End of the Season
Derrick Coleman, the Nets' power forward, said yesterday that he was breaking off contract negotiations with the club and would put them off until the end of the season.
Coleman and his attorney, Harold MacDonald, had set a deadline of next Monday to reach agreement on a contract extension to begin next year.
But MacDonald said yesterday that the two sides were too far apart to achieve a deal by then and that Coleman preferred to concentrate on helping the Nets to a winning season.


'Le Nozze di Figaro'
The season's first performance of the New York City Opera production of Mozart's "Nozze di Figaro" is to take place tomorrow afternoon at 1:30 at the New York State Theater at Lincoln Center.
In the cast are Michele Patzakis, singing her first Susanna with the City Opera; Jan Opalach, in his first appearance as Figaro with the company; Eduardo Del Campo and Christine Brewer in their City Opera debuts, as the Count and Countess Almaviva, and Gwendolyn Jones as Cherubino.
Scott Bergeson conducts.
The production is by John Copley.
Tickets are $15 to $60.
Information: (212) 870-5570.


Inside Art
White House Walls
Kaki Hockersmith's choice of art for the White House walls is still a state secret.
And it will continue to be, White House officials say, until the Little Rock decorator has put every last knickknack in place.
Judging from one recent selection, however, it looks as though the paintings will go beyond the traditional and the predictable.
This fall, Ms.
Hockersmith flew to New York City to visit Lisa de Kooning, who showed Ms.
Hockersmith a selection of later works by her father, Willem de Kooning.
The decorator selected a lyrical painting from 1983, "Untitled XXXIX."


QVC NETWORK TRIES TO WIN PARAMOUNT WITH A HOSTILE BID
The fight for Paramount Communications became hostile yesterday, as QVC Network Inc. decided to bypass the Paramount board and take its offer directly to the shareholders.
Furious over the Paramount board's slowness to negotiate a merger through a previous $9.5 billion offer, QVC said it would offer Paramount's stockholders an $80-a-share all-cash deal for 51 percent of the company.
The rest of the company would be purchased with shares of QVC stock.
The overall value of the deal remains $9.5 billion.


Herbert Osborne, 96, Ex-Banking Executive
Herbert J. Osborne, an executive for more than 40 years with the bank that grew into the Manufacturers Hanover Trust Company, died on Wednesday at a nursing home in Mountainside, N.J.
He was 96 and had lived in Summit, N.J., most of his life.
He died of natural causes, his family said.


Weary Get Rest In Phillies Bullpen
The sign that hung in the upper deck of Veterans Stadium, a bastion of sophisticated sports cynicism, said it all:
"Will Pitch Middle Relief for Food."


INSIDE
Bureaucracy 1, Gore 0
The Clinton Administration dropped its proposal to save money by merging the Drug Enforcement Administration into the F.B.I.
Page A12.
Ukraine to Keep Chernobyl
Ukraine's Parliament voted to continue operating the Chernobyl nuclear power plant, site of the worst civilian nuclear disaster.
Page A8.
P.L.O.
Moderate Is Slain
A leading moderate in the Palestine Liberation Organization was slain in Gaza, raising more fears about the pact on Palestinian rule.
Page A3.
Russia Cancels Sea Dumping
Russia suspended plans to dump nuclear waste at sea, but linked the decision to financial help for a nuclear waste-processing plant.
Page A9.


Four Men Wounded in Shooting on a Brooklyn Street Corner
Two men drove up to a street corner in Brooklyn yesterday, slowed their car to a stop and opened fire on four other men standing in the afternoon drizzle, the police said.
It took a moment, as the white station wagon raced away, before stunned bystanders came to the aid of the men, who were seriously wounded, said a police spokesman, Officer Andrew McInnis.


News Flash: McGaughey Loses One
A young filly named Shapely Scrapper not only won the 71st running of the Astarita Stakes at Aqueduct yesterday but also outran one of the prize young fillies trained by Shug McGaughey, and that's becoming a mark of distinction these days.
Last Saturday, McGaughey made history by saddling the winners of five major stakes races on the afternoon of the Breeders' Cup Preview at Belmont Park.
One of his big winners was the 2-year-old filly Heavenly Prize, who won the Frizette Stakes while the undefeated favorite, Strategic Maneuver, was running last.
Strategic Maneuver was troubled by congestion in her lungs, and might not go to Santa Anita for the Breeders' Cup on Nov. 6.
But McGaughey will be there with Heavenly Prize, who was back in the barn yesterday while the trainer was sending out yet another promising filly, Brighter Course, who had finished third and first in her two starts.


Gene Tie to Male Violence Is Studied
Scientists have identified a tiny genetic defect that appears to predispose some men toward aggression, impulsiveness and violence, a discovery that is likely to rekindle the harsh debate over the causes of criminal and abnormal behavior.
Researchers emphasized, however, that the finding was thus far limited to a single large family, and that the inherited illness was likely to be quite rare in the general population.


Prosecutor Appointed In Balkan War Trials
The Security Council today unanimously appointed Venezuela's Attorney General, Ramon Escovar-Salom, as the prosecutor charged with bringing war criminals in the Balkans to justice before the special war crimes tribunal it has already created.
Mr.
Escovar-Salom, who is 67, played a key role in forcing Carlos Andres Perez to resign as President of Venezuela last May in order to stand trial on official corruption charges.


Town Meeting's Agenda: Way of Life
DEMOCRACY materialized here out of a cool dark night this week and presented itself modestly and thoughtfully, unaccompanied by bugles, bunting or patriotic slogans.
It appeared, instead, as just plain folks, who walked in twos and threes into the auditorium of the Pine Island Elementary School in the heart of Orange County's onion fields.
They came to talk about the town they live in, about the quality of their lives here and about what kind of place they would like their town to be.
Some feared the future, some were nostalgic for the past.
But each one had decided that staying home and keeping quiet could be as dangerous as the issues that worry them: unbridled development, higher taxes and the disappearance of small-town life.


Art in Review
Leslie Kamen and Steve Keister
Mitchell Algus Gallery  25 Thompson Street  SoHo  Through Oct. 30
This small gallery on the remote southern edge of SoHo (it's not on the route to anything, except maybe the A train) often has imaginative shows.
Its current exhibition is barely an exhibition at all, consisting of one work each by two artists.
But the pieces have interest of their own and complement each other nicely.


A Skittish Market Sells Off Bonds
The bond market sold off across the board yesterday as traders and investors worried about the possibility of faster economic growth and higher inflation.
But the lesson was not that interest rates are moving sharply higher.
Nor was it that the economic fundamentals of sluggish growth and low inflation, which have underpinned this year's bond rally, have changed significantly.
Rather, it was that the market will continue to be volatile and easily rattled, even by what are normally considered second-tier economic reports.


Burlington Northern reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jays' Hopes Are Trapped By Chance
Trailing by 2-0 in the eighth inning tonight, the Blue Jays finally had a rally going against Phillies right-hander Curt Schilling.
With none out, Willie Canate, pinch-running for Pat Borders after the catcher had singled, hurried to third on Rob Butler's pinch-hit single.
But on Rickey Henderson's grounder to Schilling, Canate was caught in a rundown.
Butler stopped at second.


The Talk of Hollywood; From Target of Reno's Attack, an Uneasy Defense
Attorney General Janet Reno's threat on Wednesday that the Government will take action unless the television industry curbs violent programs has left television and movie executives rushing for cover.
A number of these executives said they were puzzled by Ms.
Reno's warning, which came in the aftermath of several tragedies apparently linked to a movie and a television program.
In one group of incidents, a teen-ager died and several other teen-agers were injured as they imitated a scene in "The Program," a current Walt Disney Company film about football, in which some players lie in the middle of a busy road to prove their toughness.
As soon as the real-life incidents occurred, the Disney Company took the unusual step of saying it would remove the scene from all 1,222 prints of the film and would recall the coming-attractions trailer for the film.


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Prudential Securities agreed to repay about 400,000 customers for huge losses suffered because of fraud at the firm in the 1980's.
The settlement with Federal and state regulators calls for Prudential to pay at least $371 million in restitution and fines and to be liable for future claims by investors.  [ Page A1. ]


More Signs of a Productive U.S.
Contrary to a widely held view that the United States is an industrial has-been whose productivity in manufacturing has been surpassed in some other countries, a new study concludes that for manufacturing as a whole, the United States still holds a significant edge over the presumed world standard-setters, Germany and Japan.
The yearlong study -- by the consulting firm McKinsey &amp; Company, together with three of the nation's top experts on productivity including Robert M. Solow, a Nobel laureate in economics -- combined research into nine industries with a wide array of available statistics.


Classical Music in Review
Robert White  Tenor Juilliard Theater


Correction: Report On Rape in Bosnia
A front-page article and headline on Wednesday reported that a United Nations war crimes commission had found evidence that rape had been used by Serbian forces as a weapon of terror in the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina.
The article said that the commission had examined reports of about 3,000 rapes, in which 800 victims had been identified by name, and that the commission said it was inclined to believe that this evidence showed that rape had been used as a weapon of war.


Woman Is a Finalist For Top N.C.A.A. Job
JUDITH M. SWEET, a past president of the National Collegiate Athletic Association and a strong proponent of gender equity in college athletics, was among four finalists announced yesterday for the job of executive director of the N.C.A.A.
Sweet is athletic director at California-San Diego, a Division III school.


No Headline
You can't live with Yasir Arafat.
You only live in his shadow. -- SOHA TAWIL, his wife.  [ 5:2. ]


Traffic Alert
TODAY  MITCHELL-LAMA STREET FESTIVAL Amsterdam Avenue will be closed between 86th and 96th Streets from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
LOWER SECOND AVENUE FALL FESTIVAL Second Avenue will be closed between 5th and 14th Streets from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
SULLIVAN STREET FALL FESTIVAL Sullivan Street will be closed between Fourth and Houston Streets from 10 A.M. to 7 P.M.
TOMORROW  AUTUMN JUBILEE STREET FESTIVAL Second Avenue will be closed between 14th and 34th Streets from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Buying a Vacant Lot: Permits, Fees and Other Obstacles
After shopping around for a house, Walter and Judy Sweeney, 28 and 27, decided to buy land and build their own home.
With a budget of $64,000, they began looking in areas they could afford.
Mr.
Sweeney, an electrician, and Mrs.
Sweeney, a receptionist, soon discovered that buying land is no simple task.
"We found that there was no single place we could go to get all the information we needed," Mr.
Sweeney said.
Here is a chronology of their land-buying venture, which began in May 1989, when they first spotted their half-acre lot.


Senate Ethics Panel Seeking To View Packwood Diaries
The Senate ethics committee's inquiry into accusations of sexual misconduct by Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon boiled over today into a public feud over whether the panel has an unfettered right to read the Senator's voluminous private diaries.
The Senate Select Committee on Ethics maintains that it does, and disclosed that it has subpoenaed all of Mr.
Packwood's diaries dating to 1989.
The panel asked the full Senate late Thursday for permission to enforce the subpoena in Federal court.


Scott Heiser, Leader And Innovator, 44, In Fashion Pictures
Scott Heiser, a photographer for Interview magazine and Paper magazine who was known for his surrealistic runway fashion shots in the late 1970's, died on Thursday at St.
Luke's Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 44.
The cause was pneumonia, said his mother, Mary G. Heiser.


Student Charged in Attack With Machete in Brooklyn
A teen-ager was arrested last night in the machete attack that seriously injured a John Jay High School student during what the police described as a wild spree Thursday afternoon by a band of attackers from two other Brooklyn high schools.
A Transit Authority Police spokesman, Albert W. O'Leary, said detectives arrested Johan Estrella, 17, of 442 Lorimer Street, Williamsburg, and charged him with attempted murder and criminal possession of a deadly weapon.


Exhibition By Extraction
Instead of being back home at the Carrier Dome, Derrick Coleman was back home recovering from an extracted wisdom tooth tonight as the Nets played the Boston Celtics here in a preseason game.
Without their power forward, the Nets managed to hang with Boston for about a quarter before the Celtics spurted out to a 108-98 victory before a crowd of 10,674, most of whom booed loudly when it was announced that Coleman, a former Syracuse star, was absent.


Tuberculosis Cases Said to Increase More Slowly
The tuberculosis epidemic in New York City among the poor and people with H.I.V. appears to be easing, the city's Health Department said yesterday.
"We have a decline in the rate of increase," said a spokesman for the department, Steven Matthews.
"The numbers are still going up, but they are not going up as fast as they have in recent years."


RESULTS PLUS
BASKETBALL  Barkley and Suns Romp  out as the Phoenix Suns reasserted the National Basketball Association's supremacy with a 145-115 victory over Real Madrid of Spain in the McDonald's Open last night in Munich, Germany.
Barkley led the Suns with 24 points and was able to sit out most of the second half after the game turned into a rout. (AP)
FIGURE SKATING  Harding Takes Lead  Tonya Harding of Portland, Ore., the 22-year-old former United States champion, skated the best technical program of her life last night to take the lead after the preliminariy program at Skate America in Dallas over the reigning world champion, Oksana Bayul of Ukraine.
Harding skated deliberately but cleanly last night, landing a triple Lutz, double-toe combination, a double loop and a double axel.
The four-minute long program will count for 66 percent of the total score.
GOLF  Top Players Fall  Seeded players and par took a beating yesterday in the quarterfinals of the world match play championships in Virginia Water, England.
Corey Pavin scored a 2 and 1 victory over Nick Price of Zimbabwe.
Colin Montgomerie had two eagles on the way to a 6 and 4 upset of Bernhard Langer, and David Frost made a late charge to defeat Ian Woosnam 2 and 1.
Only Nick Faldo was able to win after being granted an opening-day bye. (AP) Clearwater Ahead by a Shot: Keith Clearwater birdied two of the last three holes for a 67 and took a one-shot lead after three rounds of the five-day Las Vegas Invitational.
Clearwater stands at 199, 17 under par. (AP) HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL  St.
Anthony's Wins  Claudel Demosthene and Tony Williams each scored second-half touchdowns to catapult St.
Anthony's of Long Island over St.
Francis Prep of Queens (3-4) by 28-7 at St.
John's University.
The Friars (6-1) rallied from a 7-6 halftime deficit with 22 points, totaling 219 yards and 14 first downs in the second session.
Caban Lifts Union: Marco Caban rushed for 159 yards and 2 touchdowns, in addition to kicking 2 field goals and 2 extra points, to propel Union (5-1) to a 20-12 victory over Elizabeth (4-1) last night before 7,200 in Union.


Sports of The Times; Basketball Isn't the Only Way Out
GEORGE RAVELING is upset.
Southern Cal's basketball coach, along with others in the Black Coaches Association, believes that black basketball players are being discriminated against by the National Collegiate Athletic Association.
Fueling his anger is the drop in men's Division I basketball scholarships from 15 two years ago to 14 last season to 13 this season, the last proposed cutoff.
"Black student-athletes are disproportionately affected by these regulations," Raveling said earlier this week.
"They represent about 64 percent of the players playing Division I basketball. Over a 10-year period, that represents about 3,000 scholarships, lost opportunities for Afro-Americans."


Federated Drops Its Fight; Executive Will Join Macy
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company and Federated Department Stores Inc. yesterday declared an end to their feud over Roger N. Farah, the Federated executive appointed in August by Macy to revitalize its merchandising efforts and lead it out of bankruptcy.
The truce means Mr.
Farah will become Macy's president and chief operating officer on July 1.


Review/Jazz; Making the Repertory Of the Hallowed Past Into Something New
For the most part, the repertory movement in jazz has stayed within fairly limiting boundaries, reproducing as idiomatically as possible the arrangements and styles of bands of the past.
That has suddenly changed.
On Thursday night, the Carnegie Hall Jazz Band, led by the trumpeter Jon Faddis through a group of tunes associated with Benny Goodman, gave notice that arrangements are no longer sacrosanct.
Where other repertory groups might change the emphasis in an interpretation, or open up solo space beyond the constraints of the original three-minute recording of a piece, the Carnegie Hall band radically rewrote the material.
The historical and creative liberty the band took comes not a moment too soon.
It happened during the second half of the show, when the band began to play some Goodman tunes newly arranged by its pianist, Jim McNeely.
It started with "Air Mail Special," then moved into "Stompin' at the Savoy" and "King Porter Stomp." Each of these pieces featured odd touches, and some nice, sly dissonances that seemed to cram too many notes into too small a space; "King Porter Stomp" had two clarinets harmonizing on the melody.


Religion Notes
Choosing Jews
A new survey of Jews in the New York metropolitan area finds that the rate of their marriage outside their faith in recent years is barely halfwhat it is nationwide.


KASHMIR CLASHES KILL AT LEAST 25
At least 25 people were reported killed today as protesters against Indian rule in the Kashmiri capital of Srinagar clashed with heavily armed Indian troops enforcing a total curfew in the area.
Despite the presence of tens of thousands of army and paramilitary forces, sporadic demonstrations erupted throughout the capital and elsewhere in the Kashmir Valley.
In addition to the 25 people killed, 36 were injured by Indian troops, according to hospitals in the capital and reports from outlying towns.


Science Whiz Kis Get New Respect
In a classroom off the main hallway, just past a display case filled with trophies won at quiz bowls, math Olympiads, student "mentathlons" and regional science fairs, the varsity whiz kids of Ward Melville High School are cramming for the Big One.
For three years, they have been preparing for this moment, spending summers in biology labs, working with physicists, rigging computer models and writing papers on topics like "Utilizing Graph Reductions in the Analysis of the Evaluation Semantics of Functional Programs in Micro ML."


Those Rag-Tag Phillies Sport Fancy Leather
PHILADELPHIA, Oct. 22 --
One can never quite figure out just what it is with the Philadelphia Phillies, so it's not unusual that one of the stranger twists of the 1993 World Series is that the National League champions aren't being forced to be defensive about their defense.
In fact, the Series against the Toronto Blue Jays has been devoid of Phillies fielding blunders.
So much so that to this point it's hard to believe this is the same team that often left the field in the playoffs against Atlanta either red-faced or ashen.


Hevesi Takes New Tone on Badillo in Race for Comptroller


Extortion Tied to Lax Supervision
It was conceived as a novel remedy to cure a chronic New York City corruption problem.
Every workday, 2,000 building inspectors would make their rounds dressed in gleaming green uniforms with one item missing -- pockets.
In 1966, exasperated by an unending wave of graft and extortion arrests in his agency, Charles G. Moerdler, who was then the Buildings Commissioner, decided that a drastic symbol was needed to show City Hall's determination to prevent corruption.
Requiring inspectors to don pocketless uniforms, he said, would make them easily recognizable and deter them from accepting bribes to overlook code violations or to expedite the opening of new buildings.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about the installation of Hugo Sonnenschein as president of the University of Chicago misstated the number of Nobel Prizes awarded to members of the university's economics department since 1990.
It is four, not three.


Security Nightmare Wasn't, Until the Saudis Got a Wake-Up Call
It was a soccer security chief's nightmare: thousands of fans hurtling from their seats, leaping fences and jumping onto the playing surface.
The twist was that it had nothing to do with tonight's much-ballyhooed, once-in-a-generation grudge match in which Iraq got the better of Iran, 2-1.
The fans leaping the white fences at Khalifa Stadium were Saudis, and they were beside themselves with joy.


Maurice Dolbier, 81, Book Editor and Writer
Maurice Dolbier, a former book editor of The New York Herald Tribune and The Providence Journal-Bulletin, an actor and the author of children's books, died on Wednesday in Hallworth House, a nursing home in Providence, R.I.
He was 81.
Mr.
Dolbier wrote two novels, six children's books and several plays.
He became literary editor of The Journal in 1951 and a book reviewer at The Tribune in 1956, but returned to The Journal in 1967 after The Tribune and its successor, The World Journal Tribune, closed.


An Arts Center Takes Off Like 40,000 Honey Bees
With painstaking care, an artist has moved 40,000 honey bees from Oakland to the Center for the Arts at Yerba Buena Gardens, a new arts center in San Francisco that seeks to draw people out of their neighborhoods and into the city's center.
For the inaugural exhibition, which opened last week, the bees' hive was lowered the 20 feet from an open skylight to the gallery floor a little bit each day for a month to acclimate the bees to their new location.
The center itself has been more than 25 years in the making, a laborious civic process that has involved five mayors, many financial problems (an early investor, Olympia &amp; York, went bankrupt), several lawsuits and countless discussions among advisory committees in the last decade over what kind of art and performance to show.


Clinton and Congress Discuss 3-Year Test of the Trade Pact
Administration officials and Congressional leaders are discussing whether the United States should enter into the North American Free Trade Agreement experimentally, with a review after three years to determine whether the agreement causes widespread layoffs or lower wages.
If the agreement is approved by Congress, it would gradually eliminate taxes on imports and other barriers to trade between Canada, Mexico and the Untied States.


Attention Shoppers: In Aisle 1, Flu Shots (Supply Is Limited)
Inside the Kroger Supermarket on Delhi Pike here, down Aisle 1 just past a tangle of shopping carts and signs promoting "Double Coupons," between the shelves of baked goods and displays of Cocoa Pebbles and Cheerios, there was a shoppers' special: flu shots.
Several hundred people lined up here today to get their vaccinations and their groceries all at once as part of an effort sponsored by the local chapter of the Visiting Nurses Association, an organization for nurses who provide home care.
The group is sponsoring vaccination programs in 80 cities around the country; the nurses predict they will eventually vaccinate about 800,000 people.


Technology Will Force a Shorter Workweek
To the Editor:
A number of years ago the company I worked for, with 2,000 employees, required 12 people to prepare the weekly payroll.
After computerization, one individual did the job.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.00
2.94
2.90
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
3.03
2.93
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.13
3.13
3.18
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.95
4.89
6.38
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.98
5.91
7.63
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.05
6.98
8.67
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.40
5.38
6.62
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Head of Dockers to Lead Stride Rite
Robert Siegel was perfectly happy in his current position, as president of Dockers U.S.A.
The seven-year-old division of Levi Strauss &amp; Company in San Francisco was enormously successful, with more than $1 billion in revenues.
Yet an offer from the Stride Rite Corporation of Cambridge, Mass., was too good to pass up: a chance to run the company as chairman, president and chief executive, applying all the brand-marketing techniques that made Dockers products a phenomenon in the men's apparel industry as comfortable, stylish casual wear.
He would also gain leadership of a worldwide work force of nearly seven times the 600 people under his command at Dockers.


Treatment of Bulgarian Jews Not Untarnished; Scrolls' Hiding Place
To the Editor:
The letter telling the story of "How the Danes Also Rescued the Torah Scrolls" (Oct. 9) requires correction.
The scrolls were indeed hidden, but not in a "Roman Catholic church across the street." They were hidden in a state Lutheran church -- the Trinity Church -- next to the Round Tower, a block from the Copenhagen Synagogue.
LEO GOLDBERGER  New York, Oct. 9, 1993


A Wise Stand-Down in Somalia
President Clinton was right to order this week's withdrawal of 750 Army Rangers from Somalia, calling off their no-win hunt for a hostile local warlord.
This by no means ends American involvement in a United Nations operation, since 6,300 U.S. troops remain in Somalia, and 3,600 U.S. marines are deployed offshore.
But Mr.
Clinton seems finally to realize that commando raids and the civilian deaths that result from them can't cure what is ailing Somalia.
Taken together, the changed approach suggests that Mr.
Clinton has heeded an aroused Congress and widespread bafflement over a humanitarian mission that by degrees turned into a bloody vendetta.
Washington's new course does not mean Americans reject U.N. peacekeeping, but rather its muddled misapplication.


INSIDE
Packwood's Diaries Sought
A Senate panel investigating accusations of sexual misconduct by Senator Bob Packwood of Oregon subpoenaed his voluminous diaries.
Page 7.
Snag in Senator's Indictment
A grand juror's error has scuttled an indictment against Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison, but a Texas official vowed to seek new charges.
Page 7.
Charges in Tourist's Slaying
Four teen-age boys were charged as adults in the killing of a British man in Florida, and prosecutors may seek the death penalty against two.
Page 7.
Libya Army Revolt Reported
Libya's leader appears to have put down an army revolt against his Government, say Western intelligence reports and opposition leaders.
Page 5.
Europe Stock Markets Surge
Europe's major stock exchanges rose to record levels after Germany cut its key interest rates and other European countries followed.
Page 37.
Verdi Opera in Met Debut
"Stiffelio," a shocker in 1850 with its theme of adultery by a clergyman's wife, has arrived at the Met.
Edward Rothstein's review is on page 11.


Technology Will Force a Shorter Workweek; Now, Get Past Politics
To the Editor:
The U.S.
Senate passed a bill in the early 1930's calling for a four-day workweek to ease the terrible unemployment situation.
The labor committee headed by Senator Robert Wagner endorsed this bill unanimously.
If enacted, the legislation would have added eight million more jobs.
It was fought fiercely by the Republican Party, the Manufacturers Association, conservatives and the usual so called economists who relied on old economic theory.


Parents Agree To Suspend School Sit-In
Exhausted from their five-day protest, the parents who took over an elementary school in Brooklyn won an agreement last night to leave the school for the weekend on the condition that they can resume the occupation of the school on Monday morning.
A lawyer for the city said the agreement was not an acknowledgment of the protesters' right to take over the school, Public School 156 in Brownsville.
Rather, he said, the measure was agreed on by all sides -- the 50 or so parents, School Board 23 and Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines -- primarily out of concern for the safety of the parents and children in the school.


Audrey Triolo, 60, Advocate for the Poor
Audrey Triolo, an advocate for the elderly and poor in the Greenwich, Conn., area who directed a food bank and an organization that developed affordable housing, died on Oct. 14 at her home in Riverside, Conn.
She was 60.
The cause was cancer, her family said.


Radio Host's Reflections On Race, Rap And Rhythm
In entertainment, newer is often considered better.
Not so for Hal Jackson, a veteran New York City disk jockey who has found remarkable success playing what he calls "the dusty oldies" on a show called "Sunday Morning Classics."
Each Sunday Mr.
Jackson travels from his Upper East Side apartment to the cramped studio of WBLS-FM (107.5) in midtown, greets his listeners at 8 A.M. and spends the next eight hours playing a seamless mix of rhythm and blues, jazz, pop, salsa, reggae and gospel.
The very range of the program's music is unusual in this day of narrow radio formats.


Fred C. Shapiro, 62, A Journalist in China
Fred C. Shapiro, a journalist who covered the Chinese Government's suppression of the 1989 anti-Government demonstration at Tiananmen Square for the New Yorker magazine, died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 62.
His wife, Iris, said he had been under treatment for pancreatic cancer.


Kent E. Jones; Administrator and Musician, 34
Kent E. Jones, an administrator at Mount Sinai Medical Center and an oboist who had played with the New Amsterdam Symphony Orchestra and the Colorado Philharmonic Orchestra, died at Mount Sinai on Oct. 15.
He was 34.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said his companion, Peter Rossi.


Failla Won't Be The Irish's Wally Pipp
The players in the gold helmets were yelling as they entered the dressing room in Michigan Stadium more than a month ago.
In the afterglow of a surprising 27-23 victory over Michigan, one that established Notre Dame as a contender for a national championship, Paul Failla began to deal with conflicting emotions.
Failla was part of a celebration, but not a central part.
He had competed for the quarterback position with Kevin McDougal.
He had injured a thumb, and now McDougal had become an essential part of a major victory.
Failla thought of the name Wally Pipp.
Maybe, after all this work, he would be cast in the role of Wally Pipp while McDougal became Lou Gehrig for the rest of the season.
"That was the point when I said, 'Maybe I won't get my chance,' " Failla said.


Hevesi, on Attack, Accuses Badillo of Smears and Lying About Giuliani Aid
Trying to turn the tables in the race for New York City Comptroller, Alan G. Hevesi yesterday went on the attack against Herman Badillo in a new radio commercial and in their first one-on-one debate.
For days, Mr.
Badillo has been running ads that accuse Mr.
Hevesi of taking campaign contributions from school-bus contractors that do business with the city and from school custodians "while city schools are crumbling." But in an hourlong radio debate taped yesterday for broadcast tomorrow at 8 P.M. on WCBS-AM, it was Mr.
Hevesi who went on the offensive, accusing Mr.
Badillo of obfuscation in talking about Mr.
Hevesi and making false claims about who is paying for Mr.
Badillo's ads.


Richter Fails As Rangers Drop Their 3d Straight
So much for anger as a motivating tool.
A day after Coach Mike Keenan cut short his team's practice and broke a hockey stick in rage, the Rangers fell meekly tonight to the Tampa Bay Lightning.
"Well, if some of the players don't like that, ask them why they didn't play well for a gentle man like Roger Neilson," Keenan said about his tantrum after the Rangers lost, 4-1, before 18,667 at the Thunderdome.


Classical Music in Review
American Chamber Opera Company 'Seven Deadly Sins' and 'Mass for the Dead' Fourth Universalist Society  160 Central Park West, at 76th Street Through tomorrow


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Prudential Securities was flooded with telephone calls from customers throughout the country seeking details of the firm's agreement to repay investors who lost money on limited partnerships sold by the firm in the 1980's.
Prudential agreed on Thursday to pay a minimum of $371 million in restitution to investors and fines to regulators for having misrepresented the safety and potential returns of real estate and energy partnerships.  [ Page 37. ]
Lawyers said the most novel aspect of Prudential's settlement was its willingness to let investors file claims no matter how long ago they bought partnership interests.
They said the absence of a statute of limitations may affect future fraud settlements.  [ 37. ]
Macy and Federated Department Stores settled their feud over Roger N. Farah, the Federated executive Macy appointed to revitalize its merchandising and lead it out of bankruptcy.  [ 37. ]
Kroger and other grocery chains and companies are providing customers around the country with flu shots at reduced rates in a program with the Visiting Nurses Association.  [ 1. ]
BankAmerica plans to eliminate up to 3,750 jobs to reduce expenses and lift earnings per share.  [ 39. ]
Computervision said it would cut 40 percent of its work force and it issued a bleak third-quarter earnings report.  [ 39. ]
Robert Siegel, president of the Dockers U.S.A. unit of Levi Strauss, was named chairman of Stride Rite.  [ 39. ] International
The Clinton Administration is discussing with Congressional leaders whether the U.S. should enter into the North American Free Trade Agreement on an experimental basis, with a review after three years to check for layoffs or lower wages.  [ 9. ]
Brazil is being blocked from restructuring a $43.5 billion package of loans because the Dart family, which holds a quarter of the loans, does not like the terms.  [ 37. ]
Volkswagen plans to lay off more than a third of the workers at its troubled Spanish subsidiary SEAT and close a 40-year-old car manufacturing factory in Barcelona.  [ 39. ]
Trade talks between the United States and Japan, begun amid smiles by President Clinton and Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa last July, have bogged down in fundamental disagreements.  [ 45. ]  Markets
Europe's major stock exchanges surged to record levels on investor hopes for economic recovery, one day after Germany's central bank cut two of its most important short-term interest rates and other nations followed with similar reductions.  [ 37. ]
U.S. stocks ended mixed after comments by Alan Greenspan curtailed a morning rally.
The Dow gained 13.14.  [ 38. ]
Bond prices fell on Greenspan's upbeat remarks about the economy.
The Treasury bond yield soared to almost 6 percent.  [ 46. ]
Oil prices sank to four-week lows amid signs of weak gasoline prices and ample oil supplies for the winter.  [ 47. ]
The dollar rose against major currencies as more European nations followed Germany's lead and cut interest rates.  [ 47. ]  Your Money
Picking a mutual fund has gotten more complicated.
As the number of funds has multiplied, so have the publications and services rating the performance of funds.  [ 33. ]
Those inheriting money from retirement plans must follow strict I.R.S. rules to avoid unnecessary taxes and penalties.  [ 33. ]
The tide may have turned for stocks of consumer product companies, especially food and personal-product makers.  [ 33. ]
People who want to adopt a child will need a lawyer to guide them through the complex and varied legal requirements.  [ 34. ]
A Long Island couple found that buying a vacant lot on which to build a house was no simple task.  [ 34. ]


Bridge
Many of New York's leading players gather annually for a social evening with club members at the Harmonie Club, 4 East 60th Street, where good dining and good conversation are considered at least as important as good play.
The expert winners Tuesday evening were Bjorn Fallenius and Kathy Anday of Manhattan, and the member winners were Sue and Arthur Maier of Scarsdale, N.Y.
In the most dramatic deal of the evening, shown in the diagram, several pairs climbed to a slam.
Some tried six clubs from the North position, and thought themselves unlucky when East led a singleton diamond and the defense took an ace and a ruff for down one.


Rail Crossing In L.I. Crash Will Remain
Although long recommended by state officials, there are no plans to eliminate the Long Island Rail Road crossing in New Hyde Park, where a 36-year-old woman died on Thursday when her car, pinned in the crossing by traffic, was struck by a fast-moving train.
The victim, Jeromine Burnadette Prysock of Valley Stream, was trying to edge her car off the tracks when the train, going 70 miles per hour, swept through the crossing at New Hyde Park Road at 8:25 A.M.
The engine of the train hooked the back of her car, which flipped into a telephone pole, the Nassau County police said.


Belichick Gets a Pat
Any doubt about the commitment of ART MODELL, owner of the Cleveland Browns, to BILL BELICHICK as his head coach has been erased.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-6  CLINTON PLANS TO VISIT MOSCOW
President Clinton and President Yeltsin are to meet in Moscow in January as part of an American effort to support him in transforming Russia into a free-market democracy.  1


Classical Music in Review
Barbara Bonney Soprano Weill Recital Hall


Prosecutor to Ask New Indictments Against Texas Senator After Legal Snag
The District Attorney in Austin, Tex., said today that he would seek new indictments against United States Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison after a legal technicality forced him to dismiss indictments handed down by a grand jury last month.
The District Attorney, Ronnie Earle, said he was forced to drop the original charges in the case against Senator Hutchison, as well as indictments in 300 other cases, because lawyers for Mrs.
Hutchison had discovered that 1 of the 12 grand jurors who indicted her last month had an outstanding warrant charging him with writing a bad check for $20.04 to a grocery store five years ago.


Executive Changes
COCA-COLA CO., Atlanta, named Sergio Zyman, its newly appointed chief marketing officer, a senior vice president.
IDEC PHARMACEUTICALS CORP.
San Diego, appointed David Ludvigson senior vice president and chief financial officer.


Observer; Make Your Own Movie
The news has been full of material for making wonderful, old-fashioned movies of the kind they don't make anymore.
For instance:
This is a World War II propaganda movie of the sensitive school.
It feels a little like "The Moon Is Down," with lonely German conquerors wilting for lack of love in an occupied land.


A Fitting Penitence?
To the Editor:
Included in the sentence imposed on Katherine Ann Power for her involvement in the 1970 Boston bank robbery and killing of Officer William A. Schroeder is the prohibition against her profiting financially from the notoriety she has created by the crime, her fugitive years, the decision to turn herself in or imprisonment.


The Broadcast Wars, Continued
It attests to the power of PAC money, ethnic lobbying and closed-door back-scratching that a House-Senate conference committee could not agree on killing a useless boondoggle known as TV Marti.
At a taxpayer cost of $60,000 a day, this Spanish-language station broadcasts news and entertainment to Cuba -- from 3:30 A.M. to 6 A.M., to avoid violating global signal agreements.
Successive reviews have called for closing the station, but the conferees would create yet another advisory panel to determine if TV Marti is technically sound and is actually watched by anybody in Cuba.


Some Consumer Stocks Are Back in the Saddle
STOCKS of consumer product companies turned in some pitiful performances in the first nine months of 1993.
The defining moment for the group was Marlboro Friday, April 2, when Philip Morris announced it would cut the price of Marlboro cigarettes.
The stock plummeted, touching off a rout in tobacco companies and ultimately in a broad group of consumer companies.
The losers included Johnson &amp; Johnson, Procter &amp; Gamble, General Mills and Anheuser-Busch.


WASHINGTON MAYOR SEEKS AID OF GUARD IN COMBATING CRIME
With the number of drug-related slayings in the nation's capital rising, Mayor Sharon Pratt Kelly asked President Clinton today for authority to call up the National Guard to help in policing the city.
The President said he was sympathetic to the problem and would seriously consider the request, which was a stark admission by the Mayor that the city, already one of the most heavily policed in the country, was at a loss to slow the slayings on its own.


Greeks' Heritage Lies in Macedonia
To the Editor:
Your comments on Greece's position vis-a-vis Skopje, under the awkward title "The Prodigal Returns in Greece" (editorial, Oct. 12) fail to recognize that Macedonia in Greece is something more than a mere province -- that is, it is the Macedonia of the Greek kings Philip II and Alexander the Great.


Staying Afloat in a Sea of Information
Picking a mutual fund keeps getting more complicated.
As funds multiply, so do the publications and services rating them.
Investors navigating the sea of stars, arrows and letter grades can quickly lose their bearings.
Say you've decided on a balanced fund and want to check out Pax World.
It rated three upward arrows from Business Week earlier this year -- the magazine's highest accolade.
Sounds good so far.
Kiplinger's gave the same fund an "A" for its performance in down markets, but slapped a distressing "F" on its performance in up markets.


Thomas's Gain Is Opponents' Loss
Gray-haired Foge Fazio cut left, then cut right; just like Thurman Thomas.
"We had him," Fazio, the Jets' 54-year-old linebacker coach, recalled today as he demonstrated the slithery moves of the Bills' star running back during a game last season.


VW to Trim 38% of Jobs In Spain Unit
Volkswagen A.G. announced today that it would lay off 9,000 workers -- about 38 percent of the work force -- at its troubled Spanish subsidiary SEAT, which employs more than 23,500 people in Spain.
SEAT's acting chairman, Peter Walzer, said in Barcelona that VW planned to end car manufacturing at SEAT's 40-year-old Zona Franca factory in Barcelona, which currently employs 13,500 workers.


Fearless Phillies Savor Their Challenge in Toronto
Their backs are against the wall.
There is no tomorrow.
It's do or die.
The Philadelphia Phillies have heard all of the cliches, and they will have none of them.
The Phillies will play the Toronto Blue Jays in Game 6 of the World Series Saturday night, knowing that a loss will end their quest to be the best, but they fear no evil.
Nor the Blue Jays.


Where It All Started Seems Evident, Why Is Still Unclear
The source of yesterday's commuter misery near Times Square was a spot between the downtown local and express tracks on the Eighth Avenue subway line, about 150 feet north of the platform at 42d Street.
It was at that location that about five feet of plastic cable insulation burned, but transit officials said yesterday that they were not yet certain of the cause of the fire, which began with a series of loud pops in front of an approaching southbound C train.
At that location, the third rail that supplies electricity to downtown locals switches from the left side of the tracks to the right.
This is a standard design, to keep the third rail as far from the platform as possible, according to Jared Lebow, a spokesman for the Transit Authority.


Series Ring Would Fit Stewart Perfectly
Dave Stewart knew it would be his last huge contract as a baseball player.
Grab the money, pitch two more years, inflate the bank account and then disappear.
It could have been so simple.
But Stewart did not accept the most lavish offer he received as a free agent last winter.
He reached for the potential ring.
Although at least two teams, including the Yankees, offered him a superior deal to Toronto's two-year, $8.5 million contract, Stewart was not swayed by dollar signs.
He was looking for signs that pointed to playing in late October.


John Bowles, 76, Rexall Executive Who Promoted Voter Registration
John Bowles, a former president of the Rexall Drug Company who introduced the concept of an old-fashioned American drug store to Eastern Europe and who encouraged voter registration in the United States, died on Saturday at Santa Ynes Valley Hospital in Solvang, Calif.
He was 76.
He died of cancer, his family said.


CLINTON WILL VISIT YELTSIN FOR TALKS AT START OF 1994
President Clinton will meet Russia's President, Boris N. Yeltsin, in Moscow in mid-January as part of the Administration's campaign to support Mr.
Yeltsin's struggle to transform his country into a free-market democracy.
The trip, announced today by Secretary of State Warren Christopher at a joint news conference here with Foreign Minister Andrei V. Kozyrev, is also evidently intended to enhance Mr.
Clinton's standing as a statesman and divert the spotlight from the Administration's foreign policy setbacks in Bosnia, Haiti and Somalia.
The Administration would clearly like to focus attention on its support for democratization in Russia, the foreign policy area where the Clinton Administration feels it has been most successful.
Separate Trip for Gore
It was also announced in Washington that Vice President Al Gore will make a separate trip to Moscow, three days after the Russian parliamentary elections, scheduled for Dec. 12.


Corrections
The Sounds Around Town column in Weekend yesterday misstated the performance schedule of the singer Judy Barnett.
She appeared last night at Town Hall in Manhattan as part of the Fourth Annual Cabaret Convention.
She will not perform at Town Hall tonight or on Sunday night.


Greenspan's Comments Trim Advance by Dow
Stocks ended mixed yesterday, after comments around midday by Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, abruptly curtailed what had been an impressive rally.
Much of the session's action seemed to key on developments in the bond market, which rallied early and then sold off sharply once Mr.
Greenspan told an audience at the National Italian-American Foundation in Washington that economic conditions were improving.


CHRONICLE
Job promotions and career switches seem to be in the air.
President Clinton said yesterday that he would appoint GERALDINE FERRARO to be the United States representative to the United Nations Human Rights Commission with the rank of ambassador.


Today's Public Needs to Be Enlightened About Breast-Feeding
To the Editor:
It is a pity that some feminists take a narrow view of breast-feeding as "just another male trick to keep women at home" ("Nursing Becomes a Feminist Battlefield," The Week in Review, Oct. 10).
No doubt this attitude stems partly from the tacit assumption that although breast milk contains a few maternal antibodies, formula is really about the same, is more convenient and obviously is good enough for most growing babies.


COMPANY BRIEFS
WEBSTER FINANCIAL CORP., Waterbury, Conn., is becoming a multibank holding company by merging with Bristol Savings Bank.
BIOCHEM PHARMA INC., Montreal, said its anti-AIDS drug, 3TC, received approval from the Canadian Government for use as a "compassionate" treatment of last resort.


Treatment of Bulgarian Jews Not Untarnished
To the Editor:
Michael Bar-Zohar is certainly right to extol the humanity of Bulgarians during the Holocaust ("Bulgaria, Too, Rescued Jews From Hitler," letter, Oct. 16).
An unlikely alliance of King Boris III, the Eastern Orthodox Church, members of the Fascist establishment and underground Communists and Socialists managed to save the Jews of "Old" Bulgaria from deportations to the death camps.


Corporate Bond Group Carries a Load
Funds with loads, or upfront sales commissions, dominate the corporate bond group.
The highest-ranking no-load fund, Harbor, is 13th on the list of 176 corporate bond funds.
But once adjustments are made for sales charges, returns dip somewhat for the load funds.
Alliance's three-year return drops to 20.5 percent from 21.7 percent because of its 3 percent load.


Investor Group Names Officer
Peter W. Eldredge, a former publisher of Newsweek, has been named executive vice president and publisher of Friday Holdings L.P., a media investment group involved in starting up, acquiring and investing in media properties.
The limited partnership was started in March by Norman Pearlstine, former executive editor of The Wall Street Journal; Paramount Communications; QVC Networks, and Richard Rainwater, a Texas financier.
Its purpose is to explore technologies like electronic newspapers and to acquire traditional media and entertainment businesses.


BankAmerica Is Planning to Eliminate at Least 3,000 Jobs
The BankAmerica Corporation plans to eliminate 3,000 to 3,750 jobs in the next 14 months.
The cuts are necessary to reduce costs to bolster earnings per share, which have been constrained by the recession in California, Richard M. Rosenberg, BankAmerica's chairman and chief executive, wrote in a staff newsletter released on Thursday.


Review/Dance; Southern Expression, in Universal Idiom
Tennessee Dance Theater is proudly regional, specializing in works on Southern themes.
But this Nashville-based modern-dance troupe is far from provincial.
It refuses to wallow in sentimental folksiness.
Its standard of dancing is high and its choreography is rich in inventiveness as well as local color.
On Sunday afternoon at Symphony Space, it offered "Quilts," an ambitious and varied piece by its artistic directors, Donna Rizzo and Andrew Krichels.
Each section of this three-part production could stand alone on a program with other dances; performed together, the episodes complemented one another in style and mood.


KIMBERLY-CLARK CORP. (N)
The Kimberly-Clark Corporation said yesterday that its third-quarter net income fell 17.5 percent, with more than half of the decline attributed to a $13.5 million adjustment for higher Federal income taxes under the 1993 tax law.
The adjustment reduced earnings by 8 cents a share.
Kimberly-Clark, based in Dallas, said lower prices for disposable diapers, higher costs to introduce products in Europe and maintenance shutdown expenses at several pulp mills also hurt earnings.


U.S. Doctor Drops Patient For Criticizing Drug Trial
A patient in a Government drug trial that ended with the deaths of five participants was told by a senior Government doctor that he would no longer be treated because of his public criticism of the trial, officials acknowledged today.
The National Institutes of Health, which conducted the drug test, is investigating the incident, said the acting director of the institutes, Dr.
Ruth Kirchstein.
She said officials intended to apologize to the patient.
"Although I don't know all the circumstances yet, an action like this against a patient is not to be condoned," she said.
"No physician should do that."


Corrections
An article on Thursday about New York's efforts to keep the Yankees in the Bronx misstated Fernando Ferrer's position.
He is the Borough President of the Bronx, not Manhattan.


Review/Film; From Germany, a Long Joy Ride for Three Inept Criminals
German cinema has never been known for the richness and variety of its comic tradition.
That may be why "No More Mr. Nice Guy," an absurdist road film by the German director Detlev Buck, huffs and puffs so hard to produce only a few mild chuckles.
The film, which opened on Wednesday at the Joseph Papp Public Theater, follows the misadventures of Rudi Kipp (Joachim Krol) and his brother, Most (Horst Krause), as they travel across the country in a rickety pickup truck.
The destination of the brothers, who are illiterate and insane (Rudi is picked up by Most in front of a mental hospital from which he has just escaped), is a property in eastern Germany that they have inherited from their grandmother.
When they eventually reach their goal, it is not exactly the lavish estate they had fantasized.


Israel Eases Palestinian Travel Rules
In a gesture intended to bolster the Palestine Liberation Organization, the Israeli Government today eased months-old restrictions that have made it difficult for Palestinians in the occupied territories to enter Israel, Jerusalem in particular.
The action came a day after the Israelis said they would free some Palestinian prisoners next week -- probably several hundred -- as a first step in the eventual release of thousands of Palestinians held on charges ranging from armed violence to civil disobedience against the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip.


METRO DIGEST
2 GET LIFE TERMS IN ATTACK ON TOURIST
Two white men who abducted a black tourist from Brooklyn in Tampa, Fla., and set him on fire as they taunted him with racial epithets received the maximum sentence for attempted murder: life in prison.
Page 8.
NEW YORK CITY
SUBWAY FIRE INJURES 34 PEOPLE
A fire, which the authorities said was caused by an electrical short circuit, filled the subway station beneath one of the city's busiest intersections, Eighth Avenue and 42d Street, with smoke that injured 34 people and trapped 250 passengers on a C train between stations for an hour and a half.
Page 1.
The source of yesterday's commuter misery was a spot between the downtown local and express tracks on the Eighth Avenue subway line, about 150 feet north of the platform at 42d Street.
It was there that about five feet of plastic cable insulation burned, but transit officials were not yet certain of the cause of the fire.
Page 25.
VOTERS WEIGH TRADITION AND FEARS
If he is to win re-election, Mayor Dinkins probably has to fare well on the Upper West Side, whose liberal white voters helped give him his victory four years ago.
But from interviews in the neighborhood it seems far from certain that he will.
Page 1.
Rudolph W. Giuliani had about $1.4 million more in the bank than Mayor Dinkins earlier this week, campaign records show, but the Dinkins campaign said that it would still have enough resources to wage an effective fight in the final week of the mayoral race.
Page 24.
TUBERCULOSIS RATE OF INCREASE SLOWS
The rate of increase in the tuberculosis epidemic in New York City among the poor and people with H.I.V. appears to be easing, the city's Health Department said.
Page 25.
GROPING FOR TACTICS TO END KICKBACKS
With 25 current and former Buildings Department plumbing inspectors and 11 Sanitation Department Enforcement Division agents arrested in the last three weeks on extortion charges, city officials are groping for new tactics to end kickbacks.
Page 27.
REGION
PLEA BARGAINING IS MADE AN ISSUE
After almost 20 years as Nassau County District Attorney, Denis E. Dillon is seeking an unprecedented sixth term.
His opponent, Timothy Calonita, criticizes Mr.
Dillon "for abusing the plea bargaining process." Page 26.
LAWYER SAYS HE HAS WITNESS TO SHOOTING
In a case that has strained relations between the police and black residents of Norwalk, Conn., a lawyer said that he had a witness who saw a police officer shoot a young black man in the head on July 1, and he demanded that a Federal grand jury begin an investigation.
Page 26.
A high school football player from Syosset, L.I., was paralyzed when he was hit by a car while imitating a stunt from the movie "The Program," the boy's doctors said.
Page 26.
Although long recommended by state officials, there are no plans to eliminate the Long Island Rail Road crossing in New Hyde Park where a 36-year-old woman died on Thursday when her car, pinned in the crossing by traffic, was struck by a fast-moving train.
Page 26.
About New York by Michael T. Kaufman 25
Traffic Alert 24


U.N. Aides Warn Haiti It Could Face Total Blockade
As long lines grew today outside the few gas stations that continue to serve customers, United Nations officials warned that unless the country's elected President was allowed to return by Oct. 30 the Security Council would move to make the blockade against Haiti total.
The warning came amid a growing power struggle between the Haitian military and the civilian Government that centered on the nation's gas pumps.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Oct. 4 about Mexico's plans to raise minimum wages misstated the range of the increases planned for next year.
The minimum wage should rise at least 5 percent, not 7 percent, to match the expected rate of inflation in 1994.
There is no Government-imposed ceiling on increases in the minimum wage; they are not limited to 10.8 percent.


Kevorkian, Pushing for Jail, Aids in Suicide in His Home
In what he described as a deliberate attempt to get the authorities to jail him, Dr.
Jack Kevorkian was present at yet another suicide this morning, the 19th at which he has been present since embarking three years ago on a campaign to let doctors legally help severely ill people kill themselves.
Unlike any of the 18 earlier suicides, this one occurred at Dr.
Kevorkian's own home in this Detroit suburb.
That location left no ambiguity as to whether he had played an active role in the death, and gave the county prosecutor here, a bitter foe of his, all the more incentive to try to have him locked up.


Prudential Fraud Accord Has Phones Ringing
Customers throughout the country flooded Prudential Securities and state regulators with anxious telephone calls yesterday as they tried to understand the settlement of sweeping fraud charges by a firm that had aggressively sought to win their trust and their business.
A number of Prudential brokers expressed dismay and some surprise over the depth of the public reaction, as they spent hours trying to explain to clients what the settlement means and how it works.


A Sacrifice Is Honored, And a Struggle Goes On
IT was the songs mostly, the chants and anthems of the civil-rights movement, that altered the moral atmosphere of West 88th Street.
That and the unabashed and proud use of words like "liberal," "idealistic" and even "progressive," which pierced cynicism, if only for a while.
"Freedom, freedom, freedom," sang the students outside the Day School as they took part in an all-day commemoration.
They had gatheredoutside the Manhattan private school to rededicate the building to the memory of Andrew Goodman and to pledge themselves to struggle against social injustice.


Ewing Welcomes Bradley To Town
Anthony Mason played strongly in his first action of the preseason.
Shawn Bradley got a lesson from Patrick Ewing.
And with their 82-79 victory over the Philadelphia 76ers before a crowd of 16,232 at the Nassau Coliseum tonight, the Knicks remained unbeaten in the preseason.
Ewing dominated Bradley, the 76ers' 7-foot-6 rookie center, who was the No. 2 pick in the June draft.
The 76ers signed Bradley to an eight-year contract, anticipating that he would develop into a dominant center.
But it appeared the 76ers may have to wait a few years for a decent return on their $44 million investment.


Whitman, Aboard Bus, Is on Upbeat Roll
Christine Todd Whitman, the Republican candidate for Governor, spent the last leg of her three-day, cross-state bus tour in Ocean County yesterday courting elderly residents for their votes, counseling teen-agers and entertaining a group of kindergarten students with a popular children's story.
"This campaign is about people, about jobs, about the future," Mrs.
Whitman told a group of elderly residents of the Holiday City community in Berkeley Township.


Sam Zolotow, a Theater Reporter For Many Decades, Is Dead at 94
Sam Zolotow, a theater reporter and columnist for The New York Times for many decades whose relentless and exuberant pursuit of drama news made him a legend in the world of Broadway, died on Thursday in the Wadsworth Veterans Administration Hospital in West Los Angeles.
He was 94 and lived in Santa Monica, Calif.
The cause was stomach cancer, said a daughter, Suzanne Berman.


Fallout in Paramount War
Stocks in the two companies fighting to take over Paramount Communications Inc. fell yesterday.
The class A stock of Viacom Inc. fell $1, to close at $59.375, and its class B nonvoting stock fell $1.12, to close at $53.25.
The stock of QVC Network Inc.  dropped $1.50, to $55, but Paramount's stock rose $1.672, to $77.625.


Dillon Seeks a 6th Term in Nassau
After almost 20 years as Nassau County District Attorney, Denis E. Dillon is seeking an unprecedented sixth term, running against a political unknown who until May was a member of his own staff.
Mr.
Dillon, a Republican who used to be a Democrat, brags that under his direction, the county has produced the highest conviction rate in the state.
He is also proud of his success in "removing politics from the District Attorney's Office and replacing it with professionalism."


Edward C. Perry; Financial Adviser, 84
Edward C. Perry, a financial adviser to the Lily Tulip Company and Encyclopedia Britanica, died on Thursday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 84.
The cause was esophageal cancer, said his companion, Adolpho Sardina, who is the fashion designer known as Adolpho.


Yzerman Out for Month
STEVE YZERMAN, the Detroit Red Wings' leading scorer in each of the last seven seasons, will be out for at least a month with a herniated disk, General Manager BRYAN MURRAY said yesterday.
Yzerman, the National Hockey League's fourth-leading scorer last season with 58 goals and 137 points, was injured in a game Thursday night. (AP)


Upper West Side Voters Balance Doubts Against Their Traditions
Hugh Nissenson, 60, a novelist, summed up nicely the dilemma facing his kinetic, involved and hyper-articulate neighborhood on the Upper West Side in this year's mayoral race, even if at one point he had to haul out the word "Weltanschauung."
"This is a very difficult decision," Mr.
Nissenson said.
"I am a lifelong Democrat, a liberal Democrat, and I am instinctively inclined to be with Dinkins, although my feeling is that his competence is limited. I am a Jew -- and it's critical to this -- and I'm unhappy with the way Crown Heights was handled.


AMGEN INC. (NMS)
Earnings at Amgen Inc., a leading biotechnology company, exceeded analysts estimates, lifting its shares from depressed levels reached after first-quarter results appeared to indicate a slowdown in growth.
The third-quarter results, released late on Thursday after the close of the stock market, included a one-time gain of approximately $9.6 million, or 7 cents a share, from changes in the Federal tax laws.
But even without this extraordinary item, earnings would have amounted to 65 cents a share, well above the consensus estimate of 61 cents.


Break for Mayweather
The Army will let MIKE MAYWEATHER, its career leading rusher, out of the rest of his military commitment without charging him for educational expenses at West Point, it was learned yesterday.
Military officials agreed in July to waive the remainder of Mayweather's five-year commitment to the Army if he reimbursed the Government $60,000.
But Mayweather waited until this month, when members of his 1991 West Point graduating class became eligible for early release under the Pentagon's servicewide consolidation program.
By waiting, he avoided the reimbursement requirement.


Arafat's Wife Tries to Coexist, With P.L.O.
Soha Tawil says that long before she met her husband, Yasir Arafat, she was no stranger to Middle East politics.
"My mother was engaged in dialogue with the Israelis 25 years ago, shortly after they invaded Jerusalem," Mrs.
Arafat said.
"I grew up seeing Israelis come and go in our house, so the idea of making peace is not strange to me. I was brought up with the idea that eventually we must coexist."


U.N. LEADER'S VISIT TO SOMALIA IS MET BY ANGRY PROTESTS
Defying warnings from the Clinton Administration and some military officials, the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, visited Somalia today, where word of his arrival prompted the first menacing street protests in more than two weeks.
Traveling without public announcement, Mr.
Boutros-Ghali flew from Nairobi to the Somali town of Baidoa and then on to Mogadishu for a meeting with commanders of the United Nations military operation.
But he never ventured into the city itself, and remained in a secure area of the Mogadishu airport throughout his two-hour stay in the capital.


Corrections
A picture caption in Science Times on Sept. 21 about an excavation of temple ruins in Egypt in the 1920's located an archeologist, Dr.
James H. Breasted, incorrectly.
He was the figure with a cane at the left; the man at the center was unidentified.


Qaddafi Reported to Quash Army Revolt
Col.
Muammar el-Qaddafi appears to have put down a rebellion by army units seeking to topple his Government in the last 10 days, according to Western intelligence reports and Libyan opposition leaders.
Western diplomats in Cairo and others interviewed by phone in London, Rome and Tripoli said that while details were sketchy it appeared that army units staged revolts in other military installations.


Review/Music; In Sacred Space, Hymns And Humor and Yodels
The World Music Institute chose a perfect setting for the Rustavi Choir.
At the Church of St.
Mary the Virgin in Manhattan on Sunday night, the 11-man choir from Georgia, the former Soviet republic, performed without microphones or amplifiers, their voices floating radiantly in the reverberant space.
Wearing long, studded tunics, with daggers at their waists, the Georgians harmonized on work songs, Christian hymns, humorous songs and traditional toasts.
In many songs, two voices converged and separated over a drone note, sometimes in a dulcet parallel third, sometimes veering toward combinations that sound dissonant to Western ears.
The voices could be hushed and ethereal with little vibrato, as in medieval music, or clear and hearty.
Then, suddenly, a downward slide or a yelp or a yodel would make clear that the choir had its own sonic traditions.
There were antiphonal songs, filled with non-Western asymmetry; a comic song, similar to children's songs from elsewhere, had a fast, ever-expanding patter section and vivid animal noises.


Johannesburg Journal; South Africa Sees Future, on Frank TV Program
It is 1995 and the police in the new, democratic South Africa have arrested a suspected terrorist near the scene of a school bombing.
Can they torture him for information about future targets?
With a million television viewers looking in, the scenario is put to Hernus Kriel, President F. W. de Klerk's Minister of Law and Order, who is part of an unrehearsed panel play-acting the country's future.


Coleman Plea-Bargaining And Hoping to Join Angels
Mets outfielder Vince Coleman pleaded not guilty today to a felony charge of possessing an explosive device, but a plea bargain is under negotiation that could expedite his return to baseball, probably with the California Angels.
Coleman, after a Mets-Dodgers game on July 24, dropped what he said he believed to be a firecracker in a Dodger Stadium parking lot, and the subsequent blast injured three bystanders, including the cornea of a 2 1/2-year-old girl.
The Mets later said he would never again play for them.


Some Room to Spend, Mayoral Filings Show
Rudolph W. Giuliani had about $1.4 million more in the bank than Mayor David N. Dinkins earlier this week, campaign records show, but the Dinkins campaign said the figures were misleading and it would still have enough resources to wage an effective fight in the final week of the mayoral race.
According to campaign finance reports filed yesterday, Mr.
Giuliani had $1.6 million on hand as of Monday and was still allowed to spend $1 million on advertising and campaigning before Nov. 2.


Computervision to Cut 40% of Work Force
The financially troubled Computervision Corporation has announced plans to cut 2,000 employees, or more than 40 percent of its 4,500-member work force, over the next 18 months.
The beleaguered maker of software used in industrial automation announced the cutbacks while issuing a bleak third-quarter earnings report late Thursday.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a front-page article yesterday about Rudolph W. Giuliani's legal career misstated the views of Norman Siegel, the director of the New York Civil Liberties Union.
Mr.
Siegel is not backing Mayor David N. Dinkins in the New York City mayoral race; he has not endorsed any candidate.


Q &amp; A
A Widow's Rights Q I recently found out about a Social Security provision under which a widow can collect at age 60 if her husband was collecting benefits, if she is unemployed.
Are the benefits I lost retroactive?
ALICE MURRAY, Manhattan
A A widow is eligible for survivor benefits on the Social Security record of her deceased husband, as long as he was fully insured under Social Security at the time of his death and she was married to him for at least nine months.
This duration-of-marriage requirement is waived if the death was accidental or occurred while the deceased was serving on active duty in the armed forces.


The Tax Angles on Money Inherited from Retirement Plans
Inheriting money from a retirement plan can be tricky.
Whether the money is in an individual retirement account, Keogh or 401(k) plan, the heir must comply with strict rules established by the Internal Revenue Service to avoid unnecessary taxes and penalties.
"It's all very complicated," said Robert Grossman, a former I.R.S. lawyer who practices in Bethesda, Md.


CHRONICLE
KENNETH ROTH, the new executive director of Human Rights Watch, the New York-based organization that monitors human rights practices in more than 50 countries, is facing similarly formidable challenges.
"Where do you begin?" said Mr.
Roth, 38, who was deputy director since 1987 and replaces Aryeh Neier, who became the president of the Open Society Fund Inc., which supports the development of democracy.


H.M.O.'s Satisfy the Vast Majority
To the Editor:
Re "Better Try Not to Get Sick" by Vince Passaro (Op-Ed, Oct. 11):


Complexity of Adoption Calls for Lawyer's Help
ODD as it may seem, this society that professes to hate lawyers has put them squarely in the family-formation business.
In case the lesson was lost on anyone during the custody struggle between the DeBoers of Michigan and the Schmidts of Iowa, an adoption can be complicated.
People who want to adopt a child will need a lawyer.


CHRONICLE
The American Civil Liberties Union has a new legal director, STEPHEN R. SHAPIRO, 42, but he is not new to the organization.
Since 1987, he has been associate legal director, a position in which he led the work of the A.C.L.U. in the Supreme Court.
He replaces John Powell, who has become a professor at the University of Minnesota's law school.
As the A.C.L.U. heads into the next century, Mr.
Shapiro said the other day, "I think there are a host of important issues we will face that we can predict and probably twice as many that we can't predict."


Policing Credit Reports
The term "cyberspace" refers to the computer network that now blankets the globe, through which information moves at the speed of light.
Among the most coveted data in cyberland are the files that credit-reporting companies keep on 170 million people in this country alone.
Banks use them to screen applicants for loans, mortgages and credit cards.
Landlords use them to choose tenants.
Employers use them to turn away job applicants.
Target-marketers salivate for them, because they show what people buy and how they pay for it.


Air Ukraine?
If MICHAEL JORDAN changes his mind about retirement, there's a job waiting for him in Ukraine.


34 Injured by Smoke As Fire in a Subway Disrupts New York
The A train was just pulling into the subway station at 42d Street and Eighth Avenue yesterday morning when John Bundrick heard the first of several sharp pops that brought the morning commute for him and thousands of others to a chaotic stop.
"Then there were flames," he said, "then the smoke."
In the train's last car, Mr.
Bundrick, a security guard on his way to work, and two dozen other passengers rushed out onto a platform somewhere beneath the Port Authority Bus Terminal and into a swirl of sickening gray smoke.
Many of them coughed and gasped, he said, as police officers herded them toward the stairs that carried them to safety and the fresh air outside.


Washburn Rearrested
CHRIS WASHBURN, the former Warriors and Hawks player who was the National Basketball Association's No. 3 draft choice in 1986 from North Carolina State, is in trouble again, this time in his hometown.


Administration Is Fighting Itself On Haiti Policy
The Clinton Administration appears to be at war with itself over policy toward Haiti and the Haitian leader supported by the White House, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
The combatants are the Central Intelligence Agency on one side and the State Department and the National Security Council on the other.
The objective: influencing members of Congress, and through them public opinion and the White House, on the question of whether the United States should place its prestige, and possibly the lives of its soldiers, on the line for Father Aristide.


UNITED TECHNOLOGIES CORP. (N)
The United Technologies Corporation said yesterday that its net income rose nearly 25 percent in the third quarter as a result of double-digit percentage increases at its Pratt &amp; Whitney jet engine, Otis elevator and Carrier air-conditioner units.
But it said earnings of its auto parts operation fell almost 50 percent.
Contributing to Pratt's operating profit of $60 million were lower costs and an increase in orders for highly profitable spare parts.
Otis's operating profit increased to $100 million, from $78 million a year earlier, as a result of improvements in the European, Asian-Pacific and Latin American regions.
Carrier posted an operating profit of $114 million, compared with $82 million, because gains in North America, Asia-Pacific and Latin America more than offset the effects of a recession in Europe.


Air France Employees Continue Strike for Fourth Day


U.S.-Japan Trade Talks Bog Down
Trade negotiations between the United States and Japan, begun in July with smiles by President Clinton and Kiichi Miyazawa, who was Prime Minister then, have bogged down in fundamental disagreements, according to participants in the talks.
The disagreements, which emerged in talks here over the last two weeks, indicate that the framework for further talks will not necessarily serve as the basis of a harmonious new economic relationship .


Darts Clash With Brazil Over Loans
For the past couple of weeks, a high-stakes game of chicken involving one of America's wealthiest families and the Government of Brazil has animated what essentially is the final chapter of the Latin American debt crisis.
The dispute, which has Citibank and several other big banks caught in the middle, centers on a face value of about $1.4 billion in Brazilian loans held by the Dart family of Sarasota, Fla., which owns the Dart Container Corporation, a maker of foam containers and cups.


Review/Opera; New to the Met: Verdi's 'Stiffelio,' From 1850
By the time the audience offered a standing ovation to Placido Domingo on Thursday night at the Metropolitan Opera House, it was clear that the company had succeeded in introducing a significant work into its mainstream repertory.
This work, moreover, which was given a devoted, often lovely performance, is not a slight novelty unearthed to provide variety for a basically curatorial opera house.
It may be rife with flaws, but it is also ripe with melodic invention, vigorous dramatic sequences and inventive ensemble pieces.
And it is by a composer who pretty much defined the grand opera tradition: Giuseppe Verdi.
The opera, "Stiffelio," written between "Luisa Miller" and "Rigoletto," disappeared from the world's stages soon after its 1850 premiere not because it was a musical failure, but because its story about a Protestant minister who discovers his wife's infidelity fell afoul of the Roman Catholic censors.
The libretto by Francesco Maria Piave was so disfigured by attempts to eliminate signs of a married religious leader considering divorce and murder that Verdi cannibalized the music and created a more artificial drama, "Aroldo," out of the pieces.


Europe's Markets at Record Highs
Buoyed by a round of interest rate cuts, Europe's major stock exchanges surged to record levels today because, analysts said, investors bet on improving prospects for economic recovery.
Markets in London, Frankfurt and Paris closed at record highs one day after Germany's central bank cut two of its most important short-term interest rates by half a point each, setting off similar reductions in most other European nations.


Lawyer Says Woman Saw Norwalk Officer Fatally Shoot a Young Black Man
In a case that has strained relations between the police and blacks, a lawyer said today that he has a witness who saw a police officer shoot a young black man in the head on July 1, and he demanded that a Federal grand jury begin an investigation.
From the first, the police have said that the victim, Keith Sumpter, 21, shot himself in the head as he was being taken into custody on charges of stealing two gold chains from a teen-ager.


Islanders' Slow Start Is Giving Them Fits
When the Islanders return to the Nassau Coliseum on Saturday, they will see a rare sight: an opponent with a worse record.
That would be the Ottawa Senators, one of few teams in the National Hockey League which has a record worse than the 1-6 Islanders, who lost again tonight, this time to Philadelphia, 4-3, at the Spectrum.
Eric Lindros scored twice for the Flyers, who won their fourth consecutive game.
The Islanders have lost four in a row.


Limiting the Statute of Limitations
Securities lawyers were abuzz yesterday over the settlement Prudential Securities reached with Federal and state securities regulators on Thursday to compensate hundreds of thousands of investors to whom Prudential sold limited partnership investments in the 1980's.
The size of the settlement, which will cost Prudential $371 million immediately and possibly much more in the long run, was eye-opening, the lawyers said.
So was its scope; never before had Federal regulators and so many states worked in harness on a securities scandal.


4 Florida Teen-Agers Charged in Killing of Tourist
Four teen-age boys were charged as adults today in the September killing of a British tourist at an interstate highway rest stop near here, and prosecutors said they might seek the death penalty against at least two of them.
A grand jury in Monticello, 25 miles east of Tallahassee, indicted the four teen-agers on charges of first-degree murder and attempted murder.
The teen-agers, all of whom live in Monticello, a town of 2,600 residents, are charged with the shooting death of Gary Colley, 34, and the wounding of his girlfriend, Margaret Ann Jagger, 35.
The couple were attacked as they slept in their rental car beside Interstate 10 early on the morning of Sept. 14.  4 Are Silent in Court
The defendants are Cedric Demond Green, 13; Aundra Akins, 14, and Deron Maurice Spear and John Jerome Crumity, both 16.


Robyn P. Asleson, David Des Roches
Robyn Patricia Asleson, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Robert F. Asleson of Bethesda, Md., was married yesterday to Capt.
David Brian Des Roches, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Gary Des Roches of Los Angeles.
The Rev.
Donald Blickhan, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at the Old Post Chapel at Fort Myer, Va.
Mrs.
Des Roches graduated magna cum laude from Yale University, from which she also received master's degrees in art and philosophy and a doctorate in the history of art.
She works in London as a research associate for the Huntington Art Collection of San Marino, Calif.
Her father is the president of the Library Corporation, an information technology company in Inwood, W.Va.


Another of Giants' Backups Is Being Asked to Stand Up
Perhaps more than in any other sport, professional football teams are forced to go to the guys on the bench more than they would normally like to.
Violent collisions can create a constant carousel, and when a guy limps off the field, his replacement at the end of the bench, formerly light years away from the spotlight, is suddenly asked to step in and immediately perform.
Giants wide receiver Mike Sherrard appeared to be on his way to the Pro Bowl when a crushing hip injury last week probably ended his season.
He was the team's leading receiver and was proving to be one of the best talents in the game.
Sherrard was released from the Hospital for Special Surgery in Manhattan yesterday, following a three-night stay after a blood clot had been detected in his injured hip.
Although he has an outside shot of returning by the end of the regular season, for now, he's gone.


Wall Street; Warning Flags Flutter at Spectrum
SOMETIMES a publicly held company provides few clues that things could be amiss, surprising investors when bad news knocks the stock to smithereens.
At other times, however, companies leave red flags waving everywhere you look.
A timely case in point is that of Spectrum Information Technologies, up 29.5 percent to $9.875 in Nasdaq trading last week.


BENEFITS
For Ms.
Foundation  MONDAY -- Gloria Steinem and Marie C. Wilson will be the hosts of the sixth annual comedy benefit for the Ms.
Foundation for Women.
Joy Behar will be the master of ceremonies for the program of four comedians, including Ellen Cleighorn and Suzanne Westenhoefer.
Wine and hors d'oeuvres will be served at the performance, from 6 to 8 P.M. at Caroline's Comedy Club, 1626 Broadway (50th Street).
Tickets, $125, from (212) 353-8580.
Health and Welfare Agencies  MONDAY -- The Federation of Protestant Welfare Agencies will honor Joan Ganz Cooney, a founder of Children's Television Workshop, at its annual fund-raiser.
The evening at the Plaza will begin with cocktails at 7 P.M., followed by dinner and the awards ceremony.
Tickets, $500 or $75 for those 40 and under, from (212) 777-4800, extension 305.


Barbara Nonas, Robert Hunter Jr.
Barbara Nonas, a daughter of Dr.
Gerson Nonas of New York and the late Marjorie Crystal Nonas, was married yesterday to Robert Wallace Hunter Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Hunter of Sarasota, Fla.
The Rev.
Orlanda Brugnola, a Unitarian Universalist minister, officiated at the United Nations Chapel in New York.


Mary L. Clifford, Joseph M. Aronds
Mary Louise Clifford, a daughter of Donald F. Clifford and Louise M. Clifford of Chapel Hill, N.C., was married there yesterday to Joseph Martin Aronds, a son of Beverly J. Aronds of Natanya, Israel, and the late Dr.
Russell H. Aronds.
The Roman Catholic ceremony was performed by the Rev.
J.
Paul Byron at St.
Thomas More Church.
The bride, 31, is a promotion manager at HarperCollins, publishers in New York.
She graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.


Jayne Rosenwald, Robert Myers
Jayne Jefferson Rosenwald, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter B. Rosenwald of Baltimore, was married there last evening to Robert Todd Myers, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Allen Myers of Ardmore, Pa.
Rabbi Murray Saltzman performed the ceremony at the Belvedere Hotel.
Mrs.
Myers, 28, is a membership director for Centex Telemanagement Inc., a telecommunications management firm in New York.
She graduated from Ithaca College.
Her father is a senior vice president and a director of Ferris, Baker Watts, a securities brokerage firm, in Baltimore.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
VIRGIN TIME By Patricia Hampl.
Ballantine, $10.
The author journeys, materially and spiritually, to rediscover her Roman Catholic roots.
On the way, she finds the need in her life not so much for God as for prayer and the capacity for wonder it requires.
"There are wonderful passages in this book, buoyant, full of light," Barbara Grizzuti Harrison said here last year.
THROUGH THE IVORY GATE By Rita Dove.
Vintage Contemporaries, $11.
This first novel by the new Poet Laureate of the United States explores the relationships and memories of Virginia, a young black actress and musician who returns to Akron, Ohio, her hometown, to teach elementary school.
Last year our reviewer, Geoff Ryman, said: "It is a happy book, about the pleasures of living. The author has a talent for sanguine observation." Vintage has also published Ms.
Dove's SELECTED POEMS ($12), which includes three earlier volumes: "The Yellow House on the Corner," "Museum" and "Thomas and Beulah," which won a Pulitzer Prize in 1987.
One critic said, "Her poems exhibit the thrift that Yeats called the sign of a perfected manner."


Corrections
A report in the Egos &amp; Ids column last Sunday about Anne Bass misstated her role in the John Galliano fashion show in Paris.
She did not help pay to stage it.
The show's other backer, along with Sao Schlumberger, was Dodie Rosekrans.


IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: A Genteel Conspiracy Theory; Is It Just Possible That Ford Wants to Beat G.M.?
TO hear normally buttoned-up auto industry analysts sound like conspiracy buffs surveying the grassy knoll, ask them this: Is the Ford Motor Company quietly trying to overtake the hobbled General Motors Corporation and become the No. 1 automaker in the United States?
Odd that the question should have to be asked.
In other industries, companies like Pepsi, Avis, Apple and United make no bones about their eagerness to knock off the big guy.
But one of the peculiar aspects of relations among the Big Three automakers is that they are publicly quite genteel.
Perhaps because they focus their hostility on the Japanese, no one here talks much about crushing the domestic competition and becoming No. 1.


Airline Seats: Not Always First Come First Served
WHO gets the good seats in the coach section of an airplane?
The answer is as fraught with hierarchy as Byzantium.
When the travel agent opens the computer record for your coach flight, seeking to get you into an aisle seat close to the front exit, the diagram may show that that seat and other aisle seats back quite a way have been designated for frequent-flier members with high mileages or those who pay the full coach price.
Whatever the terminology, the computer may "rope off" choice seats for passengers who travel the airline often or reserve at the last minute and thus at a high price.
USAir, which still has an old-fashioned policy of first come first served, says it, too, should be holding out good seats for late-booking business travelers, and it is preparing to shift over.
"It makes a lot of sense," said J. Daniel Brock, USAir's vice president for marketing and services.
"We've got to have a system that saves good seats for those travelers who pay $600 for a last-minute ticket. Those seats cannot all go to a leisure traveler who paid $200."


Couch Potatoes, Indeed
To the Editor:
Dr.
Uriel S. Barzel's ideas about taxing obesity ("Health: Make Couch Potatoes Pay More," Viewpoints, Oct. 10) is surely just tongue-in-cheek opinion and not serious food-in-cheek science.
Certainly a physician understands that "the overconsumption of rich food and the under-expenditure of energy" are the means by which people grow fat, not the cause of obesity.
When last I looked, the cause was still unknown, clearly evidenced by the lack of cure.


Sports Wouldn't Be the Same Without the View from a Blimp
"BLIMP, I like that shot. Hold it." It is a command that Sandy Grossman, the lead CBS sports director, often makes as he selects shots to be broadcast during National Football League games.
The command is made to a camera technician who is situated in the blimp's gondola some 1,000 feet above the stadium.
Blimps are a common sight in the skies above New Jersey and much of the rest of the country, and their presence at all manner of sporting events is only expected to increase.


Late Princeton Rally Preserves Perfect Mark
Two big fourth-quarter touchdowns, one a 54-yard run by Keith Elias, gave Princeton a 21-10 victory today over a stubborn Harvard team before a crowd of 19,710 at Harvard Stadium.
The triumph was the sixth straight for the undefeated Tigers, who were led by Elias, their star tailback.
He gained 201 yards rushing on 33 carries.


Neighborhood Report: South Bronx; A School of Dreams: Building Community Leaders
Two years ago, a group of people in Hunts Point looked at the poverty, drugs and violence plaguing their neighborhood and decided they had to do something.
They decided to build a school.
Not just any school, but an elite institution that would focus on ethics and politics as well as on Hunts Point itself, molding students into potential civic leaders.


Oh, Brother, 2 Hat Tricks but Still a Tie
Pierre Turgeon's linemate scored a three-goal hat trick for the Islanders tonight.
Pierre Turgeon's brother did the same thing for the Ottawa Senators.
Those performances -- by Derek King and by Sylvain Turgeon -- accounted for the majority of the scoring in a 5-5 tie that left the Senators with something to celebrate and the Islanders with more frustration.


VOTING IN CANADA CAN AFFECT NAFTA
If the Liberal Party leader, Jean Chretien, becomes Canada's Prime Minister, as is expected in general elections on Monday, the Clinton Administration could face new problems over the North American Free Trade Agreement as a vote nears on the pact in the American Congress.
In 1988 elections, the Liberals, under John Turner, vowed to tear up an earlier free-trade accord with the United States.
Under Mr.
Chretien, 59, a shrewd, folksy, pragmatic Quebecer who held high office in earlier Liberal Governments, the position on the broader accord with the United States and Mexico is more moderate.


Dawn Pascucci, Terrill Barnard
Dawn Pascucci, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael Pascucci of Locust Valley, L.I., was married yesterday to Terrill Evans Barnard, a son of Mrs.
Richard Barnard of Clarkston, Mich., and the late Mr.
Barnard.
The Rev.
Allan B. Ramirez, a Dutch Reform minister, and Msgr.
Thomas Hartman, a Roman Catholic priest, jointly officiated at the Brookville (L.I.) Reform Church.
Mrs.
Barnard, a graduate of Boston University, teaches computer and reading at the Henry Viscardi School for handicapped children in Albertson, L.I.
Her father is the chairman of the Oxford Resources Corporation, an automobile financing company in Melville, L.I., and of WLIG, a cable television station in Riverhead, L.I.


THE WORLD: Following a Tough Act; Bhutto Gets Another Chance to Get It Right
BENAZIR BHUTTO, a gauzy veil draped over her hair in a gesture to Islamic modesty, smiled slightly last week when the speaker of Pakistan's Parliament announced that she had won a majority of votes to regain the prime ministership she lost three years ago, when she became the first woman to lead an Islamic nation.
It was a moment of victory for Ms.
Bhutto.
She had prevailed over her political nemesis, Nawaz Sharif, the man who succeeded her and who she said had conspired with the country's powerful army and President to oust her from office.
Moreover, she had regained the power that she feels is rightfully hers, not only by popular acclaim but by birth as well.
Far less clear, however, is what her victory means for Pakistan.


A Father's Dream, a Son's Nightmare
WHEN B. Ray Thompson, a former coal miner, arrived here in 1941, he was so poor he could barely keep his two sons in shoes that fit.
But by the late 1970's, he was one of the richest men in Tennessee, having built and sold one of the nation's largest coal mining companies.
Before he died six years ago, he asked the hospital where his second wife had died of cancer to help build a cancer center rivaling Sloan-Kettering and others like it.
It would make the world's best care and experimental treatments affordable to people of modest means.
Mr.
Thompson and his family committed $100 million to build it and finance a charitable foundation to help sustain it.


Sultry Songs and Jazz At New Haven's Shubert
THE musical week gets off to a lively start at 2 o'clock today as Mel Torme, Cleo Laine and John Dankworth convene at the Shubert in New Haven for an afternoon of "sultry songs and classical jazz." The box office opens at 11 today.
The phone number is 624-1825.
Three performances are offered at 3 today: the Newtown Friends of Music present Christopher Taylor, a pianist and a Van Cliburn competition medalist, playing Bach, Beethoven and Chopin in Edmond Town Hall (426-6470).


From Back Door To Inner Sanctum In the House of Art
For years the one sure response to photography was "But is it art?" Now "But is it photography?" is more likely.
Photographs that masquerade as art, acting as grand and self-assured as paintings, or leading a piecemeal, hybrid existence in paintings or sculpture or installations, are right in the center of things, and gallery walls fairly teem with them.
This story of photography's incorporation and metamorphosis into art amplifies a recurrent theme of this century: a marginal form -- welded metal, factory-made artifacts, rhythm and blues -- shifts into prominence, even predominance.
"Photographic: Works of the 60's and 70's," at the Zabriskie Gallery through Saturday, assembles examples of the many ways photography has progressed through the halls of art and into its living quarters.
A couple of museum shows have presented the subject more comprehensively -- "Photographic" has only about three dozen objects -- and some have been more generous to photographers than this show, which deals mainly with artists who experimented with cameras.
But several of the pieces here are quite satisfying and instructive, and the show touches enough bases to suggest that when photography took up residence in art's inner sanctum, the look of things shifted in just about every direction at once.


An Old Georgian Story: Dancing With the Devil
OF all the former republics of the Soviet Union, none has fallen farther faster than Georgia.
Since it declared independence in May 1989, the country has suffered one calamity after another -- a coup d'etat, a war of secession, a flood of refugees, a shredding of the economy, and now a civil war that could literally break the country in half.
It was not so long ago that this nation of 5.5 million people enjoyed a reputation for living as good a life as could be had under Soviet Communism.
From the peaks of the Caucasus Mountains to the lush Black Sea coast, Georgia was toasted as the Italy of the East.
The food was rich and spicy, the wine was plentiful, the hospitality overwhelming.


Neighborhood Report: Long Island City/Woodside; Area May Get First Nursing Home
Woodside, which lies in a Congressional district with one of the nation's highest concentrations of elderly people, has no nursing homes.
That could change soon; a developer with plans to build a 280-bed home on a vacant lot on Queens Boulevard between 61st and 63d Streets has cleared all but two hurdles.
"There's nothing like this in our community for seniors," said Joseph Conley, the chairman of Community Board 2.


Freedom Is Restored to the Capitol


Ladling Out a Little Hope to the Hopeless
"MAYBE we'll see Mary today," says Fran O'Leary, peering through a window of a 33-foot Winnebago motor home at a South Bronx moonscape.
"Mary's probably in detox," says Fran Davis.
This is a ritualistic coping joke.
Mary is more likely dead in an alley, like Carmen and Muffin, than getting clean in a treatment program, but social workers need hope to get through their days as much as their clients do.


A Designer's Date With Anne Klein
NAME: Richard Tyler.
IDENTITY: Fashion designer, 45, with two labels.
With Lisa Trafficante, his wife, he owns the Tyler Trafficante boutique in Los Angeles.


At End of Their Rope


Who Can Explain It? Who Can Tell You Why?
SIMPLE PASSION By Annie Ernaux.
Translated by Tanya Leslie. 64 pp.
New York: Four Walls Eight Windows. $15.


Humans Are the Dinosaurs in 'Pterodactyls'
Maybe it's time to start taking the playwright Nicky Silver seriously.
Up to now, his bizarrely titled works -- "Fat Men in Skirts," "Free Will and Wanton Lust," "My Marriage to Ernest Borgnine" -- have been characterized by their outrageousness, a lunatic humor, sexual confusions, violence and an eagerness, bordering on the sophomoric, to flout taboos.


All Alone at the Pinnacle Of a Chess Generation
Twenty-one years ago, there was Bobby Fischer in his prime.
Now there is Gary Kasparov.
The Russian dominates the present generation just as the American did his.
So all criticism of Nigel Short's performance in their world championship match is beside the point: Kasparov is too strong for any of his rivals.
The story is told that when Boris Spassky, Fischer's defeated opponent in the title match of 1972, was summoned before officials of the Soviet Chess Federation and asked why he lost, he replied, "Because he is the greatest player I have ever played." The story continues that he turned and walked out without ever having taken his coat off.
There was nothing more to say.


3 Men Arrested In Firebombing That Injured 2
Fingerprints on two gasoline bombs led the police to three arrests in the burning of a Brooklyn man and his 3-year-old nephew in July, a police spokesman said yesterday.
The victims were innocent bystanders in a drug turf war, he said.
The suspects, arrested at 11 P.M. on Friday in Brooklyn, were identified as Aaron Jones, 27, of 214 Maujer Street; Kevin Sands, 22, of 220 Stagg Walk, and Robert Deleon, 17, of 25 Hope Street, said Detective Joseph McConville, a spokesman for the New York City Police Department.


INSIDE
Peacekeeping, Japan Style
The United Nations is wondering whether the Japanese are prepared for the sacrifices of peacekeeping because of their desire "to make it like home" in their compound.
Page 8.
Canada Vote and Trade Pact
If the Liberal Party leader becomes Canada's Prime Minister, the United States could face new problems over the free trade pact.
Page 9.
Potato Fungus Spreading
Scientists say variants of the fungus that caused the Irish potato blight of the 1840's are spreading throughout the world.
Page 22.
Counterrevolution on Taxes
The tax revolt has come full circle on the West Coast, with several states trying to make up for revenue they lost in earlier tax rollbacks.
Page 14.
U.S. to Aid Russia's Vote
The United States offered technical help to try to insure that Russia's parliamentary elections in December are free and fair.
Page 12.


We Are What We Make
THE FOURTH DISCONTINUITY The Co-Evolution of Humans and Machines.
By Bruce Mazlish.
Illustrated. 272 pp.
New Haven: Yale University Press. $30.
METAMAN The Merging of Humans and Machines Into a Global Superorganism.
By Gregory Stock.
Illustrated. 365 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.


Technology; In TV's, the World May Soon Be Flat
ENGINEERS have long dreamed of building large televisions that would be thin enough to hang on a wall, thereby transforming the living room into the equivalent of a home movie theater.
Now, the first models of such televisions are beginning to appear -- though only for people with thick walls and even thicker wallets.
This month, the Matsushita Electric Industrial Company began selling a 14-inch television that is 3.9 inches thick, less than a third the thickness of a conventional television with the same size screen.
Next month, Fujitsu General will begin selling a 21-inch television that is only 2.4 inches thick.


A Rogues' Gallery of Artists and Esthetes
THE Stettheimer sisters Florine, Ettie and Carrie -- lived in Manhattan with their mother at 182 West 55th Street.
Ettie wrote novels and Carrie took 20 years to make a doll's house -- ornamented with miniature versions of works by artists like William Zorach, Alexander Archipenko and Gaston Lachaise -- that is now in the Museum of the City of New York.
Florine, the painter, achieved fame with her sets for Virgil Thomson's "Four Saints in Three Acts" and, thanks to Marcel Duchamp, a posthumous show at the Museum of Modern Art in 1946 (she died in 1944).


Special Today: 50 Years Of Fashion: Magazine, Section 6
In a democratic explosion, fashion has rolled its pipe racks into the mass consciousness as never before.
During the past 50 years, as seen in Fashions of The Times, both corsets and attitudes have loosened.
A special issue of the Magazine charts fashion's move from elite to street.


Give Him an Extra Year, He'll Kill Your Bowl Plans
He wasn't even supposed to be here.
He already has his degree in sociology.
And after Boston College's Darnell Campbell scored three touchdowns in Alumni Stadium this afternoon, Army probably wished he hadn't stuck around.
Led by Campbell, the Eagles improved their record to 4-2 by defeating Army, 41-14.
The Cadets dropped to 4-3, and the loss knocked them out of contention for the Liberty Bowl.


Two Ivy Teams That Are 1,000 Yards From First Place
You almost needed to be a math major yesterday afternoon to keep up with the yardage being piled up as Yale and Columbia traded drive after long drive.
By the time the game was over, the two occupants of the Ivy League cellar had combined for nearly 1,000 yards of offense.
Yale ended up with more yards, and more important, more points, holding on for a 35-28 victory in front of the 5,350 fans at Baker Field in Wien Stadium on a fall afternoon that seemed to be made especially for college football.


Books From The Times
SOLVING AMERICA'S HEALTH-CARE CRISIS: A Guide to Understanding the Greatest Threat to Your Family's Economic Security.
By the staff of The New York Times.
Edited by Erik Eckholm. (Times Books/Random House, paper, $10.) It wasn't just yesterday that health care in this country became an agonizing concern.
Three years ago, The New York Times undertook to look at the subject in special breadth and depth; this collection of 50 articles from The Times written since then, and updated as necessary, represents the fruits of that effort, examining such areas of consequence as insurance, ethics, economics, the experience of other countries and the politics of reform.
President Clinton's proposals, as laid out in his televised address of Sept. 22, are also reprinted, followed by seven articles analyzing the proposals and estimating their consequences.


U.S. Offers Help to Russians to Insure the Elections Are Fair
As part of its campaign to support President Boris N. Yeltsin in his efforts to change Russia, the United States offered technical help today to try to insure that parliamentary elections in December are free and fair.
"Our efforts -- if we are asked -- would focus on the nuts and bolts of free elections, from voter education to poll-watching," Secretary of State Warren Christopher said in a speech to the Academy of the National Economy.


New Fungus Blight Is Threatening Potato Crops Around the World
Scientists say variants of the fungus that caused the Irish potato blight of the 1840's are spreading throughout the world, threatening a crop that is a staple in many countries.
Agricultural experts are calling for an international research effort to thwart the new fungal variants, which are well-established throughout Europe and into Russia, as well as in Mexico and South American countries including Ecuador, Brazil and Argentina.
Infestations are also being reported in potato-growing regions of the United States, Canada, Africa, Japan and Korea, the experts said this week.


Black Business Owners Endorse Giuliani, Who Stresses Unity
In a concerted appeal to black and Hispanic voters yesterday, Rudolph W. Giuliani toured Brooklyn field offices in Bushwick and Sunset Park, picked up an endorsement from black business owners and repeatedly called on voters to unite around shared problems like crime and the economy.
In contrast to recent days, when he sharply attacked Mayor David N. Dinkins, Mr.
Giuliani spoke yesterday about inclusion, bipartisanship and racial healing.


Debate on Race And Adoptions Is Being Reborn
The day David L. Dunbar and Barbara Peck decided to adopt a child, race was the last thing on their minds.
All they knew was that they, a young, white couple, had fallen in love with a baby the color of butterscotch -- the child of a mixed-race mother, and possibly, black father.
And they wanted to take him home.
More than a year later, sitting in their living room on the Upper West Side, Mr.
Dunbar, a writer, looked at his son, Evan, and for a moment, contemplated race.
He thought about what other whites might one day think of his child, and what his child might one day think of him.
"You know when kids get into adolescence and they're ashamed of their parents?" he said.
"I wonder if Evan will ever be embarrassed by us because we're white? I wonder."


Tackless Strips Help to Carpet Stairs
CARPETING a straight staircase is not too difficult.
The method shown here uses tackless strips as fasteners instead of old-fashioned stair rods, which prevent stretching carpet tightly, and allows shifting carpeting to expose fresh material as wear develops.
Avoid using slippery carpet for covering stairs.
Also, leave stairs uncovered or cover them with nonskid rubber pads if they are to be used by the aged or handicapped.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
SCIENCE  BLACK HOLES AND BABY UNIVERSES  And Other Essays.
By Stephen Hawking.
Bantam, $21.95.


Blending Pop and the Classics in a Magazine for Students
EVERY month during the school year, 35-year-old Cathy Cassinos-Carr, who likes pop and rock, and 73-year-old Milton M. Friedman, who favors the classics, blend their talents as editors of a music education magazine for readers in grades 5 through 12 called Music Alive!
The magazine, published by the Cherry Lane Music Company in Port Chester, is sold by subscription -- $175 a year -- for use in classrooms and choral and instrument classes.


Fashionable Words
At the pentagon, the vogue word is win-win, the strategy of being able to fight two nonnuclear wars at the same time.
This supplanted the "win-hold-win" strategy, designed to hold one war on a back burner until the other war is won, then to win the first one.
These locutions are based on the "no win" derogation of strategy of a generation ago, which in turn was antedated by a slick "no lose" bet by gamblers.
In academe, the vogue word is daunting.
A professor may be intimidated, cowed, appalled or even spooked by the lengthy work of a colleague (which is what a co-worker is always called), but the only term to use this year is the present participle of daunt (rooted in the Latin for "tame"), as in "The subtext is daunting." (Sighted subtext; sank same.)


Health Reform and the Lawyers
To the Editor:
Harlan R. Ribnik, in "Health Reform? How About Lawyers?" (Viewpoints, Sept. 26), asked why lawyers aren't being asked to donate their services to the poor.
Dr.
Ribnik will be glad to know that lawyers are in fact being asked to do just that, and are responding in large numbers.


Ronald Lauder, Leader Of Term-Limit Band
Four years ago, Ronald S. Lauder stumbled through an improbable campaign for the Republican nomination for mayor of New York City.
A political neophyte and an heir to his family's cosmetics fortune, he spent an unheard-of $14 million out of his own pocket, only to be disdained by the political establishment and routed by Rudolph W. Giuliani.
Now, after largely vanishing from the arena of city politics, he has returned as a major figure in this year's elections.
He has mounted a campaign that has shaken the foundations of the city's political establishment.
Only this time, he's not a candidate, but rather the leader of another improbable effort: a referendum that would limit the city's elected officials to two four-year terms in office and could help pave the way for another run at elected office, if he chooses.


Crimes, Lies and Prudential
To the Editor:
I read with interest the excellent "Crimes, Lies and Prudential-Bache" (Oct. 10), but you only scratched the surface.


The Man Who Loved Chekhov
FIMA By Amos Oz.
Translated by Nicholas de Lange. 322 pp.
New York: A Helen and Kurt Wolff Book/ Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $22.95.


Staten Island Vote: Dilemma for Albany
With Staten Islanders expected to approve a referendum calling for secession from New York City, officials in Albany are growing worried about the choice they may face: permitting the dismemberment of New York City or rescinding the right of self-determination that they seemed to grant four years ago.
Metro Report, page 29.


Advice Is Cheap, Even Free
Wondering how to recycle motor oil may not keep you up at night, but when it comes time to do it, you may need guidance.
The New York City Department of Consumer Affairs prints how-to information, much of it free, on topics ranging from mattress buying to safer use of ceramic ware.


For Bowlers, A Field Of Dreams
LAWN BOWLING, that offbeat cousin of boccie and a distant, disdainful relative of regular lane bowling, attracts a small but devoted following to a Central Park court, where fine attire and genteel good sportsmanship prevail.
Next Sunday more than two dozen bowlers are expected to compete in the New York Lawn Bowling Club's Die Hard tournament at the Central Park Greene.
"We call it die hard because the weather is usually terrible this time of year," said Joe Gioco, the club's president.
"This year is the latest it has been in a long time."


On Sunday; Zen Quest: Serenity In Sing Sing
WITH the quarter-century burst of nostalgia under way about the 1960's and the tarnished idealism and even jail time of its middle-class protagonists, it is proper to salute Kobutsu Kevin Malone this morning on the quiet, yea silent occasion of his ordination to the priesthood of Buddhism.
Finally, the Malone family has a priest after all its hopes for young Kevin's parochial school years saw him cycle out into the personal searchings of the 60's, in which, among other things, he sampled the Rinzai Zen sect.
He never abandoned its simple but laborious discipline across a checkerboard of survival in a dozen different pursuits.
It took him 25 years to become a priest.
Others have done it in five years, but that only leaves him prouder this morning as he is ordained at the age of 43.


Dancing in Style
Seventh Avenue and Broadway join to raise money to fight AIDS: New York State Theater, Lincoln Center, Oct. 18.


Hotel Discounts In Hawaii
Hit by tight times in the United States and Japan and by competition from other tropical destinations, Hawaii's visitor count is expected to drop 4.8 percent this year compared with last, according to the Hawaii Visitors Bureau.
Hotels are responding with discounts and packages to lure travelers.
Sheraton has extended to Dec. 27 its Suresaver rates, with discounts of up to 31 percent at seven hotels.
For example, a $330 ocean view room at the Royal Hawaiian would be $249; a $170 ocean view room at the Sheraton Princess Kaiulani would go for $119.
Also valid through December are Sheraton's Suresaver Vacations, packages ranging from the five-night First Timer in Waikiki for $599 a person, double occupancy, to the two-night $739 Luxury in Paradise at the Hotel Hana Maui, also per person, double occupancy.


Turning Beans Into an Innovation
BEANS are no longer just a food to be cooked with a ham hock and served on a cold day.
Innovative chefs are preparing them in all kinds of interesting ways, making them into creamy purees to go with meat or fish, topping them with green vegetables or even serving them on crostini -- grilled country bread -- as a snack, as the Italians do.
Carol Field, in her excellent new book, "Italy in Small Bites" (William Morrow), gives a recipe for dried fava beans, which are pureed and mixed with wild greens.
The nutty flavor of the favas makes a splendid foil for the bitterness of the greens.
If you can't find wild greens, broccoli rape, escarole, frisee or chicory can be substituted.
The puree is also good spread on grilled, lightly oiled bread and topped with steamed or sauteed greens (winter's answer to summer's tomato bruschetta).


Russian Diva


SURFACING
SERVICE -- The 8 1/2-minute massage: You keep your clothes on.
You pay $7.95.
The Great American Backrub, at 958 Third Avenue (near 57th Street), offers a "quickie" version of stress reduction.


Avedon: Another Angle
To the Editor:
Richard Avedon has spent the last 40-plus years trying to get across to his audience that what counts in a photograph is what is visible in a photograph.
How long must we wait for people to look at his photographs closely and write about what they see?


OCT. 17-23: Nuclear Dumping; A Secret Russian Mission Exposed on Japanese TV
Whenever the Russians seem on the verge of getting along with the Japanese -- or at least extracting some serious aid from them -- things seem to sour at the last minute.
For a while it was President Boris N. Yeltsin's cancellations of trips to Japan that offended Tokyo.
Earlier this month he arrived, pledging good will and an end to Russia's practice of dumping nuclear waste into the Sea of Japan.
Only he forgot to tell the Russian Navy.


'Why Do I Feel So Ashamed?'
TAKE THE LONG WAY HOME Memoirs of a Survivor.
By Susan Gordon Lydon. 324 pp.
New York: HarperSanFrancisco. $22.


With Bulbs, No Time to Dawdle
Lose no time in patting your plants.
Still looking for good deals on good bulbs?
A few readers have reminded me of two suppliers that combine high quality with reasonable cost: Van Engelen, Stillbrook Farm, 313 Maple Street, Litchfield, Conn. 06759, and Dutch Gardens, P.O.
Box 200, Adelphia, N.J. 07710.
It's getting late to plant, though, except for tulips, which can be put in the ground until it freezes.
Pot some bulbs for forcing spring bloom in winter.
Depending on the bulb, figure on 10 to 12 weeks at 40 degrees to allow for root development.


POSTINGS: Under One Roof at Last;
Construction has been finished on the new $1.5 million, almost 10,000-square-foot home of the Flushing, Queens, branch of the Y.W.C.A.
The building at 42-07 Parsons Boulevard, the first new building for the Y.W.C.A. of the City of New York since 1917, includes a large multipurpose room, a rooftop playground, two day-care rooms, classrooms, a computer room, a kitchen and several offices.
Until now, the Flushing Y.W.C.A. operated out of several community centers, churches and other available spaces.
"We are thrilled that we can finally offer our programs all under one roof," said Vivian Manning Fox, executive director of the city Y.W.C.A.
"We can expand and implement programming to meet the community's demands and interests."


'May We Help You?': Downstairs at the Majestic
DOWN in the bowels of the Majestic apartment house, Allan Sorensen recalls his days at sea as a merchant mariner, when he savored the interior hum from machinery and passing ocean that signaled all was well aboard his ship.
"The Majestic is exactly like a ship," says Mr.
Sorensen, the resident manager of the grand, double-towered building of 254 apartments, which is too complex to have someone termed a mere old-fashioned apartment superintendent at the helm as it cruises in place through urban time and tide on Central Park West at 72d Street.


Not in Praise of Dogs: They Should Be Banned
To the Editor:
In your Oct. 17 article "My Dog, My Self" you should not have praised dogs.
The city streets are a mine field of dog poop and urine.
When I see a dog doing it on the sidewalk, I shout at the owner, "Curb that dog!" Most don't care and shout back at me to mind my own business.
Or just smile.
Isn't it everyone's business to keep the sidewalks clean?
If owners can't control their dogs, they should not be allowed to own them.
Ban the dogs!
JOSEPH J. MARINELLO  Manhattan


Corrections
A listing of cruises on Oct. 10 referred incorrectly or incompletely to several trips.
Descriptions of two Caribbean cruises of the Seabourn Pride included outdated itineraries and dates supplied by the Seabourn Cruise Line.
The ship will offer a 16-night voyage from Fort Lauderdale to Manaus on Feb. 3 and a 16-night voyage from Manaus to Fort Lauderdale on Feb. 19 (not a 7-night sailing from Aruba on Jan. 30 or a 7-night sailing from Barbados on Feb. 6).
The fares for each voyage range from $13,085 to $22,845, including air fare and a one-night hotel stay.


Other Normandy
To the Editor: While somewhat informative, the article on Normandy on Sept. 5 was disappointing.
It ignored the lovely paysage normand.
If the author had traveled just several kilometers inland, she would have discovered "the foreign, the quaint, the remote," that is to say Normandy with its beautiful apple orchards, charming villages with their half-timbered houses and flower boxes and historic churches and chateaus.


In America; The Things They Could Have Said
Think of the opportunity that David Dinkins and Rudolph Giuliani had.
Imagine how they could have campaigned, the things they could have talked about.
They could have described a vision of New York that would have placed a sense of hope in the path of our growing feelings of alienation and dread.
They could have tempered the fears of many residents that New York is in a state of irreversible decline.


Airline Seats: Not Always First Come First Served
WHO gets the good seats in the coach section of an airplane?
The answer is as fraught with hierarchy as Byzantium.
When the travel agent opens the computer record for your coach flight, seeking to get you into an aisle seat close to the front exit, the diagram may show that that seat and other aisle seats back quite a way have been designated for frequent-flier members with high mileages or those who pay the full coach price.
Whatever the terminology, the computer may "rope off" choice seats for passengers who travel the airline often or reserve at the last minute and thus at a high price.
USAir, which still has an old-fashioned policy of first come first served, says it, too, should be holding out good seats for late-booking business travelers, and it is preparing to shift over.
"It makes a lot of sense," said J. Daniel Brock, USAir's vice president for marketing and services.
"We've got to have a system that saves good seats for those travelers who pay $600 for a last-minute ticket. Those seats cannot all go to a leisure traveler who paid $200."


Dear Conan: More Advice
To the Editor:
In the interest of balance, I think you should ask what the real viewers think of Conan O'Brien's show ("Dear Conan: A Letter From Harvard," Sept. 19), not just the old National Lampoon boys who are recruited in vitro by the networks.
So here's my advice to him:


In the Region/Connecticut; A Tourist Spot Where Shakespeare Once Reigned
THE statue of Hamlet that broods amid the undergrowth outside the vacant state-owned Shakespeare Theater at Stratford-on-the-Housatonic may soon find itself in happier surroundings.
After years of searching, the Connecticut Economic Development Department, which is responsible for the 14.5-acre site, has found a development team it considers capable of creating a viable entertainment complex at the dilapidated theater center.


TWO SIDES IN HAITI MEET ON IMPASSE
Haiti's military leaders met with the country's civilian Government for more than three hours tonight in an emergency effort to reach a political settlement to avert a worldwide ban on trade with Haiti and the resignation of the Prime Minister.
The meeting, between the Prime Minister, Robert Malval, and the entire Haitian High Command, led by Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, centered around plans to restore a previously negotiated timetable to the return from exile of the elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
He was scheduled to return by next Saturday.


Vivien Leigh's Charleston
To the Editor:
Anyone who saw Vivien Leigh dance a spirited Charleston in "Tovarich" would hardly call her frail, as Frank Rich does.
Clearly, the show was a B-level vehicle, but she gave a truly memorable performance and won a Tony Award for best actress in a musical.


Thomas Eakins Ventured Deep Into the Psyche
It has long been one of the anomalies of the international art world that the paintings of Thomas Eakins have virtually never been seen outside the United States.
In Europe, even the name of Eakins is unknown to the general public.
There is, to my knowledge, only one Eakins in a European museum -- the "Portrait of Clara," which was given to the French state by the artist's widow in 1930 and is now in the Musee d'Orsay in Paris.
As for a serious exhibition of his work, backed by up-to-date scholarship, the idea would seem never to have found favor.
That conspicuous wrong has now been righted by the arrival in London of "Thomas Eakins and the Heart of American Life," at the National Portrait Gallery (through Jan. 23).


Rocard Inherits France's Battered Socialists
For the last 22 years, living uncomfortably in the shadow of President Francois Mitterrand, Michel Rocard has awaited his chance to take over France's Socialist Party.
Today, when he was finally elected the undisputed Socialist leader, he inherited a party in ruins.
Having virtually secured the Socialists' nomination for the 1995 presidential elections, Mr.
Rocard now has just 18 months to revive a party that is still reeling from its humiliating defeat by a conservative coalition in parliamentary elections in March.


Renee Lehman, Paul Condon
Renee Eleanor Lehman, a daughter of Myra H. Lehman of Rye, N.Y., and the late Richard E. Lehman, was married yesterday to Arthur Paul Condon Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Condon of Summit, N.J.
Judge John Carey of the Westchester County Court in White Plains officiated at the Plumbush Inn in Cold Spring, N.Y.
Mrs.
Condon, 28, is a manager at Overland Productions, a music entertainment concern in New York.
She and her husband graduated from Hobart and William Smith Colleges.
Her father was a real estate developer in New York.
Her mother is a sculptor in Rye.


Penn Romps Over Brown And Remains Undefeated
Penn 34, Brown 9
Jim McGeehan threw for 220 yards and 3 touchdowns yesterday as unbeaten Penn scored on 6 of its first 7 possessions to beat Brown, 34-9, in Philadelphia.


Data Bank/October 24, 1993


Tackless Strips Help to Carpet Stairs
CARPETING a straight staircase is not too difficult.
The method shown here uses tackless strips as fasteners instead of old-fashioned stair rods, which prevent stretching carpet tightly, and allows shifting carpeting to expose fresh material as wear develops.
Avoid using slippery carpet for covering stairs.
Also, leave stairs uncovered or cover them with nonskid rubber pads if they are to be used by the aged or handicapped.


Patricia Arellano, Matthew Starr
Patricia Carolina Arellano, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Gerardo Arellano of Vina del Mar, Chile, was married yesterday to Matthew Wall Starr, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Starr of Garden City, L.I.
Msgr.
Donald T. Bennett performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Joseph in Garden City.
Mrs.
Starr, 28, is an international private banking officer at Chemical Bank in New York.
She graduated from Adelphi University.
Her father is a senior vice president of Compania Sud Americana de Vapores, a maritime shipping company in Valparaiso, Chile.


Clinton Defends Aristide
President Clinton defended Father Aristide today against the C.I.A.'s suggestions that he is mentally unstable and unfit to lead Haiti.
Mr.
Clinton said the views of Administration officials who have worked with Father Aristide to help restore him to power carried more weight than allegations that officials of the agency made to members of Congress this week.


Neighborhood Report: Harlem; Bus Drivers Pay Tribute to the Memory of Mother Hale
Drivers from the 146th Street bus depot are taking the memory of Mother Hale on the road.
When Clara M. Hale, who dedicated much of her life to caring for abandoned and orphaned children, died last December, Transit Authority employees at the bus depot were determined to keep her work going.


Elizabeth Schreiber, Daniel Leiter Jr.
Elizabeth Anne Schreiber, a daughter of Hans and Mary Schreiber of Ossining, N.Y., was married yesterday to Daniel Franklin Leiter Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Leiter of Clearwater, Fla.
The Rev.
Philip D. Lyman, an Episcopal priest and a cousin of the bride, officiated at St.
Mary's Church in the Highlands in Cold Spring, N.Y.
Mrs.
Leiter, 30, is a manager in consumer travel marketing at American Express Travel Related Services in New York.
She graduated from Smith College.


Reduce Oil Imports Before the Next Crisis
To the Editor:
It is particularly distressing that not only have we forgotten the lessons of two oil embargoes and the Persian Gulf War but also that we are still paying their economic price ("After 20 Years America's Foot Is Still on the Gas," The Week in Review, Oct. 17).
Although we complain about automobile imports, the importation of oil costs us twice as much and is the biggest item in our negative balance of trade.


Questions Raised About Children in Attic
When detectives arrived at the home of Anthony and Shirley James on Oct. 8 after questioning two of the couple's six children in a shoplifting case, they found what they called clear-cut signs of abuse.
The attic where the children stayed was like a virtual prison, they said, with only two small mattresses for four people, and there was no heating except for a chimney stack that the children would gather around for warmth.
But after a flurry of media reports about the case, family members and the couple's lawyer say that the real victims in the case are the parents.
They say the Jameses opened their home to five adoptees, bringing them up in a loving manner.
By their account, the children, caught shoplifting, wove a false tale for the police in order to avoid punishment.


At Work; Will These Contract Talks Fly?
OBJECTIVE reality is the uninvited guest to virtually any labor-management negotiation, but rarely more so than in the current lengthy dispute between American Airlines and one of its unions, the 21,000-member Association of Professional Flight Attendants.
Perhaps Srinivasa Ramanujan, the late Indian mathematical genius, could untangle the airline industry's wizardly compensation formulas and arrive at a kernel of pure truth.
Mere mortals wait in vain for any fact, factoid or fact-ette to stand up and bark.
Are flight attendants still getting the shaft a decade after they made concessions, including allowing the company to impose its two-tier wage system, to save their jobs and, supposedly, the airline?
Or is American a benevolent employer, simply seeking flexibility to allow it to compete in what every American man, woman, child and kitty cat by now agrees is a killer industry?


Hands On
I LIKE RUNNING THINGS.
Granted, freight elevators do not ordinarily fall into the category of things style editors get to run -- though the bemused operator at Isaac Mizrahi's SoHo loft building occasionally indulges me.
But an intimate knowledge of fashion's backstages is necessary in this business.
It's not a pretty world.
Behind all those sleek showrooms, Seventh Avenue is seamy.
Granted, the International Ladies Garment Workers Union is responsible for better lighting and fireproofing in the lofts where American garment workers cut, drape and stitch.
But all around them are cramped offices, passageways clogged with clothes racks, graffiti-littered halls, dirty restrooms and seeming miles of clanging metal gates to control thievery.
For years, the Paris couture houses were no better.
Behind the hushed, perfumed salons where models parade the most expensive clothes in the world, the back rooms were unspeakable.
Now, those of Dior, Givenchy, Lacroix and Chanel in particular are pleasant, neat as a pin and admirably secure.
Sometimes too much so.
Last summer, after I had spent a couple of exhilarating hours watching Karl Lagerfeld put his design troupes through their last-minute paces for the next day's show, I left by the back way -- on the freight elevator, of course. (It was well past 8 P.M.) Just as the door at the employees' entrance snapped shut behind me, the door in front, leading to the rue Cambon, refused to buzz open.
I was sealed in a little box of a vestibule, able to see out through the one-way glass but unable to be seen.
I had the sinking feeling that much as I loved the house of Chanel, an overnight stay would be too long.
Finally, a security guard found me.


Neighborhood Report: Crown Heights; Helping the Frightened Elderly Take Back Their Streets
Starting next week, the elderly residents of Crown Heights will be taking back the streets -- or at least the supermarkets, pharmacies, beauty parlors and banks -- if the plan of a coalition of community groups works as hoped.
Volunteers from each of several groups will escort the elderly on their errands on Mondays and Tuesdays between 10 A.M. and 1 P.M., said Batia Brandel, executive director of the Crown Heights Jewish Community Council, a member of the coalition.
Volunteers will also do the legwork for those who are bedridden.


'That Heavenly Coffee' Returns in New Coffee Bars
Chock Full o' Nuts is returning to Manhattan, but only the name will remain the same.
In place of the dozens of coffee shops, the last of which closed in 1989, the new stores will take the form of the oh-so-hip coffee bars that have cropped up from Seattle to Seventh Avenue South.
The first store is scheduled to open in midtown early next year, with as many as 10 more planned for Manhattan by 1995.
"The coffee bar is the fastest growing thing in coffee," said Howard Leitner, president of Chock Full o' Nuts, a major coffee distributor.
"We think it will be an exciting thing to do."


Megaclub With That 'Underground' Look
Peter Gatien has spent $2 million renovating the Tunnel, which sounds like an awful lot for a nightclub that will be open only two nights a week.
"This is such a big space that I decided it needs to be filled," Mr.
Gatien said last week about the megaclub, at Twelfth Avenue and 27th Street, that he bought in May 1992 and officially reopened on Friday.
"It's very expensive to fill a club and give it legs during the week." The Friday night party, called "Puzzled," is open to anyone; on Saturdays, there's a party for gay men called Nocturnal.


Helping Women Master the Financial World
CAREN SCHWEITZER, program coordinator at the Westchester Self-Help Clearinghouse in White Plains, recalled the phone calls she received soon after her divorce more than 20 years ago.
Some were from real estate agents asking if her house was on the market, said Ms.
Schweitzer, who has since remarried.
Others were from well-meaning friends and family members offering torrents of advice.
"Everybody treated me as though I had suddenly become an incompetent," said Ms.
Schweitzer, who is a social worker.
The assumption was, she said, that she could not make sound decisions as a newly single woman.


Happy Mating of Mexican and Spanish
MANSION MADRID is a marvel.
Smiling waiters at this Lindenhurst newcomer serve soul-satisfying Spanish and Mexican food in spacious comfortable surroundings at bargain prices.
Diners who enjoyed the fare at the Costa de Espana, which has closed in Port Jefferson, will be pleased to find its chef, owner and the same well-prepared food transplanted to the South Shore.


Sleepy? No. Pass The Popcorn
These cornflower-blue-and-white striped broadcloth pajamas ($65), by Brooks Brothers, would be ideal garb for hanging around the house, watching gloriously obscure films from the 1930's and 40's on the American Movie Classics cable channel.
Their nattiness may help to mitigate any feelings of slothful lassitude induced by movie marathons.


A Royal Scandal, Japanese Style
When members of the British royal family become the center of controversy, it is generally because they said too much.
In the Japanese imperial court last week, a mystery surrounded the Empress who said nothing -- because, for reasons as mysterious as the royal family's origins, she cannot.
Empress Michiko, the dignified, much-beloved and often pitied wife of Akihito, has not said a word since she fell unconscious for hours on Wednesday, her 59th birthday.
The palace, which originally suggested that she had only briefly fainted, now contends that medical examinations have found no evidence of a stroke.
Instead, her physicians say she feels "strong feelings of distress." They did not say why.


Democrats Study Amending War Powers Act
Leading Senate Democrats say they will make a coordinated effort to determine when the United States should agree to send troops abroad and what role Congress should have in such decisions.
After two weeks of repeated though unsuccessful efforts in the Senate to curb President Clinton's authority to deploy troops in Somalia, Bosnia and Haiti, the Democrats announced a new effort to see if the War Powers Act of 1973, which allows Congress to order a President to withdraw troops from potential conflicts abroad, should be amended.


Hail, Jones
To the Sports Editor:
Robert Lipsyte, searching for historical analogies to the retirement of Michael Jordan in his prime, properly cites the abdications of Rocky Marciano, Bjorn Borg and Jim Brown.
The same column also says only two other American athletes -- Babe Ruth and Muhammad Ali -- "so dominated, advanced and transcended their sports."


Sendup


How a Canny Evita Played Her Cards
FEW theatergoers are unfamiliar with "Don't Cry for Me, Argentina," one of the hit songs from "Evita," the popular musical by Andrew Lloyd Weber and Tim Rice.
The songs were hit recordings long before the show opened on Broadway.
What may come as a surprise is the harsh plot about an uneducated peasant who, through sheer power of will, became the First Lady and unofficial leader of Argentina in the Government of Juan D. Peron.


A Second Term for Mayor Dinkins
At this point in the mayoral election, the cliches of disappointment are getting a real workout: Something must be badly wrong with a system that can't produce candidates better than David Dinkins and Rudolph Giuliani.
The real issues are being oversimplified.
It doesn't really matter who wins.
The first two statements may apply in this campaign, as they do in most.
But it emphatically does matter that voters choose correctly between Mr.
Dinkins and Mr.
Giuliani.


Neighborhood Report: Crown Heights; Parkway Work Nears Finish
After six years of delays, traffic jams, reports of cost over-runs and citizen protest, the reconstruction of Eastern Parkway will be completed by Thanksgiving Day, the Department of Transportation says.
The timing is coincidental.
"I drove down the parkway last week and got my first look," said Commissioner Lucius J. Riccio.
"I thought I was going to heaven. It was so inviting." But some residents and merchants -- who have complained for years about the disruption of their community, the difficulties faced by pedestrians in safely navigating the road and the increase in traffic accidents -- are still complaining.


After Karajan In Berlin, No Deluge Yet
Behind the desk of Ulrich Meyer-Schoellkopf is a group photograph of the Berlin Philharmonic.
"I always like to have the orchestra behind me," joked Mr.
Meyer-Schoellkopf, the Swiss administrative director of this democratically based ensemble.
Around the walls of his office are large portraits of the five artistic directors who have presided during the orchestra's 111-year history: Hans von Bulow, Arthur Nikisch, Wilhelm Furtwangler, Herbert von Karajan and, now, Claudio Abbado.
The first four, at least, are among the most famous conductors in history.
The Berlin Philharmonic, Germany's finest orchestra, has long been counted among the world's elite.
Yet it has made few New York appearances in recent years: a series of Karajan concerts in 1982, a single concert led by James Levine in 1986 and another series led by Bernard Haitink in 1991.
The 1991 concerts were not particularly well received by critics.
So audiences in the United States and Canada have been waiting with special curiosity for Mr.
Abbado's first North American tour with the orchestra, which will include three Mahler programs at Carnegie Hall, starting on Thursday.


Hatch Chiles
To the Editor: Regarding "New Mexico's Mecca for Peppers" about chiles from Hatch (Aug. 29):


Corrections
An article in the Metro Report last Sunday about a special one-day effort to immunize children in New York City misstated the number of children the organizers hoped to reach.
It was 10,000, not 100,000.


Austria's Share of the Danube
I HAVE long associated the Danube with Hungary and especially Budapest, the city so closely defined by the magnificent river that flows through it.
That is because the Danube seems scarcely to make an impression on Vienna as it skirts the capital.
But 60 miles west of Vienna, the river broadens, slicing and curving through hilly Austrian countryside so rich with Baroque abbeys and medieval fortresses, vineyards and villages, bike trails and pleasant back roads, that visitors who thought the river was principally Hungary's are unlikely to make that mistake again.


A Diner's Mile On the East Side
DANAL ($25 and Under)  (212) 982-6930; 90 East 10th Street, near Third Avenue; $; all major credit cards


Residents Battling Boards
ANYONE who has served on the board of a condominium, co-op or homeowners' association will hardly be surprised to learn that a dark mood of frustration and bitterness is festering between boards and residents around the country -- possibly worse than it has ever been.
Common Ground, the bimonthly magazine of the Community Associations Institute, recently devoted five pages to the problem.
And the recent formation of a Regional Council for Homeowner Rights, made up of disgruntled residents in the Washington area is another symptom of the growing discontent.


D.H. Hurts N.L.
To the Sports Editor:
I agree with George Vecsey that it is time to abolish the designated hitter ("Stupid Rule Mars World Series," The Times, Oct. 17).
However, the use of the d.h. in American League home games, along with the prohibition of the d.h. in National League home games, is not, as Vecsey proclaims, a disadvantage to the A.L. team in any meaningful way.
But it clearly hurts the N.L. team.


Peggy Walsh, James G. Dunn
Margaret Anne Walsh, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Mason Walsh of Scottsdale, Ariz., was married there on Friday to James Gilbert Dunn, the son of Mrs.
Ruth R. Dunn of Brunswick, Ga., and the late Gilbert L. Dunn.
The Rev.
Paul Ulrichson performed the Presbyterian ceremony at the Arizona Club.
Ms.
Walsh, known as Peggy, is keeping her name.
She is the executive editor of The New York Times News Service, an international wire service in New York.
She graduated from United States International University.
Her father, now retired, was the publisher of The Phoenix Gazette and The Arizona Republic newspapers.


Two Worlds of Kurt Masur Collide in New York
Ten minutes before curtain time in Avery Fisher Hall at Lincoln Center, Kurt Masur faced an unusual kind of dressing-room dilemma: Which set of tails to wear?
The choice was between the long black coat he always wears when he conducts the New York Philharmonic, or the long black coat he always wears when he conducts his other orchestra, the Leipzig Gewandhaus.


Crimes, Lies and Prudential
To the Editor:
A fascinating and frightening story.
Now the firm is spending millions on an advertising campaign to gain the "trust" of the investing public.
The frightening thing is that the ad campaign will be paid for with the money from clients.
This will result in the sheep lining up to be shorn again by Prudential, a company that hasn't the foggiest idea what the word "trust" means.
WILLIAM E. HARLEY New York, Oct. 13


From Tulipmania to a Glory of Spring
THERE is still time to plant hardy spring-flowering bulbs.
But the opportunity is fast dwindling since the bulbs must grow roots before the ground freezes.
It is these roots that absorb the soil's moisture, which in turn pushes up the leaves and the stems that support the flowers.
Tulips will probably take top priority this year, in celebration of their 400th anniversary.
To mark the event, the Netherlands begins a yearlong tulip quadricentennial.
The country, the center of an industry that propagates more than 3,500 tulip hybrids and species that are planted in gardens all over the world, has long been noted for its beautiful tulips and its vast bulb-growing fields are indeed a sight to be seen.


Advertisements for Themselves: A Letter from Lewis Lapham
To the Editor:
As a former chairman of the board of the Cowles Media Company, I would like to reply to your review of Willie Morris's "New York Days." The review is tainted by numerous inaccurate statements, most of them from Mr.
Morris, but some from sources, equally uninformed, quoted by him.


Jones Keeps Promise To Stay Undefeated
Five years after his dream for Olympic gold vanished, and he vowed he would never lose a fight again, Junior Jones of Brooklyn won one of boxing's ultimate but unheralded prizes tonight: a bantamweight world championship.
Jones, the 118-pound, 22-year-old boxer from Bushwick, staged a stunning late comeback to take a unanimous decision and unseat Jorge Julio of Colombia for the World Boxing Association title.


Tackless Strips Help to Carpet Stairs
CARPETING a straight staircase is not too difficult.
The method shown here uses tackless strips as fasteners instead of old-fashioned stair rods, which prevent stretching carpet tightly, and allows shifting carpeting to expose fresh material as wear develops.
Avoid using slippery carpet for covering stairs.
Also, leave stairs uncovered or cover them with nonskid rubber pads if they are to be used by the aged or handicapped.


Mika Brzezinski And James Hoffer
Mika Emilie Leonia Brzezinski, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Zbigniew Brzezinski of McLean, Va., was married yesterday to James Patrick Hoffer, a son of Patricia Hoffer of Lititz, Pa.
The Rev.
Donal Kehew, a Roman Catholic priest, and the Rev.
Harry Boehmke, a Congregational minister, jointly officiated at the West Side Church on Block Island, R.I.
Mrs.
Hoffer is a reporter for the WFSB-TV, the CBS affiliate in Hartford.
She graduated from Williams College.


Corrections
A chart last Sunday with the heading "Health Care: Clinton's Plan and the Alternatives," misstated aspects of the proposal by Representative Jim McDermott, Democrat of Washington.
His plan would impose a payroll tax on individuals as well as employers, and would require individuals to pay "sin taxes." The measure's health security board would also have the authority to revise benefits; it would not be able to establish them.


St. John's Russo on Same Line In Records as Archie Griffin
St. John's 30, Sacred Heart 0
Anthony Russo scored three touchdowns and carried 36 times for 185 yards, raising his career total to 5,177 yards, as St.
John's crushed Sacred Heart, 30-0, yesterday at Redman Field.


Charles Decker, 51, Building-Code Expert
Charles M. Decker, a New Jersey state official who led national efforts for strong and uniform construction and building safety codes, including access for the handicapped, died on Thursday at a hospital in Livingston, N.J.
He was 51 and lived in Tewksbury Township, N.J.
He died of complications from cancer, his family said


Those Useless Computer Manuals
To the Editor:
In "Free Technical Support: An Endangered Species of Service" (The Executive Computer, Oct. 10), it was stated that "some software companies estimate that at least half their calls are from people who would rather call than open their user manuals."


Deborah Mattis, W. H. Collier 4th
Deborah Cook Mattis, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Louis P. Mattis of New York, was married yesterday to William Henry Collier 4th, a son of Mrs.
Dempsey W. Hodges Jr. of Kinston, N.C., and Mr.
Collier 3d of Greenville, N.C.
The Rev.
Douglas M. Renegar performed the Episcopal ceremony at Christ Church on St.
Simons Island, Ga.
Mrs.
Collier, 27, graduated from Mount Vernon College.
Until recently, she was an account executive with Grey Advertising in New York.
Her father is the chairman and chief executive of Sterling Winthrop Inc., the pharmaceutical company in New York.


TRANSACTIONS  Football  National Football League  MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Activated Doug Pedersen, quarterback, from the practice squad. Waived Frankie Smith, cornerback.


The Unmade Star
STRANGE things happen when Jeff Buckley opens his mouth to sing.
One moment he's a white bluesman with a sound straight out of the Mississippi Delta; the next, a jazz singer whose acrobatic voice swoops and glides through a haze of cigarettes and pained memories.
The last thing he sounds like is his age -- only 26.
Even odder, his singing makes otherwise jaded clubgoers and music-business executives rave with none of their usual cynicism.
They will talk of catching Mr.
Buckley at East Village hangouts like Sin-e and the Fez, where they have heard him sing anything from "I Loves You Porgy" to a Sufi chant, an obscure Elton John oldie or one of Mr.
Buckley's own unconventional songs.
And they will talk about his new contract with Sony Records and how Buckley is a name to watch.


From Tulipmania to a Glory of Spring
THERE is still time to plant hardy spring-flowering bulbs.
But the opportunity is fast dwindling since the bulbs must grow roots before the ground freezes.
It is these roots that absorb the soil's moisture, which in turn pushes up the leaves and the stems that support the flowers.
Tulips will probably take top priority this year, in celebration of their 400th anniversary.
To mark the event, the Netherlands begins a yearlong tulip quadricentennial.
The country, the center of an industry that propagates more than 3,500 tulip hybrids and species that are planted in gardens all over the world, has long been noted for its beautiful tulips and its vast bulb-growing fields are indeed a sight to be seen.


Lisa Schiffman, Michael Pfeffer
Lisa Sheryl Schiffman, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Schiffman of Chestnut Ridge, N.Y., was married last evening to Michael Stuart Pfeffer, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
David Pfeffer of Roslyn Harbor, L.I.
Rabbi Joseph Sternstein performed the ceremony at Temple Beth Shalom in Roslyn Heights, L.I.
The bride, 30, graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania.
She and her husband, a magna cum laude graduate of Tufts University, received M.B.A. degrees from Columbia University.
She is a vice president in the capital management group at Prudential Insurance in Newark.


Yeltsin Appears in Public to Honor a Hero of the Past
President Boris N. Yeltsin came here today for his first public appearance since the violent showdown in Moscow with his hard-line opponents three weeks ago, but was kept from a mostly friendly crowd by hundreds of police officers and army guards.
Mr.
Yeltsin came to this city about 125 miles northeast of Moscow to dedicate a statue of the 11th-century Prince of Kiev, Yaroslav the Wise, who ruled over Russia, Ukraine and Belarus and created the first written Slavic legal code.


Annmarie Cappiello, Timothy Graham
Annmarie Cappiello, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank A. Cappiello Jr. of Baltimore, was married there yesterday to Timothy Robert Graham, a son of Naureen D. Graham of Greenwich, Conn., and the late Robert P. Graham.
The Rev.
Brian Frawley performed the ceremony at Corpus Christi Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Graham is a designer and maker of wedding gowns and dresses in New York.
She graduated from Wesleyan University and received an M.B.A. from New York University.
Her father is the chairman of the Cappiello-Rushmore Funds, a mutual funds management group in Bethesda, Md.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-13 A SOMALIA SUCCESS STORY  Known as the "city of death" at the height of Somalia's famine last year, Baidoa is no longer starving, and the United Nations views it as a model in its effort to recreate government at the grass-roots level.  1  Clashes between rival Somali factions are feared by the U.N.  10  BOMB IN BELFAST KILLS 9, HURTS 50  At least 9 people were killed and 50 wounded in Belfast when the Irish Republican Army exploded a bomb in a Protestant shopping area.  3  U.S.
TO AID RUSSIAN ELECTIONS  The United States offered technical help to try to insure that Russia's parliamentary elections in December are free and fair.  12  Georgia's Government reported gains against rebels.  12  Yeltsin makes his first public appearance since crackdown.  12  BOSNIA P.O.W.
The only uncertainties, they say, are the margin of victory and the next step.  29  VOUCHERS FOR SCHOOLS  A grass-roots movement in Fairfield, Conn., is proposing a voucher system to let parents use public money to send their children to private schools.  34  Obituaries 38  Frank J. Del Giudice, an industrial designer.


'It's Complicated. . . . It's Very Complicated'
THE BEGINNING OF THE JOURNEY The Marriage of Diana and Lionel Trilling.
By Diana Trilling.
Illustrated. 442 pp.
New York: Harcourt Brace &amp; Company. $24.95.


Graveyard Holds a Battle's Bitter Memories
IF any place in Connecticut truly reflects the spookiness of Halloween, it may be an old family graveyard in Ledyard near the Thames River.
For more than 200 years, a spirit of hatred has permeated the cemetery, directed at the man still considered the leading traitor in American history, Benedict Arnold.


Nancy C. Levitan, Nigel B. Kelly
Nancy Carol Levitan, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jerome Levitan of New York, was married there last evening to Nigel Brian Kelly, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Brian Kelly of Bristol, England.
Rabbi Joel Goor officiated at the United Nations Plaza Park Hyatt Hotel.
Mrs.
Kelly is a senior marketing manager at Avon Products Inc. in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Tufts University.


New Haven Symphony Marks Its Centennial With New Music
IN 1863, when Morris Steinert attempted to organize an orchestra in New Haven, the "woods were not full of musicians who could play upon orchestral instruments," he later recalled.
The first rehearsals were "simply frightful," he said, and generated such noises "as to frighten the horses which were kept in a livery stable next door, and which immediately signified their displeasure by violently kicking against their stalls in rhythm with the scraping of the fiddles, the windy tones of the flutes, the squeaky harmonics emitted from the yellow clarionets."


Pirate Battles to Keep the Airwaves Open
On a chilly Sunday evening, high in the hills overlooking the San Francisco Bay area, Stephen Dunifer sets down his backpack and prepares to put Radio Free Berkeley on the air.
He pushes a 10-foot antenna into the earth, then wires together a car battery, a sound mixer and microphone, a portable compact-disc player and a home-brew, five-watt radio transmitter.
"The people's technology is ready to strike back," he mumbles, tuning his transmitter to 88.1 FM.
With a flick of the microphone switch, he begins three hours of eclectic and illegal radio broadcasting.


'Demolition Man' Makes Recycling an Art
What do the New York City Department of Sanitation and the action-movie industry have in common?
A passionate belief in the motto: "Recycling! It's the law!"
New York uses the slogan to threaten miscreants who fail to tie up old newspapers.
But the city lags far behind Hollywood, where the unwritten law is that no successful movie concept can ever be tossed out.
After "Die Hard," who would dare make an action film without shattering an abundant amount of glass?


Feeling the Bumps in the Road At the Tokyo Auto Show
IN 1985, visitors to the auto show here were treated to a preview of Honda's new Accord, a car that crossed the Pacific and outsold all American models for three years running.
The 1989 show marked the first sighting of Lexus, the Toyota luxury sedan that displaced Cadillacs, Mercedeses and Jaguars from garages of the wealthy.
The once-obscure Tokyo Motor Show, held every other year, had suddenly become a gallery for the dynamic imagination of Japan's auto industry, whose creations provoked nightmares from Detroit to Turin.


Corrections
An article last Sunday about elections for the County Board of Legislators misstated the first name of the Democratic and independent candidate in the Ninth District.
He is Richard G. Wishnie, not Robert.


A Dissident's Letters From Prison To Beijing Will Surface in China
Even as he languished in the solitary confinement of a prison cell, China's most famous dissident, who was released last month after serving 14 and a half years, fired off regular letters to China's leaders saying they "deserve a kick in the behind" because they "have done nothing for the people."
Photocopies of the letters from the dissident, Wei Jingsheng, have been smuggled to newspaper publishers in Hong Kong.
Totaling thousands of pages of hand-written Chinese characters, they are soon to be serialized and their contents beamed back into China in radio broadcasts and newspapers.


Christopher Rothko, Lori L. Cohen
Lori Lynn Cohen, a daughter of Leo and Rita Cohen of Great Neck, L.I., was married last evening to Christopher Hall Rothko, the son of the late Mark Rothko, the Abstract Expressionist, and the late Mary Alice Rothko.
Rabbi Ellen Lippmann officiated at the Silvercup Studios in Long Island City, Queens.
Ms.
Cohen, 30, is keeping her name.
She is an immigration coordinator in the office of migration for the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Detroit.
She and her husband graduated from Yale University, from which she received a law degree.


Promoting Home-Grown Ideas for Cleaner Air
BURTON TRIBBLE came from Kansas to the nation's capital last week to volunteer the services of his 3,000 swine for the Clinton Administration's war against the greenhouse effect.
At the White House, Vice President Al Gore cited the hog farmer as an example of what business can do to cut the emissions of gases that trap the sun's heat within the atmosphere, possibly raising the earth's temperature enough to do serious environmental damage in years to come.


A Steeler Turns Anger Into Commodity
Everything about Greg Lloyd -- the imposing size, the proud stride, the penetrating eyes -- oozes intensity.
This is Lloyd's seventh season as a Pittsburgh Steelers linebacker and this much has always been clear: If he ever found a way to channel his extreme desire and talent, he could become one of the most ferocious and successful linebackers in pro football.


Miriam Inger and James Lo Stuto
Miriam Elaine Inger, a daughter of Morton Inger of Wellfleet, Mass., and the late Sarah S. Inger, was married yesterday to James Peter Lo Stuto, the son of Frank and Carmella Lo Stuto of Saddle Brook, N.J.
Msgr.
Charles Stengel and Rabbi Frederick Dworkin officiated at St.
Philip the Apostle Church in Saddle Brook, N.J.


The Campaign for County Clerk
THE office of county clerk is difficult enough to explain, much less attain.
What then if the major candidates for this $91,375-a-year post never meet in debate?
How are voters to learn the issues or whom to support with their ballots?
That is the situation that has developed this year between James P. Doody, the Eastchester Town Supervisor, who is seeking the post on the Democratic ticket, and Leonard N. Spano, a long-term member of the Board of Legislators who is running on the Republican and Conservative lines.


Susan E. Ryan, Richard Kornutik
Susan Elizabeth Ryan, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen M. Ryan Jr. of Fairfield, Conn., was married there yesterday to Richard Francis Kornutik, a son of Richard Kornutik of Wilton, Conn., and Elizabeth Weeber of Crown Point, N.Y.
The Rev.
Edward J. Scull officiated at St.
Pius X Roman Catholic Church.
Ms.
Ryan, 26, is keeping her name.
She is an account executive in advertising sales with Southern Connecticut Newspapers Inc. in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Providence College.
Her father is the president of National Hockey League Enterprises in New York, the league's licensing and marketing arm.


Orangemen Find Miami Far Out of Their League
Near the first half's end, Syracuse wide receiver Shelby Hill decided he could take it no more.
After dropping a pass with no one around him, which typified the Orangemen's plight tonight against the University of Miami, he peered down at the football with disdain.
Then he kicked it high and far off the playing field.
Syracuse's hopes had long since sailed out of the Orange Bowl as Miami punished the Orangemen, 49-0, before a crowd of 63,194.


Stacey Reisner, Peter Reichman
Stacey Meryl Reisner, the daughter of Ira A. and Roberta C. Reisner of Suffern, N.Y., was married last evening to Peter Glenn Reichman, a son of Lee and Phyllis C. Reichman of Yorktown Heights, N.Y.
Rabbi Robert Lennick officiated at the Fair Lawn (N.J.) Jewish Center.
Ms.
Reisner Reichman graduated summa cum laude from Tufts University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in public and private management from Yale University.
She is to become the human resources manager for the Dannon Company, the yogurt manufacturer, in White Plains.


Mutual Funds; Using Fees as Rewards, or Penalties
CLEARLY, the idea that investors in mutual funds should reward good performances and penalize poor ones does not rule the industry.
Most fund managements are compensated with a flat fee from investors each year, and only a small group of managers are paid a bonus when their performance figures are strong, and "fined" a portion of the fee when their results are not.
Recent decisions by two funds, one of which dropped a performance-based fee, while the other initiated one -- show that the debate is still alive as to which type of fee is a better performance incentive.


9-0 Leafs Set Start-up Mark
Maple Leafs 2, Lightning 0
The Toronto Maple Leafs broke the National Hockey League record for most victories at the start of the season, winning their ninth straight with a 2-0 victory over the Tampa Bay Lightning last night in St.
Petersburg, Fla.


Club Carousel's Debut: 'South Pacific'
IN the 50th anniversary year of "Oklahoma!" why shouldn't a newly reopened theater be called Club Carousel and put on "South Pacific"?
Everybody loves Rodgers and Hammerstein and theme celebrations are in.
Formerly the Darien Dinner Theater and then Connecticut's Broadway Theater, Club Carousel offers dinner and theater, though both appear, at this stage, to be a pipe dream.
Under new management, with an artistic director and producer (Cathye A. Fitzgerald) and a changing schedule of future productions and performances, the theater and the lobby are redesigned in pale pink and blue to resemble a cross between an amusement park and a gaming resort, neither allowing for taste and elegance to intrude.


Reform Judaism Head Seeks Converts
Departing from a longstanding Jewish reluctance to proselytize, the leader of Reform Judaism in North America yesterday encouraged Jews to seek converts among those who do not have their own faith.
The rabbi, Alexander M. Schindler, president of the Union of American Hebrew Congregations, announced a $5 million program "to reach out to those of our neighbors who belong to no church" or no other religion.


Does Fashion Matter?
Fashion has always been a favorite victim of wits, savants, celebrities and curmudgeons.
In the 40's, Fashions of The Times occasionally ran a column called "What They Say About Fashion," a collection of quotes like this zinger from Ralph Waldo Emerson: "The sense of being perfectly well-dressed gives a feeling of inward tranquillity which religion is powerless to bestow."


Finding Surprises In Corporate Galleries
DISCOVERING craft objects on the walls and pedestals of an art gallery can be a novel experience for some people.
The surprise is magnified when those walls and pedestals are right smack on the first floor of the company where they work or do business.
In the galleries at the Johnson &amp; Johnson World Headquarters in New Brunswick and the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company in Lawrenceville, employees and visitors are stopping to look and pick their favorite craft objects, often after a long, pithy discussion.


Christine Woros, Gerald Pucci Jr.
Christine Maria Woros, a daughter of Patricia and Martin Woros of Wantagh, L.I., was married yesterday to Gerald Dominick Pucci Jr., the son of Mr.
Pucci of Albany, and A. Gretchen Normandin of Supply, N.C.
The Rev.
Richard Neilsen, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Church of Our Saviour in New York.
The bride, 28, is an associate at J. P. Morgan Securities Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Trinity College in Washington and received an M.B.A. from New York University.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 24, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
4
THE AGE OF INNOCENCE, by Edith Wharton. (Collier/Macmillan, $5.95.) The 1920 novel about New York society life in the 1870's.
2
43
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their mothers.
3
6
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
4
2
LORD OF HAWKFELL ISLAND, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) Romantic passions and feminist feelings at play in 10th-century Britain.
5
4
MITIGATING CIRCUMSTANCES, by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg. (Signet, $5.99.) A woman's revenge after she and a daughter are attacked.
6
36
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
7
7
DRAGON TEARS, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) Two police detectives try to cope with a demonic serial killer in southern California.
8
80
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
9*
5
THE SECRET HISTORY, by Donna Tartt. (Ivy, $6.99.) Close friends at a small college must deal with the consequences of a crime.
10
20
CONGO, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) An American team seeks to discover why a group of archeologists died among ruins.
11
91
THE FIRM, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A young lawyer learns that his firm is engaged in secret, possibly illegal activities.
12
27
SPHERE, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) Four scientists explore an alien spaceship found on the ocean floor.
13*
43
RISING SUN, by Michael Crichton. (Ballantine, $5.99.) The investigation of a woman's death involves the American-Japanese rivalry.
14*
1
THE KILLER ANGELS, by Michael Shaara. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A 1974 novel about the Battle of Gettysburg.
15
1
FOREVER AND THE NIGHT, by Linda Lael Miller. (Berkley, $5.50.) The romance of an ordinary woman and a handsome vampire.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
6
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
520
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
3
4
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Bantam, $6.99.) The autobiography of the general.
4*
3
THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH SECURITY PLAN. (Times Books/Random House, $8.) The Clinton Administration's health care proposals.
5
10
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces.
6
36
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
7
6
SAVE YOUR JOB, SAVE OUR COUNTRY, by Ross Perot with Pat Choate. (Hyperion, $6.95.) Arguments against the ratification of Nafta.
8
106
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
9*
26
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) Menopause and today's women.
10
8
PRINCESS, by Jean P. Sasson. (Avon, $5.50.) The life of a member of the Saudi royal family.
11
15
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) The veterinarian's memoirs.
12
8
I CAN'T BELIEVE I SAID THAT! by Kathie Lee Gifford with Jim Jerome. (Pocket, $5.99.) The autobiography of the television talk show host.
13
127
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
14*
12
A ROSE FOR HER GRAVE, by Ann Rule. (Pocket, $5.99.) Six true-crime stories.
15
138
LOVE, MEDICINE, AND MIRACLES, by Bernie S. Siegel. (Harper Perennial, $12.) The importance of a patient's mind and emotions.
16*
34
TOUJOURS PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) The charms of rustic France.
17*
16
A WORLD LIT ONLY BY FIRE, by William Manchester. (Little, Brown, $11.95.) An account of the Renaissance and the Reformation.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
4
THE DAYS ARE JUST PACKED, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A new collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
1
BOTTOMS UP! by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.99.) Exercises for women to achieve good health and fitness.
3
140
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
4
156
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 9, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


Melissa Robinson, Clayton Kaufman
Melissa Brooke Robinson, the daughter of Helena M. Robinson of Watervliet, N.Y., and the late Charles Robinson, was married yesterday toClayton Frederick Wright Kaufman, a son of Robert F. Kaufman of Briarcliff Manor, N.Y., and Mrs.
John Wright of Norwalk, Conn.
The Rev.
Emery Parillo, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at Our Lady of Mount Carmel Church in Watervliet.
Ms.
Robinson, 30, is keeping her name.
She is a writer with The Associated Press in Harrisburg, Pa.
She graduated from Boston College and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
Her mother, now retired, was an executive secretary in the New York State Department of Transportation in Albany.


If Simon Says, 'Lie Down in the Road,' Should You?
BY now it is impossible to see the most notorious scene in the movie "The Program": drunken college-football players lie down along the divider-line of a highway and live to tell about it.
Though the scene has "stuntmen" written all over it, a teen-aged boy died and two others were seriously injured recently, imitating the daredevil trick.
Last week, Touchstone Pictures deleted the episode from the film.
Here are some scenes that remain: the hero drunkenly plays chicken with an oncoming train; a pumped-up player on steroids smashes car windows with his head, his way of celebrating making the team.
This is all dangerous behavior and depicted as stupidly self-destructive.
Should those scenes be snipped out, too, in case they give someone bad ideas?


Airline Seats: Not Always First Come First Served
WHO gets the good seats in the coach section of an airplane?
The answer is as fraught with hierarchy as Byzantium.
When the travel agent opens the computer record for your coach flight, seeking to get you into an aisle seat close to the front exit, the diagram may show that that seat and other aisle seats back quite a way have been designated for frequent-flier members with high mileages or those who pay the full coach price.
Whatever the terminology, the computer may "rope off" choice seats for passengers who travel the airline often or reserve at the last minute and thus at a high price.
USAir, which still has an old-fashioned policy of first come first served, says it, too, should be holding out good seats for late-booking business travelers, and it is preparing to shift over.
"It makes a lot of sense," said J. Daniel Brock, USAir's vice president for marketing and services.
"We've got to have a system that saves good seats for those travelers who pay $600 for a last-minute ticket. Those seats cannot all go to a leisure traveler who paid $200."


World Markets; European Stocks Look Good -- for Now
INVESTORS in European equities made it clear how happy they were about falling interest rates last week when they pushed stock indices on most major markets to all-time highs.
But with valuations of many stocks reaching multiples that are high, if not unprecedented, by historical standards, some analysts are asking: How long can this year's European bull market be sustained?
The answer seems to be that it has enough support in most markets to continue into next year, albeit with some risks.
But then the outlook gets murkier.
The markets have been rising merrily all year, lately on the assumption that interest rate reductions would spark economic recovery and make equities more attractive than rate-sensitive investments.
But until last week, rates had not been falling as fast or as far as many economists had predicted, especially following the near-collapse of the European exchange-rate system this summer.


Women and Utilities
To the Editor:
Regarding "Harvard Law '55 (Pre-Ginsburg); Now, Alone at the Top" (Oct. 10), women invaded the male power structure at utilities long before Joan T. Bok of New England Electric System.


How They Stole the Story
SUITED COMMUTERS, glitzedup night-on-the-towners, cityfolk returning from a weekend spent in sweat pants and suntan oil.
Anyone inching up to the Queens Midtown Tunnel during August and September couldn't miss the billboard that was positively sneering at them.
"You're going to New York dressed like that?" The dig came courtesy of Charivari, the Manhattan fashion retailer.


Neighborhood Report: Midtown; After 30 Years It's Ciao, Giordano
Geography finally got the best of Giordano, a once-thriving Italian restaurant in an area many say has become a wasteland -- 39th Street off Ninth Avenue, at the entrance to the Lincoln Tunnel.
A family business for more than 30 years, Giordano closed this month.
Often called the Mamma Leone's of the far West Side, the restaurant was founded by Giordano Creglia in 1959, when it was popular among longshoremen.
Then theater people came, followed by college students and workers in the fashion industry.
Recently, though, customers were afraid to walk in the area, the restaurateurs say.


Duke University Installs a Woman as Its President
On a day that was a mix of pomp and populism, Nannerl O. Keohane was inaugurated today as the eighth president of Duke University, becoming the only woman serving as the permanent head of one of the nation's top research universities.
In an interview on Friday, Mrs.
Keohane, the 53-year-old daughter of a Presbyterian minister from Blytheville, Ark., defended American universities against accusations that they were overrun with "political correctness," saying the public debate has reflected a few widely publicized incidents rather than any widespread effort to impose a new academic orthodoxy.


If Only Dykstra Could Pitch In Relief
Lenny Dykstra likes to live life on the edge, that he will never deny.
He likes things to be risky, to be dramatic.
He likes the pressure to be magnified.
And so when he walked to the plate in the top of the seventh inning tonight in the Skydome, Dykstra most certainly was in his element.
It was the sixth game of the World Series, a do-or-die game for his Phillies.
Philadelphia was down by four runs, 5-1, and one game from post-season elimination.
From the feel of the Skydome, the Toronto fans seemed to think it was only a matter of time before their celebration began.


Jennifer Wieland, Patrick Peterkin
Jennifer Mary Wieland, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank J. Wieland of Northport, L.I., was married there yesterday to Patrick O'Brien Peterkin, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
DeWitt Peterkin Jr. of Noroton, Conn.
The Rev.
Thomas J. Colgan, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Philip Neri Roman Catholic Church.
The Rev.
T.
Carleton Lee, an Episcopal priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Peterkin graduated from Carnegie Mellon University and is studying for a master's degree in publishing studies at New York University.
Her father, now retired, was a regional vice president, in Huntington, L.I., for the Chase Manhattan Bank.


Lee Anne Baer, Mark Gurvitz
Lee Anne Baer, the daughter of Ervin and Helga Baer of Fayetteville, N.C., was married last evening to Mark Jay Gurvitz, the son of Jeannette Gurvitz of New York and the late Gerald Gurvitz.
Rabbi Bernard Shoter performed the ceremony in the George Watts Hill Alumni Center at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
Ms.
Baer is keeping her name.
She graduated from U.N.C., from which she also received an M.B.A.
She is a senior product manager at Sterling Health, a pharmaceutical company in New York.


Austria's Share of the Danube
I HAVE long associated the Danube with Hungary and especially Budapest, the city so closely defined by the magnificent river that flows through it.
That is because the Danube seems scarcely to make an impression on Vienna as it skirts the capital.
But 60 miles west of Vienna, the river broadens, slicing and curving through hilly Austrian countryside so rich with Baroque abbeys and medieval fortresses, vineyards and villages, bike trails and pleasant back roads, that visitors who thought the river was principally Hungary's are unlikely to make that mistake again.


The Tale of Brutus, Recounted in Gold
OLD coins are like little bits of history.
The auction of ancient Greek and Roman coins that Sotheby's is scheduled to hold on Tuesday in Zurich makes this clear.
Electrum coins from Lydia at the time of Croesus, more than 2,500 years ago, and 2,400-year-old Sicilian coins will share the block with much younger Roman solidi, from the fifth century A.D.


Bradley Pays the Price of Education
The ball went down into the low post to Shawn Bradley, moving Jimmy Lynam noticeably forward in his courtside seat.
The general manager of the Philadelphia 76ers was looking for hope, for a rare ray of light from the young man whose head almost seems nestled in the clouds.
Patrick Ewing was between Bradley and the basket, his left elbow embedded in Bradley's lower back, his intentions not unlike some belligerent bouncer at the front door of a rowdy disco.


Streetscapes/The Yankees' Stadiums; Site-Searching -- an Old, Tumultuous Story
ANXIETY, intrigue and confusion seem to mark the current negotiations over the New York Yankees, who have contemplated leaving their 1923 stadium in the Bronx for either New Jersey or a Manhattan site in the far West 30's.
But the history of the club's stadium plans suggests that turmoil is only the normal condition.
The Yankees were established in 1903 as the Highlanders, part of the two-year-old American League's challenge to the National League, established in 1876.
Their first ball park, with bleachers for 15,000, was on the west side of Broadway, from 165th to 168th Street, then in the path of New York's first subway and now the site of Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center.


America, Through a Glass Darkly, By a Fascinated Englishman
American plays have been the order of the day in London this year, with "Marvin's Room," "The Piano Lesson" and "Three Hotels," among many others, crossing the Atlantic to varying degrees of success.
In March, the Royal Court Theater, a playhouse best known for promoting new British writing, opened its own "American season" with Anna Deavere Smith's "Fires in the Mirror." Under the joint auspices of two longtime admirers of American drama -- Max Stafford-Clark, then the theater's artistic director, and Stephen Daldry, who holds the post now -- Howard Korder's "Search and Destroy" and David Mamet's "Oleanna" followed.
So did an "American" play with a difference: it was written by an Englishman.
Martin Crimp, the 37-year-old author, wrote "The Treatment" in the summer of 1992, finishing it aptly enough on July 4.
His inspiration came from his first-ever trip to the United States in 1991.
On a playwrights' exchange between the Royal Court and New Dramatists in New York, he was clearly intrigued by what he found in the New World.


The Searcher


A Whitman Fan
To the Sports Editor:
Evidently, Timm Rosenbach ("Walking Away, While He Still Can," The Times, Oct. 3) is not only an athlete but a scholar.
Rosenbach commented about those "barbaric yawps," as he called them, when breaking from a huddle and the players began screaming like maniacs.
He knows the verse of Walt Whitman, America's greatest poet, very well.


Far From Capital's Brutality, Another Somalia Finds Hope
Just 140 miles west of the violent Somali capital, this bush town is going rather placidly about its business, opening newly whitewashed hotels to traveling businessmen, restoring fields and replenishing herds.
Known as the "city of death" at the height of the country's famine last year, Baidoa is no longer starving.
The rains and the last harvest have been good, so relief agencies no longer distribute free food.
Trucks jam the town's crowded marketplace, and herds of cows wander across the main street.


Elizabeth Emerson and John Lewiecki
Elizabeth H. Emerson, a daughter of Tilly-Jo and Andrew Emerson of Maplewood, N.J., was married there yesterday to John D. Lewiecki, a son of Edward and Virginia Lewiecki of Hingham, Mass.
The Rev.
Craig Burlington, an Episcopal priest, officiated at St.
George's Church.
The bride graduated from Hamilton College and received a master's degree in management of human services from Brandeis University.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Rolling, Rolling, Rolling
THE human bowling ball has come to Long Island.
In between the salad course and the four choices of entrees, the guests at Craig Sepler's bar mitzvah in Jericho were being strapped into a giant cage, turned upside down and spun across the room toward a row of giant canvas bowling pins.
Splat!
A strike.
This was fun?
"It's the best," said Brooke Goldman, 13, after she had been helped out of the ball and staggered back to her dinner seat.


Roxane Frechie, Lawrence Phillips
Roxane Frechie, a psychoanalyst in New York, was married yesterday to Lawrence S. Phillips, the chairman of the Phillips-Van Heusen Corporation, the New York apparel company, which was founded by his great-grandfather Moses Phillips.
The Rev.
Rudy Aguila, a Baptist minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Graceland Wedding Chapel in Las Vegas, Nev.
Ms.
Frechie, 42, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Finch College and received a master's degree in social work from Fordham University.
She received her psychoanalytic degree from the Training Institute for Mental Health.
She is now on the faculty there and at the Research Institute for Self Psychology, both in New York.
She is the daughter of Selma Frechie of Philadelphia and the late Gordon Frechie.


Felony Charges Against Oregon Law Official
The Clatsop County District Attorney was indicted on Wednesday on charges that she fabricated a drug indictment against two police officers and tried to dismiss a traffic citation given to her husband.
The District Attorney, Julie Ann Leonhardt, 37, an Astoria native who was elected last year by a landslide over a three-term incumbent, will be arraigned Friday in Clatsop County Circuit Court on a dozen criminal charges: four felony charges of first-degree forgery, two misdemeanor charges of tampering with public records and six counts of official misconduct.


Eating Aboard
To the Editor: I read with interest your article on the Montrealer Amtrak train between New York and Montreal (Sept. 12).
I recently rode the sister day train, the Adirondack, from New York to Montreal.
Your comments on the not-too-grand cuisine are even more significant for those riding the daytime route.
We had a choice of egg salad sandwiches, chicken nuggets or microwaved chicken sandwiches on this 10-hour ride.
Though the route up the Hudson and along Lake Champlain is magnificent, it became a long hungry ride for many of the passengers.


Rutgers Falls Short Trying to Follow Last Year's Script
Virginia Tech 49, Rutgers 42
For Virginia Tech Coach Frank Beamer, it appeared that history might be repeating itself and that his Hokies were about to blow another 28-point lead to Rutgers yesterday in Blacksburg, Va.


White Plains Facing a Three-Way Mayor Race
WHEN Alfred Del Vecchio, the 18-year incumbent Mayor of this city, lost the Republican primary last month, it was another indication that the political tide here was shifting.
White Plains was once a Republican stronghold, but Democrats gained control of the Common Council two years ago.
Now, the mayor's office is up for grabs, with a three-way race that is likely to split Republican voters and pave the way for a Democrat to run the city.
Mayor Del Vecchio, who lost the primary by 85 votes, is running on the Conservative line.
He is still a popular figure in White Plains and will undoubtedly attract votes.
The Republican candidate, Michael Coffey, a Common Council member for 18 years and owner of a moving and storage company, will be competing with Mr.
Del Vecchio for both Conservative and Republican support.
Reaping the benefits of the division may be the Democratic candidate, Sy J. Schulman, who has served on the Common Council for two years and is the former president of the County Association.


Neighborhood Report: Upper West Side; School Fights to Save a Garden
Should a garden across from Louis D. Brandeis High School be turned into a housing project?
The parents say no, but the city Housing Authority is still trying to get the Board of Education to say yes.
The DOME Garden, named after its organizing group, Development of Opportunities Through Meaningful Education, has been across from Brandeis for 15 years.
The Housing Authority wants to move it to the Brandeis schoolyard, clearing the way for 35 units of low-income housing at the 9,000-square-foot garden site, on West 84th Street between Amsterdam and Columbus Avenues.
But school administrators, teachers and parents say the schoolyard is already too small for the overcrowded school.


Help Offered by Family Advocates
In regard to "Group Attacked Over Legal Advice"  [ Sept. 26 ] , I would like to express my outrage and disgust over your portrayal of Family Advocates as a radical group involved in the practice of law without a license.
This is hardly true.
This group stands for the preservation of the family, not its utter destruction, as condoned and enforced by the legal system of the State of New York, all for the profit of the lawyers and judges involved.


RECORD BRIEF
Gumbo: 'Dropping Soulful H2  O on the Fiber' Chrysalis/ERG 3260212; CD and cassette.


Yeltsin Gets Some Comfort From Clinton
IT was a message of support and encouragement that Secretary of State Warren Christopher delivered to President Boris N. Yeltsin in Moscow last week.
The purpose of the visit, part of a trip that also took in Hungary, Ukraine, Belarus, Kazakhstan and Latvia, was to reassure Mr.
Yeltsin that the Clinton Administration would stick with him all the way to democracy and a market economy, to urge him to avoid backsliding on freedom of the press, and to tell him not to worry that Washington had strategic designs on his back yard in eastern Europe.


Rhonda Feinmehl, Mitchell Robbins
Dr.
Rhonda Iris Feinmehl, the daughter of Arlene and Norman Feinmehl of Highland Park, Ill., was married last evening to Dr.
Mitchell Allen Robbins, the son of Vicky and Larry Robbins of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Moses Mescheloff, a great-uncle of the bridegroom, performed the ceremony at the Fairmont Hotel in Chicago.


Corrections
A headline in some copies of the Metro Report last Sunday about tensions between some New Yorkers and the authorities misidentified the New York City neighborhood involved.
It was Washington Heights, not Crown Heights.


Ellen S. Kurrus, David M. Ross
Ellen Suzanne Kurrus, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Thomas A. Kurrus of Salt Lake City, was married yesterday to David Marshall Ross, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Raymond F. Ross of Westport, Conn.
The Rev.
Lincoln Ure, an Episcopal priest, officiated at the Stein Eriksen Lodge in Park City, Utah.
Rabbi Richard Schachet took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Ross, 27, is a buyer of women's sportswear for Bloomingdale's in New York.
She graduated from Mount Holyoke College.
Her mother is an assistant nurse manager at the University of Utah Medical Center in Salt Lake City.
The bride's father is an internist at St.
Mark's Medical Center there.


Frank J. Del Giudice Dies at 77; Designed Generations of Airliners
Frank J. Del Giudice, an industrial designer who developed the interiors of American passenger jets from the earliest model to modern aircraft like the jumbo 747, died on Oct. 17 at his home in Seattle.
He was 77.
The cause was a heart attack, his family said.


Racial Role-Playing And Guises of Politics
To the Editor:
Brent Staples's criticism of the actor Ted Danson, after his appearance in blackface at a Friars Club roast honoring Whoopi Goldberg, both misinterprets Mr.
Danson's message and sends a troubling one of its own (Editorial Notebook on the rhetoric of race, Oct. 13).


Chief State's Attorney Vows to Fight Gangs
CONNECTICUT'S new Chief State's Attorney, John M. Bailey, leaned forward at his desk in his Wallingford office and delivered what might be considered a declaration of war against the people who are terrorizing the state's cities.
"I want to get the career criminals, the ones who prey on people," he said.
"I want people who commit violent crimes put away. The first role of government is public safety. If you can't have a system where people feel safe and can go to work in safety, then we have a government that is failing." Backlash Against Lawlessness
And, Mr.
Bailey said, a backlash is developing against lawlessness.
"There's a whole new feeling out there," Mr.
Bailey said.
"I'm speaking to organizations at least three nights a week around the state and people are saying they've had it and they don't want fluff for an answer. They're fed up."


For Clinton, A Place on the Bottom Line
AS a self-proclaimed New Democrat, President Clinton has tried to show that he has a warmer heart toward business than the Democrats of old.
Notwithstanding corporate America's traditional skepticism toward Democrats, executives have been willing to give Mr.
Clinton a hearing, but the bottom line is what his policies will mean for their companies' bottom line.
On that, the jury is still out.
With an eye to helping business, Mr.
Clinton has vowed to speed up growth, remove trade barriers and cut corporate health care costs.
He has also pushed through a deficit-reduction plan, which his aides assert has gone far to push down long-term interest rates.
All this, the Administration vows, will fatten profits.


B. R. Weissblatt, D. M. Weill
Bonnie Risa Weissblatt, a daughter of Sue Ellen Schneider of New York and Henry Weissblatt of Boca Raton, Fla., was married last evening to Douglas Michael Weill, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Jeffrey Weill of Scarsdale, N.Y.
Rabbi Richard Chapin officiated at Temple Emanu-El in New York.
Mrs.
Weill, 27, graduated from Cornell University, as did her husband.
She is an assistant to the director of the Museum of Modern Art in New York.
Her father is a precious metals specialist in Boca Raton.
Her stepfather, Robert A. Schneider, is the chief executive of the RAS Securities Corporation in New York.


Profile: Kenneth Stone; His Message for Mom &amp; Pop: There's Life After Wal-Mart
IN the late 1980's, after spending more than a decade helping Iowa towns and businesses cope with change, a rising tide of phone calls and speaking invitations alerted Dr.
Kenneth Stone that he might have the best data in the nation on what happens when Wal-Mart and other mass merchants move into a community.
Since then, the mild-mannered 57-year-old Iowa State University economist has diligently accumulated something even more precious: insights into how local retailers can survive -- even thrive -- when Wal-Mart and its competitors, like Kmart, the nation's No. 2 retail chain, roar into town.


Other Normandy
To the Editor: As a frequent visitor to Caen, I was astonished by the description of the city and William the Conquerer's superb chateau.
Though largely reconstructed, Caen is far from bland; there is a lively open market on the charming 18th-century Place St.-Sauveur, and the nearby streets have enchanting shops and restaurants.


A Name To Reckon With
To the Editor:
Frank Rich's article "Broadway Flops Go to CD Heaven"  [ Oct. 10 ]  has opened up the scrapbooks of memory.
I am, however, prompted to ask if there is not one name missing in all those paragraphs: Goddard Lieberson.


Corrections
A picture in the Residential Resales column last Sunday, with the listing of the house at 572 Ninth Street in Park Slope, Brooklyn, was published in error.
It showed a house at 18 Prospect Park West; it is reprinted on page 7 today with the description of that house.


Vision Problems Call for Treatment
To the Editor:
Two Sept. 26 articles, "Blind Fashion" and "Slow Fade to Blue and Cut" touched on the subject of visual impairment.
Your readers should know that for the millions of people with partial sight, there are special devices and rehabilitation techniques that can help beyond the capabilities of store-bought magnifying glasses.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 10 about the book "Homeboys: Portraits of Young Men Growing Up in New Haven" credited Dru Nadler, the book's photographer, incompletely.
She took all the pictures, not most of them.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 3 about the Osage Hills in Oklahoma characterized the Tallgrass Prairie Preserve incorrectly.
It is the country's largest tract of tall-grass prairie maintained as a preserve, not the largest tract of tall-grass prairie.
The article also misstated the first name of the original owner of the Drummond House.
He was Fred Drummond, not Frank.


Miss Crawley, Mr. De Gregorio
Marcia Kathleen Crawley, a reporter for WINK, the CBS-TV affiliate in Fort Meyers, Fla., was married yesterday to Steven Nicholas De Gregorio, a producer for WFLA, the NBC-TV affiliate in Tampa, Fla.
The Rev.
Dr.
Edward L. Younken officiated at the First Presbyterian Church in Rutherford, N.J.
Ms.
Crawley, who is keeping her name, graduated from the University of South Florida at Tampa.
She is the daughter of Billy and Marcia Crawley of Brandon, Fla.
Her father is a contractor with Hawkins Construction Company in Palm Harbor, Fla.


Advertising Women to Hear Shalala on 'Sandwich Generation'
Donna E. Shalala, the Administration's Secretary of Health and Human Services, will talk about health care for the elderly at a luncheon on Monday sponsored by Advertising Women of New York, a trade association.
The discussion, "Tales of the Sandwich Generation," will address the role of professional women in caring for aging parents.


Sound Bytes; In the Beginning, the Brain . . .  So Let's Figure That Out
Jeff Hawkins is the brain behind several pen-based computers, including the Tandy-Casio Zoomer, a "personal digital assistant" for which his new company, Palm Computer Inc., wrote application and handwriting-recognition software.
He started his career at the Intel Corporation, the chip maker, then moved to Grid Systems Inc., in Fremont, Calif., a maker of desktop and portable computers that was later bought by Tandy and now is a part of AST Research.


Noreen Troccoli, John M. Kyriakis
Dr.
Noreen Troccoli, a senior research scientist at the Massachusetts Public Health Biologic Laboratory in Boston, was married on Friday to Dr.
John Macleod Kyriakis, an assistant professor of medicine at the Harvard Medical School in Boston.
Paul Eysie, a justice of the peace, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the Endicott Estate in Dedham, Mass.
Dr.
Troccoli, 36, is keeping her name.
She graduated cum laude from Muhlenberg College.
She and her husband received doctorates in biology from Boston University.


He Keeps Giving New Meaning to Gross Revenue
TOM CLANCY does not sell videos.
Jane Fonda does not have a morning talk show.
Rush Limbaugh is not available on pay-per-view cable television.
"Beavis and Butthead" do not, at least not yet, have a best-selling book.
So if the question is "Who is involved in all these enterprises," the answer is (E) Howard Stern.


Seeing Hartford's History on the Victorian Trail
In the latter part of the 19th century, Hartford was a bustling center of commerce, and the arts, and home to such people as Mark Twain and Harriet Beecher Stowe.
Now the artifacts of Hartford's Victorian Age can be seen on a new walking and driving tour patterned after Boston's Freedom Trail.
The Victorian Trail, which was inaugurated on Oct. 2, is the work of Historic Hartford, a volunteer group that wants to promote historical tourism in the area.


Miro Offers Case in Point of Creativity's Link to Depression; The Spice of Art
To the Editor:
Your Oct. 12 Science Times article reminded me of a quote by the sculptor Augustus Saint-Gaudens: "What garlic is to salad, insanity is to art."  ROBERT A. PATTERSON  Marina del Rey, Calif., Oct. 15, 1993


Irving Torgoff, 75, a Star Player In Early Days of Pro Basketball
Irving Torgoff, a star college basketball player and a leading pro player in the early days of the National Basketball Association, died on Thursday in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
He was 75 and lived in Lighthouse Point, Fla.
The cause of death was a heart attack, his family said.


Habitats/Vision on Ninth Street; The Brownstone Solution
WHEN Jessika Auerbach first entered the ground floor of the elegant West Ninth Street town house between Fifth Avenue and Avenue of the Americas, she thought she had been mysteriously transported to a garage.
"It was an interesting garage -- the owner was a sculptor, and it was full of metal and wood chips," she said.
"But you needed vision to see it as two good-sized bedrooms, a play hall and a wine cellar."


If Staten Island Votes to Secede, What Will Albany Do?
Ten days before their long-awaited referendum on self-government, Staten Islanders are whipping up secessionist sentiment by singing separatist anthems, staging freedom rides and circulating declarations of independence, on parchment no less.
They have taken to comparing State Senator John J. Marchi, the father of secession, to George Washington.
Frustration has simmered for so long on Staten Island that some residents complain that even secession will not salve their anger.
"What we ought to do is tear down the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge and let us get back to life the way it used to be," said Katherine J. Winter, a retiree who has lived on Staten Island for all of her 68 years.


Pushing Bad Buttons
To the Editor:
Having read "Movies That Push Buttons"  [ Oct. 3 ] , I say the wonders of interactive video technology be damned.
It seems to me that the management and employees of Digital Pictures are teaching our kids to kill.
They are the new pornographers, pushing violence on children, and should be treated accordingly.
RICHARD WELLS  Seattle


Who Invented Brunswick Stew? Hush Up and Eat.
MENTION Brunswick stew to a Southerner and you're likely to hear lyrical accounts of open fires, black iron pots, and a mess of squirrel, rabbit and possum that somebody's daddy brought home.
Never mind that hardly anyone now alive has ever taken part in such a ritual -- it's all part of the legend.
Also integral to the legend is the rivalry between Georgia and Virginia about the origins of the dish, made nowadays with chicken and a variety of meats and vegetables.
On the surface, the dispute is geographical: Was the dish first prepared in the county of Brunswick, Virginia or in the town of Brunswick, Georgia?
Both states stand firmly behind their local tales and archival records, but it's when the talk gets closer to home -- to questions of texture, essential ingredients, methods of preparation, taste -- that things really get hot.


A Voucher Plan for Crowded Schools
With this middle-class suburb experiencing a surge in school enrollment, a grass-roots movement is proposing a voucher system to let parents use public money to send their children to private schools.
The parents concede that state law does not allow for such a system, but say that unless communities begin making the case for vouchers state officials will not act to change the law.


Fourth Place and Farewell To East Coast for Antley
Chris Antley didn't exactly go riding off into the sunset yesterday at Aqueduct.
But, in his last major ride before transplanting his career to California, the 27-year-old jockey finished fourth aboard the favored filly McKaymackenna in the $150,000 Aqueduct Cup while Earlie Fires was riding One Dreamer to a long-shot victory.
It seemed a long time since Antley had reached the peak of his career by winning the 1991 Kentucky Derby with Strike the Gold, and even longer since he had won more races than any other rider in the country in 1985.
And he conceded that the good times had been followed by dwindling times.


Corrections
A picture caption on page 133 of The Times Magazine today, with an article about fashion advertising, renders a model's name incorrectly.
She is Iman; at the time of the photo, Somalia was her home country (not her surname).


Advertisements for Themselves: A Letter from Lewis Lapham
To the Editor:
Every publishing season sponsors at least one cause celebre, and in New York this fall the merchants of high-end literary opinion assigned the show window to a book that dwells, not surprisingly, on themselves.
"New York Days" (review, Sept. 5) is a sentimental memoir in which the author, Willie Morris, describes his tenure as the editor of Harper's Magazine in the years 1967-71 as a lost golden age of American letters, when journalism was poetry and all the writers at all the tables at Elaine's were the natural children of William Faulkner or Henry James.


Crunch Time for Expansion Cities
The owners of the National Football League's 28 teams will meet on Tuesday in a conference room at the Hyatt Regency O'Hare hotel in Chicago.
When they leave the room, perhaps late in the night or early the next morning, they will have brought joy to the two cities they selected for expansion franchises and sadness and frustration to the three losers.
Of the five bidding cities, the favorites are St.
Louis, Baltimore and Charlotte.
The outsiders are Jacksonville and Memphis.
The situation is further complicated because if St.
Louis does not receive an expansion franchise, the New England Patriots may move there.
Even insiders are unsure how the voting will go.
The two new teams will start playing in 1995.
They will pay a franchise fee of $140 million each, as opposed to the $16 million paid by Seattle and Tampa Bay when the league last expanded, 1974 for the 1976 season.
Millions and Millions More
The $140 million franchise cost is only the beginning.
Each new team will need at least $70 million in operating funds.
By last week, each bidding group (there are two from Baltimore) was required to filea $20 million letter of credit with the league.
All complied except for St.
Louis, whose letter is expected by Tuesday morning.
For the winning groups, the $20 million will represent an installment on the first payment to the league of $42 million, due on Nov. 1.


NEWS ABOUT THE MAGAZINE
This issue of the magazine presents three occasions for comment.
As a special report on fashion in the past 50 years, it is an apt place in which to note the retirement -- that is the quasi retirement -- of Carrie Donovan as the Magazine's style editor.
It is a theme issue, the first since the Clinton Inauguration.
Finally, this is the last issue of the Magazine in its present format.
From time to time, the Magazine devotes an entire issue to a single theme.
Just as the Jan. 17 issue examined American politics from serious and not-so-serious perspectives, this issue examines the influence of fashion on daily life since Fashions of The Times began in 1943.
In many ways, fashion has had as much influence on Americans in that time as politics.


Jedd Wolchok and Karen Popkin
Karen Elizabeth Popkin, the daughter of Sam and Marilyn Popkin of Toledo, Ohio, was married last evening to Dr.
Jedd David Wolchok, a son of Harold and Elaine Wolchok of Grymes Hill, S.I.
Rabbi David Katz performed the ceremony at the Princeton University Chapel in Princeton, N.J.
Ms.
Popkin, 27, is keeping her name.
She is a medical secretary at New York University, where she is also a master's degree candidate in music therapy.
She graduated summa cum laude from Ohio University.
Her father, now retired, was an inspector at AMC/Renault in Toledo.
Her mother is a tax preparer in Toledo for H.&amp; R. Block Inc.


Taking a Dog: A Hotel Guide
Places that welcome, not merely tolerate, travelers' dogs are the subject of two new publications, "DogGone" and "Pets in Paradise."
For $6.95, the 13-page "Pets in Paradise" provides listings of Florida hotels, motels and inns that accommodate canine companions.
An extensive chart lists each establishment's guidelines on pet size and weight regulations, availability of pet sitting and animal activities and amenities for the pet owner.
The information will be updated each year.


POSTINGS: Home of the Arthur Godfrey Show; Old CBS Studios Sold
Fans of Arthur Godfrey's old radio shows may be saddened to learn that CBS has sold the Manhattan building that housed the studios where the show and many others originated.
The nine-floor, 58,000-square-foot building, at 49 East 52d Street, was bought for an undisclosed sum by Park Avenue Plaza Company, an affiliate of Fisher Brothers, a Manhattan real estate company.


Three Landscapists and What They See
KORNBLUTH is not New Jersey's oldest private gallery: at the age of 125, Swain, in Plainfield, may have that title.
Still, Kornbluth, a Fair Lawn establishment now in its 35th year, is up there and, what is more, it continues to prosper, albeit under new ownership.
The founder, Lillian Kornbluth, is enjoying retirement, and the business is now run by her long-time assistant, Sally Walker Fowler.


OCT. 17-23: Los Angeles Verdict; A Jury Takes a Lenient View
In the Denny Beating Once again, a vivid videotape of a brutal beating has failed to convince a jury in a high-profile trial in racially divided Los Angeles.
Last week, Damian M. Williams, shown on a television news tape hurling a brick at the head of Reginald O. Denny, a white truck driver, as he lay stricken in an intersection, was convicted of mayhem and four counts of misdemeanor assault in a series of attacks during last year's riots.
But the jury acquitted him of five other felony counts.
He faces sentences that could total from two to eight years.


Family First


Corrections
Because of a producer's delay, an article on page 5 of the Arts and Leisure section today, about the English playwright Martin Crimp, includes an outdated opening schedule for his play "The Treatment" at the Joseph Papp Public Theater.
The opening is now set for Nov. 2, not this Thursday.


'Wild Thing' One Time Too Often
Mitch Williams sat at his locker, staring straight ahead, his hands running through his sweat-dampened hair and his eyes blood-shot.
He had been here before, three days earlier.
He couldn't believe it had happened again.
For the second time in three games, Phillies Manager Jim Fregosi turned to Williams, his closer, to get his team a crucial World Series victory.
For the second time in three games, Williams' wildness had overcome him, and this time the cost was too high.


Insiders and Outsiders
ON Tuesday night, a light-heavyweight rain was falling in nagging little drops on the black felt hat of Joe Frazier, the former heavyweight boxing champion.
Like countless other V.I.P.'s and friends of the owners of the Harley-Davidson Cafe at 56th Street and Avenue of the Americas, Mr.
Frazier had been temporarily shut out of the restaurant's overcrowded grand opening, and he didn't know how to get through the mob or the police barricades.
"I lost my son," Mr.
Frazier said in the bewildered voice of someone who had stepped out into the night expecting to be treated like somebody and ended up in a cattle call of too many other somebodies tied up in everything from chains and bandannas to Versace scarves.


Neighborhood Report: Lower Manhattan; Fighting for the Freedom to Sell Art on the Streets
Robert Bery's first venture into selling his art on New York's sidewalks was short-lived.
After he had been showing his paintings on Wall Street for an hour, undercover police officers confiscated his works.
He was arrested, handcuffed and jailed.
What happened to Mr.
Bery is increasingly common in Greenwich Village, TriBeCa, SoHo and other downtown neighborhoods where artists live, have studios and market their works.
The charge against him was selling merchandise without a vendor's license.
But he couldn't get a permit, because the legal limit of 852 licenses was already taken and the waiting list was closed.


Irish Steamroll Past U.S.C.
As if a reminder was necessary, it was conveniently located above the north scoreboard, the one in front of the library mural where Touchdown Jesus presides over the Notre Dame Fighting Irish and their customary sellout congregation.
Just above the evidence of Notre Dame's 31-13 victory over Southern California this afternoon, the 11th over the Trojans in as many seasons, a garnet and gold pennant waved in the breeze and delivered a promise of a Saturday three weeks away.
The flag read: FLORIDA STATE.


Lisa N. Ridley, Francis M. Caesar
Lisa Nicholle Ridley, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
John E. Ridley 3d of Mequon, Wis., was married yesterday to Francis Mark Caesar, a son of Virginia L. Caesar of Brooklyn and the late Gregory Caesar.
The Rev.
Clarence Robinson, an African Methodist Episcopal minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the New Testament Church in Milwaukee.
Mrs.
Caesar is a vice president at Lehman Brothers, the investment bank in New York.
She graduated from Oberlin College and received an M.B.A. degree from Harvard University.
Her father is an ophthalmologist in Milwaukee.
Her mother, Terri Ridley, is a special-education teacher at the Oliver Wendell Holmes School in Milwaukee.


The Executive Computer; An Ensemble From Microsoft Is Greater Than Its Parts
IT'S a powerful new tool for creating business documents.
It's a diabolical scheme for domination of the desktops of corporate America.
It's a great bargain.
It's a potentially lethal threat to smaller software companies.
Microsoft Office version 4.0 -- an all-in-one package comprising the Windows versions of Word, Excel, Powerpoint and Mail -- is greater than the sum of its parts.
The latest version of Microsoft Office, introduced last week, has the potential to change the way business users of personal computers buy and use software.


Neighborhood Report: Long Island City/Woodside; Parking Lot for a New Ferry May Bring Headaches
The people of Long Island City have for years lived, uneasily, with legions of commuters coursing through their neighborhood -- in cars, buses and trains -- on their way to or from Manhattan.
Now, though, residents in this Queens neighborhood are bracing for a plan that they maintain would add to the onslaught: a proposal for East River ferry service that allows commuters to leave their cars in a 500-car parking lot in Long Island City before sailing toward Manhattan.


Upstart Wisconsin Upset By Gophers
Minnesota 28, Wisconsin 21
Scott Eckers passed for 267 yards and two touchdowns and Chris Darkins scored twice as Minnesota beat previously undefeated Wisconsin, 28-21, last night in Minneapolis.


From Tulipmania to a Glory of Spring
THERE is still time to plant hardy spring-flowering bulbs.
But the opportunity is fast dwindling since the bulbs must grow roots before the ground freezes.
It is these roots that absorb the soil's moisture, which in turn pushes up the leaves and the stems that support the flowers.
Tulips will probably take top priority this year, in celebration of their 400th anniversary.
To mark the event, the Netherlands begins a yearlong tulip quadricentennial.
The country, the center of an industry that propagates more than 3,500 tulip hybrids and species that are planted in gardens all over the world, has long been noted for its beautiful tulips and its vast bulb-growing fields are indeed a sight to be seen.


Jean Keh, Marshall Cohen
Jean Keh, a former partner of David K's, the Chinese restaurant in New York, was married on Friday to Marshall J. Cohen, a lawyer in New York.
Acting Justice Phyllis Gangel-Jacob of the New York State Supreme Court officiated in her chambers in Manhattan.
Ms.
Keh, who is keeping her name, is a Chinese water colorist in New York.
She graduated from Taiwan Provincial Nursing College.
She is a daughter of T. S. and Fu Chen Chi of Madison, Wis.


Ursula Moran, Robert Docters
Ursula Healy Moran, a specialty retail analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company, was married yesterday to Robert Gerald Docters, a management consultant at Booz, Allen &amp; Hamilton.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Herbert G. Draesel Jr. performed the Episcopal ceremony at the Church of the Holy Trinity in New York.
The bride, 32, graduated from Harvard University, from which she also received an M.B.A.
She is the daughter of William and Kathryn Moran of Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
Her father is a computer industry analyst at D. H. Brown Associates, a computer consulting concern in Port Chester, N.Y.
Her mother is an Episcopal lay worker in Poughkeepsie with the Rural and Migrant Ministry, an interdenominational group that provides social services to migrant workers in Dutchess County.


Chaos Theory
Today, there is only one fashion rule: Be true to you.
But that's not as simple as it sounds.
In fact, modern dress codes are more complex than ever.
Choosing from inexhaustible options, people put themselves together not in a random way, but rather to announce their identities.
Here are some examples.
Carrie Donovan


Not in Praise of Dogs: They Should Be Banned
To the Editor:
I could hardly contain myself when I read the reference to Jack Russell terriers as an example of dogs that bark persistently for no reason other than to hear themselves.
That is a slur of the worst kind.


Actions of Japan Peacekeepers in Cambodia Raise Questions and Criticism
In the dun-colored, desert-like plains of southeastern Cambodia, Capt.
Kohji Maeda of the Japanese Self Defense Forces offered a farewell tour of the military camp that his wide-eyed Cambodian neighbors had taken to calling "viang" -- a palace.
Captain Maeda pointed out the air-conditioned barracks with satellite television, the filtration plant able to purify 70 tons of water a day, the row of vending machines that accepted 100-yen coins for ice-cold cans of Japanese beer, the cafeteria that served only Japanese fare and the Japanese-style bath houses with communal tubs and computerized temperature controls.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen108.05
107.07
121.65
per Dollar
German Mark1.6171
1.6775
1.5280
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.3048
1.3309
1.2838
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.4725
1.5208
1.6218
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold$370.00
$364.75
$343.20
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


OCT. 17-23: A New Feud in Somalia; The Secretary General Makes a Defiant Visit To Mogadishu
At odds over how best to proceed in Somalia, the United States and the United Nations have fallen farther into a feud.
Their biggest rupture yet came last week as the United Nations Secretary General, Boutros Boutros-Ghali, defied warnings from Washington and made a sudden visit to Mogadishu, setting off the kind of street protests the Clinton Administration had sought to avert.
The incident served as a display of the willful pride of the Secretary General, who has been determined to advertise his independence from the United States.
While the demonstrations in Somalia died down quickly, the tensions they ignited seemed less likely to settle in Washington, where Clinton Administration officials already blame the U.N. and its representatives for leading policy toward Somalia astray.


Q and A
In Chaucer's Footsteps
Q.
My daughter is a serious student of Chaucer's "Canterbury Tales." Can you tell me if there is a day trip tour from London to Canterbury following in the footsteps of the pilgrims? -- Erika Fusco, Woodcliff Lake, N.J.


Georganna Hoag And Ronald Berry
Georganna Amey Hoag, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
William K. Hoag Jr. of Ridgefield, Conn., was married yesterday to Ronald Alan Berry, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward L. Berry of Goshen, N.Y.
Msgr.
Charles Stubbs performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church.
Mrs.
Berry, 26, is an associate in Stamford, Conn., with the International Executive Service Corporation, a nonprofit organization that helps develop foreign businesses and economies.
She graduated from Towson State University.


Lisa Ridgik, Charles Hooker
Lisa Carol Ridgik, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph Ridgik of San Diego, was married yesterday to Charles Daimon Hooker, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
George Hooker of Cocoa Beach, Fla.
The Rev.
L.
C.
Weber officiated at the Fifth Avenue Presbyterian Church in New York.
Mrs.
Hooker is a national accounts manager in New York for the MCI Telecommunications Corporation, the long-distance telephone company.
She graduated cum laude from Pepperdine University.


Back to the Future


Denise Neumann, James Martin
Dr.
Denise Anne Neumann, an economic consultant for National Research Associates in White Plains, was married yesterday to James Patrick Martin, a currency and bond trader at the Caxton Corporation, a New York money-management concern.
The Rev.
David Peter officiated at St.
Gabriel the Archangel Roman Catholic Church in Saddle River, N.J.
The bride, a daughter of Kathleen and Gerard Neumann of Saddle River, graduated magna cum laude from Wellesley College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a doctorate in economics from Harvard University.


Late Illinois Touchdown Upsets Michigan
Illinois 24, Michigan 21
Johnny Johnson scrambled from two potential tacklers and threw a 15-yard touchdown to Jim Klein with 34 seconds remaining, giving unranked Illinois a 24-21 upset of Michigan yesterday and its first victory at Ann Arbor, Mich., since 1966.


Scientist Clones Human Embryos, And Creates an Ethical Challenge
A university researcher in Washington has, as an experiment, cloned human embryos, splitting single embryos into identical twins or triplets.
This appears to be the first time such a feat has been reported.
The scientist, Dr.
Jerry L. Hall of George Washington University Medical Center, reported his work at a recent meeting of the American Fertility Society.
The experiment was not a technical breakthrough, since he used methods that are commonly used to clone animal embryos, but it opens a range of practical and ethical questions.


Life Sign Takes Crown
Life Sign, the 7-10 favorite driven by John Campbell, clinched divisional honors by winning the Cadillac Breeders Crown 3-year-old pace for colts today at Freehold Raceway.
Life Sign, who battled all season with Riyadh and Presidential Ball, left no doubt about the 3-year-old pacing division today, finishing a neck ahead of the hard-charging Beastmaster and 2 lengths ahead of Broadway Jate -- two opponents who didn't figure to challenge.
Presidential Ball, driven by Jack Moiseyev, finished fifth, and Riyadh, who was driven by Jim Morrill Jr. and challenged Life Sign for the lead during most of the mile, tired and finished seventh.


Erica D. Pocsik, Andrew T. Lahn
Erica Danielle Pocsik, the daughter of Robert and Elaine Pocsik of New York, was married there yesterday to Andrew Taylor Lahn, a son of Gerald and Myra Lahn of Smithtown, L.I.
The Rev.
Dr.
Melvin Hawthorne, the chaplain of the nondenominational Church Center for the United Nations, performed the ceremony at the Metropolitan Club.


Marci Alboher and Gary Nusbaum
Marci Alboher, the daughter of Linda Alboher of Highland Beach, Fla., and the late Manny Alboher, was married yesterday evening to Gary David Nusbaum, the son of Ronni Nusbaum of Hollywood, Fla., and Jack Nusbaum of New York.
Rabbi Helene Ferris officiated at the Plaza in New York.
Mrs.
Alboher, 27, is an associate in the law offices of Sheldon S. Lustigman in New York.
She graduated from the University of Pennsylvania and received her law degree from American University.
Her mother owns the Madrid Motel in Wildwood Crest, N.J.


Michele Mattone, P. L. Corvisiero Jr.
Michele Christine Mattone, the daughter of Vincent J. and Emilia Mattone of Locust, N.J., was married yesterday to Peter Louis Corvisiero Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Corvisiero of Oakwood Heights, S.I.
The Rev.
William Leydon, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at St.
Monica's Church in New York.


The Snooty Dame at the Block Party
We are Where America Shops -- at Sears, in Glendale, Calif.
And Americans -- college students, Hispanic moms with toddlers, old people -- are gawking at a striking apparition poised on the stairway to the women's fitting room.
Cindy Crawford, supermodel, Hollywood wife and hostess of MTV's fashion program "House of Style," is calling out her bra size -- off camera -- above the racks of industrial-gauge corsets.


Couch Potatoes, Indeed
To the Editor:
The article provides a good example of why the Clinton health plan should be tabled.
It displays the effect of having the opinionated make the rules.
Dr.
Barzel proposes to have the obese singled out to pay more for health insurance.
It seems that there are "good" behaviors and "bad" behaviors.
Obesity is one of those which can be the basis for discrimination of all kinds.
If the obese are to pay the "real" cost of their health care, then why not have those with AIDS pay the real cost?
How about those with birth or other genetic defects?
Those on dialysis?
And so on.


Tanya M. Gibson, Brian L. Clark
Tanya Mechelle Gibson, an actress, a choreographer and a dancer in New York, was married yesterday to Brian Lee Clark, a research editor at Lear's magazine in New York.
The Rev.
Edith B. Sloan officiated at the National Presbyterian Church in Washington.
Mrs.
Gibson-Clark graduated from the Julliard School.
She has appeared in the Broadway productions of "The Wiz," "Black and Blue" and "Salome." She is a daughter of James and Kathryn Gibson of Washington.


Margaret A. C. Foley, Peter A. Rafle Jr.
Margaret Ann Corcoran Foley, the daughter of Mrs.
Dermot G. Foley of Larchmont, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Foley, was married yesterday to Peter Allan Rafle Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Rafle of Hopewell, N.J.
The Rev.
John Joseph Foley, a Roman Catholic priest and the bride's uncle, and the Rev.
Nancy Bowen-Martell, a Unitarian minister, officiated at St.
Augustine's Roman Catholic Church in Larchmont.
Mrs.
Rafle is a legal assistant in Washington at W. R. Grace &amp; Company, the chemicals concern.
She graduated cum laude from Barnard College.
Her father was a partner in Kaplan, Kilsheimer &amp; Foley, a New York law firm.
The bride's maternal grandfather, the late Sylvester J. Ryan, was the Chief Judge of the Federal District Court for the Southern District of New York.


A Too-Short Wish List
To the Editor:
I hope that Frank Rich has faxed his wish list to Sony, Angel et al.
My only fault with it is that it's too short.
Everything by Harold Rome should be in print, including "Pins and Needles" and the intriguingly titled "Zulu and the Zayda." Don't laugh -- "Zulu" had some great tunes.
All of Frank Loesser should also be available, and I am personally curious about Harold Arlen (surely, "Wizard of Oz" wasn't all he did).


Corrections
A column on June 20, "If You're Thinking of Living in Morningside Heights," misstated the number of postwar buildings in that Manhattan neighborhood.
Several apartment houses, including the Morningside Gardens co-op, the General Grant Houses and faculty housing for Columbia University, were built after World War II.
A reader noted the error in a letter dated June 20; this correction was delayed by an editing lapse.


Elizabeth Katz And Peter Xilas
Elizabeth Mindy Katz, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Melvin J. Katz of New York, was married last evening to Peter George Xilas, a son of Jean Xilas of Highland Park, Ill., and Isidoros Xilas of Lake Bluff, Ill.
Rabbi Fredric S. Dworkin performed the ceremony at the Brae Burn Country Club in Purchase, N.Y.
Mrs.
Xilas and her husband, both 26, graduated from the University of Michigan.
She is an associate in Chicago with Oppenheimer &amp; Company, the financial services concern.


Help Offered by Family Advocates
The courts of New York have taken many productive working citizens out of their homes and jobs and put them in jail with little or no regard to their being parents of children of what is usually a dysfunctional situation.
These children need special attention at this time by both parents to reassure that they are not the cause of the separation of the family.
They are victims.
The courts need to recognize that the children of today are at a learning stage to be the parents of tomorrow.


Woolworth to Shut Down 37 Variety Stores
As part of a nationwide retrenchment announced recently, the Woolworth Corporation will close 37 of its 103 variety stores in New York City, where generations of one-stop shoppers have gone for everything from hair spray to cough drops to Halloween costumes.
The company is also considering moving out of its corporate headquarters building on lower Broadway.
The company said Oct. 13 that it would close a total of 970 sites nationwide.
The cutback in New York stores, said Frances Trachter, vice president of public affairs, is "very representative of our repositioning to focus our presence in big urban areas." She added: "We want to keep stores in vital downtown areas where people work and live and where there are tourist factors."


OCT. 17-23: Drug Wars, Cont.; Clinton's Pass At Treatment
With the presentation of his drug strategy last week, President Clinton suggested that he was emphasizing rehabilitation and prevention -- a welcome departure to drug experts who have come to believe that the Reagan-Bush formula, devoting 70 percent of their drug budgets to law enforcement, had spent maximum money on minimal results.


Suzanne Silberman, Jeffrey Feldman
Suzanne Silberman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Larry Silberman of North Woodmere, L.I., was married last evening to Jeffrey Bruce Feldman, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Chester Feldman of Kew Gardens, Queens.
Rabbi Isidoro Aizenberg performed the ceremony at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Mrs. Feldman and her husband, both 27, graduated from Boston University.


Anne Sabo, Benson Ross
Anne Marilyn Sabo, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Frank A. Sabo of Summit, N.J., was married there yesterday to Benson Tilford Ross, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edmund B. Ross of Basking Ridge, N.J.
The Rev.
Reilly Jensen officiated at the Central Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Ross, 29, is an account executive at Superba Inc., a manufacturer of neckwear in New York.
She graduated from Cedar Crest College.
Her father, now retired, was the director of labor relations at New Jersey Bell in Newark.


A Year Later, the Focus Has Shifted From a Lost Sailor to His Boat
It will be a year on Wednesday since Mike Plant's abortive call for help from the middle of the Atlantic Ocean.
The 41-year-old solo sailor was lost at sea on his way to a racing event.
But the story of his sailboat continues, in the form of a $6 million lawsuit and another yacht race.


Sports of The Times; No Haunting Out For the Phillies
BABE RUTH did it trying to steal second.
Otis Nixon did it bunting.
Willie Wilson did it striking out for a record 12th time.
Shoeless Joe Jackson did it grounding to the second baseman.
Willie McCovey did it lashing a line drive with the tying run at third and the winning run at second in the seventh game.
What they did was make the last out in a World Series -- a haunting memory that the Phillies escaped last night.


Supercollision
When physicists were trying to persuade Congress to spend billions on a 54-mile underground racetrack for subatomic particles, they promised exciting spinoffs, like more powerful magnets and advanced tunnel digging techniques -- practicalities politicians might come to love.
But what they were truly hoping for was a glimpse of something subtler and harder to sell: a hypothetical particle called the Higgs boson.
Studying the Higgs boson, if it indeed exists, held out the barely tangible promise of an explanation for how the beautifully symmetrical laws of physics, said to rule creation, gave birth to such a messy, asymmetrical world.


Tackless Strips Help to Carpet Stairs
CARPETING a straight staircase is not too difficult.
The method shown here uses tackless strips as fasteners instead of old-fashioned stair rods, which prevent stretching carpet tightly, and allows shifting carpeting to expose fresh material as wear develops.
Avoid using slippery carpet for covering stairs.
Also, leave stairs uncovered or cover them with nonskid rubber pads if they are to be used by the aged or handicapped.


Kristin Stover, Jeffrey Matheny
Kristin Thea Stover, the daughter of Richard and Thea Stover of Wexford, Pa., was married yesterday to Dr.
Jeffrey Michael Matheny, a son of James and Judith Matheny of Chicago.
The Rev.
Helsel Marsh performed the ceremony at the Hiland Presbyterian Church in Pittsburgh.
Mrs.
Matheny graduated magna cum laude from Bowdoin College and is now an M.B.A. candidate at Case Western Reserve University.
Her father is a managing director of the corporate finance group at G. E. Capital Services in Stamford, Conn.


Q and A
Forcing Officers To Pay Their Fees Q. Our small four-unit condominium has a board president, who owns two condos and who has not paid his monthly maintenance fees for eight months.
What can be done? . . .
Angela Wynn, Spring Lake, N.J.


Health Reform and the Lawyers
To the Editor:
Dr.
Ribnik's hatred of lawyers stems from guilt about his own profession.
Less than two years ago, I was told by my obstetrics and gynecology group that unless we had paid in full more than two months before my due date, the hospital and the group would be unable to deliver my child.
More recently, I underwent surgery for wisdom teeth, at a surgical group that had told me my insurance would cover the entire cost of the operation.
It covered only 25 percent of their bill.
My son's friend fell in the park and his mother took him directly to his pediatrician's office; the doctor refused to see him because his mother was unable to pay him immediately, having left her checkbook at home.


For the Disabled, Some Progress
TO Itzhak Perlman, a polio victim at age 4 who gets around in a motorized wheelchair, wears leg braces and uses metal crutches to walk, the question of access is all-important.
"A lot of people think access means the ability to get into a building, no matter where or how you can get into it, whether you get into it through a back alley, or through an elevator that usually carries garbage or food," the renowned violinist says.
"But shouldn't it mean that you can get into the building through the front door with everybody else? That for me is true access."
Not quite two years ago, the Federal Americans With Disabilities Act took effect, requiring that owners or operators of places of public accommodation remove architectural barriers to the disabled if the changes are "readily achievable." The law was hailed as a civil-rights statute that would remove many of the countless barriers that block the physically disabled from having easy access to offices, hotels, restaurants, theaters, airports and other public spaces.


Staff Cats
To the Editor: A double helping of appreciation for Alice Furlaud's "France's Three-Star Cats" (Aug. 22), which charmed and entertained us in its own right, but also reminded us of our own unexpected encounter with another feline hotel staff member.
Although we've come almost to assume a cat will attend us at most American bed and breakfasts, we've never found one in residence at the more formal hotels in this country.
Perhaps because such an expectation never entered our minds, we were surprised and delighted to find the marmalade cat Gainsborough seeing to her morning toilette while comfortably ensconced upon a brocaded sofa in the drawing room of the Dower House at the Royal Crescent in Bath, England.


Maybe Paul Simon Had It All Wrong
"BLACK and white are the colors of photography," Robert Frank declared in 1961, succinctly announcing his position in a controversy that's as old as the medium itself.
And on the other side is Paul Simon, singing of the wonders of Kodachrome: "Makes you think all the world's a sunny day."
The argument about whether black-and-white or color is more artistic, or more truthful, or just plain better has raged since photography's advent in 1839.
But for many years the debate was moot.
Color printing processes, when they existed at all, were tedious to use and tended to produce disappointing results.
Many photographers hand-colored pictures they'd taken in black-and-white, but that seemed less than satisfactory.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
CHILLING BROADCAST
Nosferatu enrolls at Old Eli on Halloween Night, when the Shubert Radio Theater will broadcast its original script, "Dracula at Yale" over WSHU Radio (91.1 FM) at 9 P.M.
The show will be taped in a public performance this Friday at 7:30 P.M. in Thornton Wilder Hall, 2901 Dixwell Avenue, Hamden.
Admission will be $5 at the door, $4 for elderly vampire mavens.


Jets Are Still Evolving, Evolving and Evolving
Forever.
It seems as if the Jets have been evolving forever.
And today becomes one of those Sundays when a clue emerges: Where are they?
And where are they going?
Although Coach Bruce Coslet tried to orchestrate the news media's questions this week -- don't talk to the players about any game beyond today's American Conference East meeting with the Buffalo Bills -- everyone knows today's contest is only the first of a three-part test for the Jets.
Next Sunday, the Jets play the Giants, and the following week face the Dolphins.


Sports of The Times; Jays Cross Baseball's Great Divide
REMEMBER a few years ago when every body particularly self-deprecating Canadian fans -- brooded there might be some kind of frozen-north impediment to the Blue Jays?
Free agents like Paul Molitor and Dave Winfield and Dave Stewart would not choose to mess with visas and tax adustments.
The reserved Ontario fans would not know how to push the Blue Jays home.
Somehow a Canadian team would find a way to stumble.
You heard that stuff up here.
"Winfield Called: He Still Wants More Noise," one banner said last night, referring to Dave Winfield, the Zorba who taught the Blue Jays' fans how to roar last season.


Business Diary: October 17 - 22
COMPANIES Ever Get Burned by a Fast-Talking Broker?
Now, Some Justice  Who says the small investor can't get justice?
Who says you're out of luck when your broker assures you something's safe and you lose your shirt?
Last week the little guy scored big when Prudential Securities agreed to pay $371 million to settle charges that it defrauded 400,000 investors.
Part of that is fines, but the bulk of it -- $330 million -- will go to investors who can prove they got false promises or were otherwise cheated. (If, eyes wide open, you took a flier on a high-risk limited partnership and lost, forget it.) In 1989, Drexel agreed to shell out $650 million, but that was big-game stuff involving institutional investors; this is the largest settlement ever involving the mistreatment of, say, retirees who see modest nest eggs hacked away by fast-talking brokers.
And it may get even bigger: Prudential, which made $1 billion on limited partnerships, must pay all claims -- no limits, no statutes of limitations.


Godfather Of Sole
WHAT THEY ARE: A karate kick of irreverence, size-10 boxing shoes in blood-red high-top leatherette (plastic) with cream-colored rubber soles.
And they are crisscross-laced with about a dozen flat-wound, cotton athletic shoestrings, in sky blue, purple, argyle or gold, tied in large, loose, loopy bows.
WHERE THEY'RE FOUND: On the 53-year-old feet of George Clinton, the zany godfather of funk music.
The foot-stomping, blues-based, rock-and-R-and-B-fused sound has made him the funkiest man on the planet (and sometimes off).
And so go his shoes.
The shoes are also featured in the album art of Mr.
Clinton's latest recording, "Hey Man . . . Smell My Finger," on Prince's Paisley Park Records. (And Prince is someone else with a fetish for uplifting footwear.) WHAT THEY REALLY, REALLY ARE: Attitude with sole.
Like Elvis's (late Vegas period) oversize belt buckle, Louis Armstrong's handkerchief, James Brown's conked kinks and the omnipresent scarf that Aerosmith's Steven Tyler clings to when he sings, Mr.
Clinton's shoes, no matter which ones he wears, are a show-biz-hyped distillation and projection of his style.
And what a style: from a pair of five-inch-high platform sneakers to feathered, mid-calf-length, hand-stitched trapper boots.
Mr.
Clinton, a former hairdresser in Newark who likes to wear his hair these days in a freaked-out, funny fright wig of braids, tresses and coiled multicolored yarn, was recently quoted in Interview magazine as saying, "I can wear any style -- or have no style -- and it doesn't bother me." WHY: Funk feeds the deep nostalgia of inner-city baby boomers and the insatiable hunger of members of the hip-hop generation, who've sampled songs like Mr.
Clinton's "Atomic Dog," "Flash Light" and "P. Funk (Wants to Get Funked Up)" with abandon and reverence.
And thus Mr.
Clinton is high-stepping the pace of his almost-30-year recording career.
A resurgence of 1970's-era disco and funk music is also sweeping the nation, stirring a storm of interest and dollars in Mr.
Clinton's various musical incarnations, including his solo act and his role as leader of the eccentric Parliament-Funkadelic funk mob.
Re-releases of early albums are planned, as well as a major Clinton tour, record executives said.
ADDITIONAL CLINTON PROPS: Funky eye wear, diapers, United States Army-surplus fatigues, chains, rings, wacky T-shirts, knit caps, broad-brimmed hats, capes, cloaks, face paint and, of course, his concert flying saucer, the Mothership.
SHOE-IN: Mr.
Clinton's ability to transform the ordinary -- like the pair of boxing shoes -- into a highly personalized statement "speaks to his strength as an artist," said Susan Nininger, the Los Angeles-based costume designer who was the stylist on Mr.
Clinton's "Smell My Finger" album shot and provided the shoes.
"I was basically asked to bring the wildest stuff I could find and he would be able to wear it," she continued.
"I let my imagination go and meld with his outrageousness, and it worked." CLINTON'S STYLE CREDO: "Colors don't clash; people do," from Mr.
Clinton's new single, "Paint the White House Black."


Kelly Johnson, Stephen George
Kelly Michelle Johnson, a daughter of Mrs.
Danny G. Nicks of Winston-Salem, N.C., was married there yesterday to Stephen J. George, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
James E. George of Park City, Utah.
The Rev.
Ted Trautman officiated at Centenary United Methodist Church.
The bride, 27, graduated from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
She is a candidate for master's degrees in counseling psychology and organizational psychology at Columbia University.


Where Are Studies On Acupuncture?
"A Gentle Remedy With Pins and Needles"  [ Sept. 26 ]  on acupuncture is likely to seriously mislead your readers and, possibly, send many sufferers of chronic disorders to seek the wrong treatment.


I.R.A. Bombing Kills 9 in a Shopping Area of Belfast
At least 9 people were killed and 50 wounded today when the Irish Republican Army exploded a bomb in a Protestant shopping area of Belfast, Northern Ireland, the police said.
The attack, one of the most lethal in recent years, came without the usual I.R.A. warning permitting the evacuation of civilians, according to the Royal Ulster Constabulary, the police in the British province.


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when the negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
BATTERY PARK CITY  $1.875 million
377 Rector Place (Liberty House Condos)  3-bedroom, 4 1/2-bath, 3,362-sq.-ft., penthouse duplex condo in a 6-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, concierge, dining room, 4 terraces, harbor view; common charge $2,750, taxes $16,920.
Listed at $2.25 million, 1 year on market (Broker: Regatta New York Realty)


Fear of New Factional Strife Worries U.N. in Mogadishu
United Nations officials are concerned at signs of disputes between the rival Somali factions that share control of the capital and fear that a clash may be increasingly likely.
Renewed tensions between those loyal to Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid and those loyal to Mohammed Ali Mahdi are a growing threat to peace efforts being pressed by the United States and the United Nations, the officials say.


Anne Gullquist, Patrick Mullin
Anne Sherrard Gullquist, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert W. Gullquist of New Canaan, Conn., was married there yesterday to Patrick Michael Mullin, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael J. Mullin of Tampa, Fla.
The Rev.
Lidabell Pollard performed the ceremony at the Congregational Church.
The Rev.
William Donovan, a Roman Catholic priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Mullin is a research assistant with Columbus Circle Investors, a money-management firm in Stamford, Conn.
She graduated from Denison University.
Her father is a partner in the New York investment bank of Lazard Freres &amp; Company and the chief investment officer of Lazard Freres Asset Management.


Devils Struggle, but Still Make It to 7-0
The Devils were able to escape unscathed from their worst period of the season tonight and recover for a 2-1 victory over the Florida Panthers, their seventh triumph of the season without a loss.
The Devils prevailed despite playing an atrocious second period -- though they weren't scored on in that session -- before a crowd of 14,315 at Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Neighborhood Report: Bay Ridge -- CAMPAIGN FOR THE COUNCIL; Can This Democrat Win Now?
Sal F. Albanese has made a political career of not fitting in.
Despite being a Democrat-Liberal, he won a City Council seat in 1982 in a conservative Republican district, then became the Council's leading maverick, bucking his party hierarchy.
His job security, therefore, is never taken for granted.
That is especially true now, when the head of his ticket, Mayor Dinkins, seems more vulnerable than in 1989, when he garnered barely 1 in 10 votes in this district, the 43d in Brooklyn.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Existing-home sales, millions, ann. rate
3.81
3.82
Auto sales, mid-Oct., millions, annual rate
6.8
6.8
Tuesday
Consumer confidence index, Oct.
62.6
64
Wednesday
Durable-goods orders, Sept., pct. change
2.3
0.5
Thursday
G.D.P., 3d quarter, percent change
1.9
2.7
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
350
345
Friday
Chicago purchasing managers' index, Oct.
54.5
54.5
Personal income, Sept., percent change
1.3
0.2
Monday
Canadian elections
Tuesday
Treasury holds 2-year note auction
Wednesday
Treasury holds 5-year note auction


In Westport, Seafood With Water View
IT'S too late in the season to dine outside on the big old-fashioned porch at The Longshore Grille in Westport.
But that shouldn't keep you from enjoying Long Island Sound views from the windows that cover two sides of the large, light and airy dining room.
The restaurant is located in the Inn at Longshore, a privately owned white clapboard lodge that is surrounded by the Westport town-owned grounds, golf course and sports complex in a choice location facing the water.


Turning Beans Into an Innovation
BEANS are no longer just a food to be cooked with a ham hock and served on a cold day.
Innovative chefs are preparing them in all kinds of interesting ways, making them into creamy purees to go with meat or fish, topping them with green vegetables or even serving them on crostini -- grilled country bread -- as a snack, as the Italians do.
Carol Field, in her excellent new book, "Italy in Small Bites" (William Morrow), gives a recipe for dried fava beans, which are pureed and mixed with wild greens.
The nutty flavor of the favas makes a splendid foil for the bitterness of the greens.
If you can't find wild greens, broccoli rape, escarole, frisee or chicory can be substituted.
The puree is also good spread on grilled, lightly oiled bread and topped with steamed or sauteed greens (winter's answer to summer's tomato bruschetta).


Commercial Property: Leasing Where the Landlord Is; More Space Opens Up in Sites Occupied by Owners
EARLY next year, Cushman &amp; Wakefield will move into Black Rock, the CBS headquarters building at 51 West 52d Street.
It is not a perfect fit -- the big real estate company has to spread out across six floors, making communications between brokers harder than they might have been in, say, 1221 Sixth Avenue, the 49th Street building that could have accommodated Cushman on two floors.
Still, Cushman decided that was a small price to pay for being a paying guest in CBS's house.
"There's an extra measure of comfort about a building when the owner is living there, too," said Charles R. Borrok, the Cushman vice chairman who negotiated the deal.


Andrea Perlbinder, Garth Stein
ANDREA JO PERLBINDER and Garth Ferguson Stein met five years ago at Columbia University, where both were studying for master's degrees in film.
He caught her attention by singing in the editing room and by offering to play the role of the boyfriend in a short 16-millimeter comedy she was making called "Papaya Smoothie."
They are now, as she puts it, "a film-making couple" who write, produce and direct movies, often together.
The two, who share everything from career goals to tastes in shoes, are working on a documentary about Philadelphia, Miss., the town where three civil rights workers were killed in the 60's, as well as an adaptation of "Green Grass, Running Water," a comic novel by Tom King about four elderly American Indians who escape from a hospital to solve the world's problems.


A Body Before, a Body After
"I thought I had the most beautiful torso I'd ever seen," Matuschka said on Tuesday before the opening of her exhibition, "I Am One Woman," at the Y.W.C.A. at Lexington Avenue and 53d Street.
So, in the late 1980's, Matuschka, an artist who goes by one name, started taking photographs of herself nude and making casts of her body.
"I remember looking in the mirror and saying, 'I have such a beautiful body, something bad is going to happen here.' "
And something did.
In 1991, she found out she had breast cancer and had a mastectomy.
"In retrospect, it's amazing that I was documenting my body so extensively before, that I have this permanent record," said the artist, 39.
One self-portrait, "Beauty Out of Damage," which appeared on the cover of The New York Times Magazine on Aug. 15, is among those showing the results of her mastectomy.


Neighborhood Report: South Bronx; 'Leave Us Alone,' Say Parents in District 12
Maria Pena has something to say to the politicians, editorial writers and other people who bitterly criticized Schools Chancellor Ramon C. Cortines for reinstating nine principals and an assistant principal in District 12.
"Why don't they find another district to worry about?" said Mrs.
Pena, who is the president of a parents' association at P.S. 61, where her two grandchildren are enrolled.
"Leave us alone."


Consumed By Guilt in 'Substance Of Fire'
"THE Substance of Fire" by Jon Robin Baitz satisfies the standard for literate arousal that Norman Kline, the producing director, has set for the theater part of the Emelin Theater's performing arts series.
But it is precisely the theater part that is wanting in Kent Paul's flat staging, which is reflected in pedestrian work by an ill assorted cast.
Two years ago, Mr.
Baitz at 29, already the bearer of promising playwright accolades inspired by an earlier play, "The Film Society," came up with this striking work about a fascinating character, Isaac Geldhart, a stately publishing tyrant with a consuming case of Holocaust survivor's guilt.
Isaac condescends to his three children, all grown-up professionals, and holds rigidly to archaic standards like an "ossified old academic," as one of his sons puts it.


Going, Going Crazy: Carter Wins It for Jays
With Joe Carter playing the role of the departed Dave Winfield and reprising the act of Bill Mazeroski, the Toronto Blue Jays tonight erased from the baseball lexicon a statement that had been around for 14 years: No team has repeated as World Series champions since the 1977-78 Yankees.
The Blue Jays, on Carter's electrifying three-run home run against Mitch Williams with one out in the ninth inning, edged the Philadelphia Phillies, 8-6, in the sixth game and ended the longest period baseball ever has had without a repeat World Series champion.
The Phillies had snatched a 6-5 lead in the seventh with a stunning five-run rally.


Before the Rematch, Both Rumors and Conciliatory Words Are Heard
After nine matches, 26 goals and one massive celebration, the only sure thing in this sleepy emirate remains the liquid wealth below its barren surface.
South Korea and Saudi Arabia lead in the race for the two Asian spots in next year's World Cup finals, but with two rounds of matches remaining, neither team is in a position to play for anything less than victory.


Katherine Moran, Guy R. Sullivan
Katherine Miles Moran, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Moran of Cheshire, Conn., was married there yesterday to Guy Richard Sullivan, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard T. Sullivan of Flushing, Queens.
The Rev.
Rowan Greer performed the ceremony at St.
Peter's Episcopal Church.


Kidnapped in Beirut
DEN OF LIONS Memoirs of Seven Years.
By Terry A. Anderson.
Illustrated. 356 pp.
New York:  Crown Publishers. $25.
CHAINS TO ROSES The Joseph Cicippio Story.
By Joseph Cicippio and Richard W. Hope.
Illustrated. 216 pp.
WRS Publishing, 701 North New Road, Waco, Tex. 76710.
TAKEN ON TRUST By Terry Waite.
Illustrated. 370 pp.
New York:  Harcourt Brace &amp; Company.
AN EVIL CRADLING By Brian Keenan. 296 pp.
New York:  Viking. $22.50.


Avedon: Another Angle
To the Editor:
I can't remember a more mean-spirited review than Maud Lavin's of "An Autobiography," by Richard Avedon (Oct. 3).


Dogs and Cats as Co-Therapists for Elderly and Depressed
SOME members of the audience wore fur at a workshop held here recently to expand the use of animals in working with the sick and disabled, the elderly and the mentally disturbed.
Those in fur were the dogs and cats being used for demonstrations, and except for a few meows, they sat quietly until it was their turn in the program.
The animals' good behavior was not surprising, because each one attending the workshop run by Alpha Affiliates, a New Jersey group that studies the benefits of animal-human relationships, had learned the proper demeanor in social situations.
Most of the dogs or cats had participated in the kind of healing relationships that the 30 occupational and recreational therapists, nursing-home employees and health-care volunteers had gathered at the Ramada Inn here to learn more about.
Heeling at Appropriate Speed
Dodger, a bright-eyed golden retriever that has lifted the spirits of many a sick patient in his four years of work as a therapy dog, lay quietly in a corner until it was time to show his wheelchair technique.
Then, as a volunteer played the part of a patient, he gently rested his front paws on the wheelchair and offered his head for a friendly rub.


Roof Collapses in Harlem Building, Injuring 6 People
The roof of a city building being rehabilitated for temporary housing for the homeless collapsed yesterday morning in Harlem, taking five workers down with it and injuring a passer-by.
A spokesman for the Buildings Department said the contractor, A.H.A.
General Construction of Brooklyn, had violated city policy by not applying for a special permit to work on the weekend.
The company also did not inform the City Housing Authority, which manages the site, that it was working, so the engineer and construction manager who usually monitor safety were not at the site, the department said.


Props, Symbols and Nonstories in TV Campaign Coverage
In local television campaign coverage, it began and ended as the week of the rubber chicken.
The fowl prop, produced by the Conservative Party mayoral candidate, George Marlin, as a stand-in for Rudolph W. Giuliani in a program on WNBC-TV, was the leitmotif as television reporters harped on the Republican and Democrat mayoral candidates' failure to debate face to face.
The reporters' obsession with the nondebate built to a frenzy on Thursday, when they tried to force Mr.
Giuliani and Mayor David N. Dinkins together as they briefly crossed paths outside Columbia University.


First Fiddle


Neighborhood Report: Upper West Side -- NEIGHBORHOOD MYSTERY; Little Liberty: A Footnote To History
The sight of a diminutive Statue of Liberty perched atop 43 West 64th Street has piqued the curiosity of millions of visitors to the Lincoln Center area over the years.
Spotlighted at night, the statue is 55 feet tall and, like New York Harbor's 300-foot-tall grand dame, is made of molded sheet metal bolted to a frame, with a circular stairway inside.


Kristin Schmidt, Brian Moriarty
Kristin Karin Schmidt, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward H. Schmidt of Appleton, Wis., was married yesterday to Brian Mathew Moriarty, the son of Lois V. Moriarty, also of Appleton.
The Rev.
Dr.
James H. Harris Jr., a United Methodist minister, officiated at the Warren Hotel in Spring Lake, N.J.
Mrs.
Moriarty, 26, is a chiropractic assistant in New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University, from which her husband received a master's degree in management.


Timman's End Play Is His Achilles' Heel
THE most persistent hindrance in Jan Timman's play in the first half of his International Chess Federation championship match with Anatoly Karpov has been the endgame: when it is favorable for him, he does nothing more than draw; when it is unfavorable, he loses.
For example, the Dutchman lost Game 1 with mistakes in the ending and here, in Game 10, played on Sept. 22 in Amsterdam, he repeats the flaw.


Midway Plans To Fly Again From Chicago
Midway Airlines, which operated from Midway Airport in Chicago for a dozen years until it halted service in 1991, plans to start up again this fall.
Its name and base airport will be the same, and its chief executive, Ken Carlson, was the founder of Midway in 1979, but little else has been retained from the original airline.
Like many fledgling carriers, the new Midway, (800) 446-4392, is taking advantage of ripe market conditions -- including relatively inexpensive planes and a large pool of unemployed airline workers -- to fill a perceived niche.


Giuliani Campaign Theme: Dinkins Isn't Up to the Job
The New York City mayoral candidates have tried to frame their contest in many terms, from who would make the better healer to who would be tougher on crime.
But for Rudolph W. Giuliani, one argument has emerged again and again: that Mayor David N. Dinkins is simply not up to the daunting task of managing a complex city.
"It is patently clear that he can't manage a riot, he can't manage a boycott, he can't manage a budget, and he can't manage a campaign to keep it even vaguely in compliance with the law," Mr.
Giuliani said last week, summing up in campaign hyperbole what even Mr.
Dinkins has acknowledged were missteps in handling problems including violence on the streets and raises for the city's union workers.


Health Reform and the Lawyers
To the Editor:
Legal Services of Eastern Missouri, a nonprofit organization, serves approximately 20,000 poor people a year with their civil legal needs.
The majority of our clients are women with children, many of them in need of protection in domestic violence matters.
Recently we have also been assisting hundreds of people, victims of the flooding in Missouri, with regard to their needs for food, shelter, and unemployment benefits, as well as in efforts to protect them from charlatans that prey on victims in times of disasters.


Neighborhood Report: Harlem; Pastors, Parking And Privilege
The city allows doctors to leave their cars in no-parking zones in front of hospitals.
Police officers are allowed the same privilege near precinct houses.
Teachers can park in front of some schools.
So why, pastors in Harlem wonder, do ministers who park in front of churches get tickets?
In an area dotted with houses of worship, the question is being asked with exasperation.
Despite denials from the Transportation Department, ministers and staff members insist that parking agents are cracking down.


Public &amp; Private; Gender Gaffe
It has been one thing after another for Christine Todd Whitman, the Republican who is running for governor of New Jersey against the incumbent Democrat, Jim Florio.
There was the day she was reduced to offering a photo op of cows and pigs at her hunt-country home to defend her farmland tax breaks.
There was the day she fired her campaign manager, who was also her brother.
The bus for her bus tour had car trouble.


The Spouse Factor
THE First Lady of New York City is about to deliver a brief speech.
Its text is computer-printed in 14-point helvetica bold on a half-dozen file cards clutched in her left hand.
Like all her speeches, this one was written by her press officer.
As she always does, Joyce Dinkins read it through and shortened it.
This is her third speech of the day.
It will not be the last.
Public speaking is far from her favorite endeavor.
But as the daughter of one of the city's first black district leaders, Mrs.
Dinkins, now 62, was weaned on calls to duty, and this particular duty is essential in a married life that often appears to be lived more for her husband than with him.


Killer


4 Brooklyn Institutions Woo Visitors From Other Boroughs
Four Brooklyn cultural institutions are pooling a $23,000 tourism grant from city agencies to create a marketing campaign with the theme "A Day in Brooklyn." The object: to attract visitors from other parts of the city who may not know that the four institutions -- the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, Prospect Park, the Wildlife Center and the Brooklyn Museum -- are fairly close neighbors.
The campaign, also supported by private donors, will make its first appearance in subway advertisements next month.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
P.S.A.L.
SUPER SUB: Nasry Aranda starting in the backfield in place of Allen Conyers (separated shoulder) rushed 16 times for 130 yards and 2 touchdowns to propel STEVENSON over EVANDER , 30-14.
Aranda had scoring scampers of 37 and 33 yards.
SENSATIONAL SYLVESTER: Keith Sylvester rushed for 161 yards on offense and added 8 tackles and 2 interceptions as CLINTON (3-3) topped WASHINGTON (1-5), 21-18.


Hamburg Journal; Of Ghoulies and Beasties and Bumps in the Night
IN a remote part of this rural Sussex County hamlet, known at this time of the year for its colorful wash of autumn leaves, a frightening change is afoot.
Unearthly moans and spectral visions charge the air once the sun sets.
A mummy's ghostly form walks unchallenged with the likes of Slime Man and a crimson-eyed vampire.
That's not to say that local residents are immune to the ghastly invasion.
But they know that Richard Hanf is up to his usual Halloween tricks.


On the Rim of Java's Mount Bromo
FOR travelers to Indonesia, a volcano climb is as essential as a gamelan concert or a frolic on Bali's beaches.
In few places is the Pacific's volcanic ring of fire so manifest.
More than a third of the world's active volcanoes mark this country's jagged landscape.
Settlement, agriculture, religion -- all have been shaped by the overhanging peaks.
The major deterrents to a climb have been remoteness and the lack of comfortable lodging.
Indonesia's higher volcanoes have been mainly for backpackers, or those who don't mind roughing it.
But now, on Mount Bromo in east Java, knowledgeable guides and a comfortable new hotel have made some of the country's most spectacular volcanic vistas far more accessible.


Help Offered by Family Advocates
I would like to state that Family Advocates stands for values that seem to have escaped American society over the last several decades.
It has attempted to bring sanity for thousands of men and women facing mutual self-destruction in the so-called legal system that professes to protect the interest of children.


And How About . . . ?
To the Editor:
My nominee for Frank Rich's wish list of "dimly remembered musicals of the 50's and 60's" is "Kean," with Alfred Drake and Lee Venora.
This show by Robert Wright and George Forrest was, as the Columbia LP (KOS 2120) jacket rightly claimed, "a rich and lavish musical" about the great actor and "about life and love in London a century ago." MARK PEARSON  Boston


BEST SELLERS: October 24, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
63
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
3
2
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.) Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
3
2
4
LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching Hour."
4
4
4
SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $23.) Two Navajo tribal policemen undertake to unravel a web of politics and murder.
5
5
9
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
6
6
7
THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Concluding the "Griffin &amp; Sabine" trilogy.
7
7
28
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
8
8
32
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
9
1
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in Victorian England's high society.
10
13
40
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through illustrated cards and letters.
11
9
7
STRIP TEASE, by Carl Hiaasen. (Knopf, $21.) The problems, political and sexual, of a Florida Congressman.
12*
10
4
POT OF GOLD, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon, $23.) A single mother and her teen-age daughter go on a spree after winning $60 million in a lottery.
13
11
11
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and woman and for the woman's first lover.
14
12
12
STREETS OF LAREDO, by Larry McMurtry. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A Texas bounty hunter goes south of the border in pursuit of a train robber and killer.
15
15
2
SMILLA'S SENSE OF SNOW, by Peter Hoeg. (Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux, $21.) In Copenhagen and Greenland, a woman investigates a child's mysterious death.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
2
1
7
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
3
2
24
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
4
3
9
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
5
4
3
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
6*
7
10
MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Essays suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected ways and places.
7
10
3
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Reflections on 43 years of marriage.
8
9
4
THE FOUNTAIN OF AGE, by Betty Friedan. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A call for men and women to regard life after age 60 as an exciting adventure.
9
5
63
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
10
6
15
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A psychiatrist discusses mood-changing medications and their effects on a person's self.
11
8
20
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
12
1
STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski. (HarperCollins, $22.) Reminiscences from the man who played Capt.
James Tiberius Kirk.
13
12
45
CARE OF THE SOUL, by Thomas Moore. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) A psychotherapist's discussion of spirituality and everyday life.
14
17
THE FIFTIES, by David Halberstam. (Villard, $27.50.) A journalist's social, political, economic and cultural history of the 1950's.
15
14
3
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
3
2
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
2
1
23
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.
3
2
13
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
4
4
17
EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Counsel from a physician about diet and nutrition.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 9, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
THE ARABISTS: The Romance of an American Elite, by Robert D. Kaplan. (Free Press, $24.95.) A thoughtful, balanced view of the inbred State Department specialists whose fluffs (like their dealings with Saddam Hussein) have received more attention than their successes (like the exodus of the Ethiopian Jews).
THE COST OF TALENT: How Executives and Professionals Are Paid and How It Affects America, by Derek Bok. (Free Press, $22.95.) Mr.
Bok, formerly president of Harvard, examines, documents and analyzes the trends that have given David Letterman an income more than 50 times that of President Clinton.
THE CROCODILE BIRD, by Ruth Rendell. (Crown, $22.) A coolly composed allegorical suspense tale (not dependent on a detective) about a girl who accepts her mother's tyranny though seeming to know that the woman is a mad murderer.
DAPHNE DU MAURIER: The Secret Life of the Renowned Storyteller, by Margaret Forster. (Doubleday, $25.) An insightful life of the popular author whose resentment at being born female never challenged the social arrangements that depressed the status of women.
THE GIRL WHO TROD ON A LOAF, by Kathryn Davis. (Knopf, $23.) A heated, dramatic novel narrated by Francie, an underachieving composer who finds redemption by completing an inherited unfinished opera.
THE HOLDER OF THE WORLD, by Bharati Mukherjee. (Knopf, $22.) A woman of today celebrates the life of a woman who lived three centuries ago and across two cultures in this brilliantly conceived and executed novel.
MARGUERITE YOURCENAR: Inventing a Life, by Josyane Savigneau. (University of Chicago, $25.) Yourcenar (1903-87), author of "Memoirs of Hadrian," intense, cerebral, fascinated by sexual ambiguity, has found a perfect biographer in the patient, wise, industrious Ms.
Savigneau.
PRONTO, by Elmore Leonard. (Delacorte, $21.95.) Mr.
Leonard's latest antihero, a cheapo operator for the Miami syndicate, flees to Italy, pursued by the Feds and by two quaint thugs who can't keep their minds on their work.
REMEMBERING BABYLON, by David Malouf. (Pantheon, $20.) Mr.
Malouf's adroit seventh novel confronts a band of settlers in Australia with Gemmy, a boy born white and raised by aborigines; they dread that their own identities might be compromised like his.
TRAVELS WITH LIZBETH, by Lars Eighner. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) A writer who until very recently made homelessness his full-time job has found a strikingly unconventional voice and form to deal with life as the literate don't normally live it.
THE WARBURGS: The Twentieth-Century Odyssey of a Remarkable Jewish Family, by Ron Chernow. (Random House, $30.) Mr.
Chernow's vast Warburg saga follows the fates of a rich, thoroughly secularized German Jewish family betrayed by the nation and culture they loved.


Miro Offers Case in Point of Creativity's Link to Depression
To the Editor:
The publication of Michael Kimmelman's review of the centenary retrospective exhibition of the work of Joan Miro ("A Grand Phantasmagoria From a Catalan Poet," Weekend, Oct. 15) in the same issue as your editorial on the link between depression and artistic creativity, "Making Art of Madness," struck me as an interesting coincidence.
Though not widely recognized, Miro suffered from depressive disorders, and he often referred to them during interviews and in his writings.


IN SHORT: NONFICTION
HUMOR  A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN . . .
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR  By Erma Bombeck.
HarperCollins, $20.


Health Reform and the Lawyers
To the Editor:
Dr.
Ribnik's proposal for government-funded civil legal services for the poor and the elderly, at reduced rates, may not be completely radical.
I am paid by the government of Massachusetts at something close to the rate Dr.
Ribnik proposes for his Legalaid, "35 cents per dollar of the usual fee," for juvenile court work.
Because of Medicaid and Medicare, doctors are paid to treat whatever combination of medical problems a poor or elderly person presents to them.
By contrast, when my clients' cases spill over into probate court, district court or housing court, I often find myself doing uncompensated work on their behalf.
Frequently, my adversaries are also appearing without fee.
JENNA SCHULMAN Springfield, Mass., Oct. 5


Ciao, Giordano: The End of a Family Business


New Activism Over Breast Cancer
WHEN Helen M. Ciaffa first felt a lump in her right breast, she ignored it.
When a lesion on the breast began to bleed, she tried not to be concerned.
When her arm started to enlarge, she bought long-sleeve blouses to cover the swelling.
"I was petrified, but I couldn't deal with it," explained the 72-year-old retired clerical worker from New Rochelle.
"Then my husband looked at me one day and said, 'Helen, why don't you just jump out of the window, because you're already killing yourself this way.' "


THE NATION: N.R.A. Campaign Under Attack; The Small-Arms Industry Comes On to Women
THE National Rifle Association has come a long way, baby.
For its latest ad campaign it has updated the kind of feminist slogans that Virginia Slims has used to sell cigarettes.
Now the gun lobby is telling women "how to choose to refuse to be a victim."
The ads, in magazines like Family Circle and Redbook, cite scary crime statistics and invite women to call an 800 number (answered by women) for information about an N.R.A.
"refuse to be a victim" course.
The group says it is selling awareness, not guns.


Pearl Jam Stays the Course With Its Own Rock Hero
Who would want to be a rock hero?
At this late date, the role seems utterly thankless, a never-ending attempt to navigate between fans' escalating demands on the one side and deluded self-importance on the other.
Anyone with a memory can tally the would-be heroes who ended up as cranks, self-parodies, small-timers or corpses; even self-proclaimed anti-heroes slip up and become mundane.
It's hard to find some middle ground between rock's egalitarian myth -- that anybody can do it -- and the gifts of talent, passion and charisma, or to take songs seriously without inviting cackles from Beavis and Butt-head.
But Eddie Vedder, Pearl Jam's singer and lyricist, has volunteered for the job, and he has kept himself honorable through Pearl Jam's second album, "Vs." (Epic 53136; LP, cassette and CD).
His stalwart baritone -- sustained and resolute, gasping with exhaustion or shouting in a last-ditch rasp -- is the voice of long-suffering defiance.
He offers not the illusion of heroic power but the consolation of empathy.
"I am lost, I'm no guide," he moans in "Leash." "But I'm by your side."


Wall Street; Prudential's New Headache Could Cost $5.3 Billion
IT has not been a good week for Prudential Securities.
While it was agreeing to pay at least $371 million to investors victimized by misleading sales tactics, it was hit with a class action claiming some investors were unfairly treated by one of Prudential's most successful mutual funds.
The suit, filed at Federal court in New York for a Maryland investor, claims that Prudential's changes in the organization and fees of the $5.3 billion Prudential Utility Fund required some longtime investors to pay higher fees than they bargained for.


If TV Drives Foreign Policy, We're in Trouble; Fixing Broken Glass
To the Editor:
I was a Peace Corps volunteer in Somalia in the late 1960's.
One day a woman begged me to fix the shattered glass lining of her thermos bottle.
The woman cried that her husband would beat her if he found out it was broken.
She would not accept that I could not fix broken glass.


Struggling to Lighten the Mortgage Debt on Co-ops
THE circumstances of the co-op market have made a landlord -- small-time and probably temporary -- out of Michael Kollmer.
In 1988 he and his new bride, Rachael Smith, bought a two-bedroom apartment in the 38-unit building at 622 West 114th Street, taking sponsor financing.
They were unable to sell it when Mr.
Kollmer moved to New Rochelle in 1990 to be closer to a new job as a music teacher in Mamaroneck.
This year the Kollmers, who now have two sons, bought a house in New Rochelle.
They rent out the West Side apartment, absorbing a $150-a-month loss, the difference between the rent they receive and the carrying costs of the apartment.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York Senate
1.
Peacekeeping: Vote on a resolution that would require congressional authorization before the President deployed combat troops under foreign commanders in United Nations operations.
Rejected 65 to 33, Oct. 19.
2.
Peacekeeping: Vote on a resolution urging President Clinton to consult with Congress before any U.S. troops are put under new foreign commands.
Approved 96 to 2, Oct. 19.
3.
Bosnia: Vote on a non-binding resolution that puts Congress on record as insisting that it give its approval before any U.S. troops are used to implement a peace agreement in Bosnia.
Approved 99 to 1, Oct. 20.
4.
Haiti: Vote on a resolution that would limit President Clinton's authority as commander-in-chief to send U.S. troops to Haiti.
Rejected 81 to 19, Oct. 21.
5.
Haiti: Vote on a non-binding resolution that urges President Clinton to seek congressional approval before sending troops to Haiti.
Approved 98 to 2, Oct. 21.
Connecticut  Dodd (D) . . .
N Y Y N Y  Lieberman (D) . . .
N Y Y N Y  New Jersey  Bradley (D) . . .
N Y Y N Lautenberg (D) . . .
N Y Y N Y  New York  D'Amato (R) . . .
Y Y Y Y Y  Moynihan (D) . . .
N Y Y N Y  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.
Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York House
1.
Supercollider: Procedural vote on whether the House should give final approval to a bill allotting $22.5 billion for hundreds of water and energy projects around the country, including $640 million that the Senate had approved for continued construction of the Supercollider.
Rejected 264 to 159, Oct. 19.
Connecticut
1. Kennelly (D) . . . N
2. Gejdenson (D) . . . N
3. DeLauro (D) . . . N
4. Shays (R) . . . N
5. Franks (R) . . . Y
6. Johnson (R) . . . Y  New Jersey
1. Andrews (D) . . . Y
2. Hughes (D) . . . N
3. Saxton (R) . . . N
4. Smith (R) . . . N
5. Roukema (R) . . . N
6. Pallone (D) . . . N
7. Franks (R) . . . Y
8. Klein (D) . . . N
9.
Torricelli (D) . . .
Y  10.
Payne (D) . . .
N  11.
Gallo (R) . . .
Y  12.
Zimmer (R) . . .
N  13.
Menendez (D) . . .
N  New York
1. Hochbrueckner (D) . . . Y
2. Lazio (R) . . . N
3. King (R) . . . N
4. Levy (R) . . . N
5. Ackerman (D) . . . Y
6. Flake (D) . . . N
7. Manton (D) . . . Y
8. Nadler (D) . . . Y
9.
Schumer (D) . . .
N  10.
Towns (D) . . .
N  11.
Owens (D) . . .
Y  12.
Velazquez (D) . . .
N  13.
Molinari (R) . . .
N  14.
Maloney (D) . . .
N  15.
Rangel (D) . . .
N  16.
Serrano (D) . . .
N  17.
Engel (D) . . .
A  18.
Lowey (D) . . .
Y  19.
Fish (R) . . .
N  20.
Gilman (R) . . .
N  21.
McNulty (D) . . .
Y  22.
Solomon (R) . . .
N  23.
Boehlert (R) . . .
N  24.
McHugh (R) . . .
N  25.
Walsh (R) . . .
N  26.
Hinchey (D) . . .
N  27.
Paxon (R) . . .
N  28.
Slaughter (D) . . .
N  29.
LaFalce (D) . . .
N  30.
Quinn (R) . . .
N  31.
Houghton (R) . . .
N  KEY: Y Yea; N Nay; (A) Absent or did not vote; (P) Present.


Holly R. Fogler, Michael S. Solender
Holly Renee Fogler and Michael Samuel Solender, associates at the Washington law firm of Arnold &amp; Porter, were married last evening in Alexandria, Va.
Rabbi Gerald Serotta performed the ceremony at the Radisson Plaza Hotel.
Ms.
Fogler is keeping her name.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Texas, from which she also received a law degree.
She is the daughter of Sharon Roberts of Dallas.
Her mother is a legal secretary at Jones, Day, Reavis &amp; Pogue in Dallas.
The bride is the stepdaughter of Larry Roberts of Dallas.


Education and Help for Teen-Age Mothers
AS Tracy Jewel sat twirling her fashionably long brown hair around the edge of her pencil, she looked like any other high school student struggling to solve a difficult math problem.
But this 18-year-old senior from Mamaroneck, who still had a mouthful of braces, wasn't quite like the rest of her peers in this math class.
Her classmates eagerly looked forward to the late morning break, when they could grab a soda and a cigarette outside.
Tracy was just as eagerly anticipating her time out from the school day, so she could cuddle her 4-month old son, Jesse, who was in the day-care center of the Southern Westchester Board of Cooperative Educational Services here.


T. S. Eliot's First Marriage Turns a Film Into a Tempest
In a country that takes its literature seriously, a forthcoming film is causing a small stir with its portrait of the unhappy first marriage of T. S. Eliot, Britain's favorite expatriate American poet.
With a pin-striped Willem Dafoe as the poet and Miranda Richardson as his willful, eccentric first wife, Vivien Haigh-Wood, "Tom and Viv" portrays a marriage defined by mutual incomprehension, sadness and not a little rancor.
The film, directed by Brian Gilbert, traces a relationship that began at Oxford during World War I, when Tom met the lively, emotionally unpredictable Viv, the elder of two children of a well-to-do (and well-connected) Edwardian couple.
The liaison and its decline -- signaled in 1932 by their separation and culminating with her institutionalization six years later -- form the drama of "Tom and Viv," which is scheduled for release next year.
Michael Hastings, co-author of the script with Adrian Hodges, adapted the screenplay from his 1984 play, seen Off Broadway at the Public Theater in 1985.


A Shakespearean Timon Unafraid of Emotion
While rehearsing the title role in "Timon of Athens," which opens the National Actors Theater's third season on Broadway on Nov. 4, Brian Bedford is staying at the director Gregory Mosher's spacious West Village apartment.
"That's why there's this enormous plow in the middle of the room," he says, indicating a farm implement presumably commemorating Mr.
Mosher's direction at Lincoln Center of "Speed-the-Plow," the play that gave New Yorkers the opportunity to see Madonna tackle David Mamet's dialogue.
"Madonna's number is on the phone memory -- shall we ring her up?"
You don't expect one of North America's eminent classical actors to be immersed in pop culture, but a lively discussion of recent action-adventure movies (he thought "Striking Distance" was "quite good, of its kind"), reveals that Mr.
Bedford does not spend all his time reading Shakespeare and Moliere.


Santiago
Flying over the Chilean Andes to land in the fertile valley of Santiago, a visitor has a first impression of quiet farm lands surrounded by mountains.
This is the calm setting for the surprisingly modern metropolitan area of five million.
In contrast to the chaos found in many big Latin cities, Santiago has a distinct sense of order, along with the flavors of colonial antiquity.
Founded by Pedro de Valdivia in 1541, it has benefited from Chile's economic boom over the last four years.
The city is easy to get around, has the most up-to-date technology and infrastructure available in Latin America and is relatively safe for travelers.
On a clear day, the mountains around the city can be a shimmering sight of brown topped with white, as they rise above the modern buildings from a thin brown haze at the edge of the city.
But a view of the mountains, particularly in winter, is never guaranteed, since in June, when winter begins in the Southern Hemisphere, the city is often troubled by smog.


Midori Recital at SUNY Purchase
SOME world-renowned visitors will perform in Westchester next weekend.
On Friday at 8 P.M., the young violinist Midori plays at the Performing Arts Center at the State University of New York at Purchase with the pianist Robert MacDonald as accompanist.
Their program includes Beethoven and Bartok sonatas, Alfred Schnittke's charmingly tongue-in-cheek "Suite in the Old Style" and Saint-Saens' "Introduction and Rondo Capriccioso." The box office number at the SUNY campus is 251-6200.
Two recitals are scheduled next Saturday at 8:30 P.M.
In one, the pianist Richard Goode will play four Beethoven sonatas -- Nos. 1, 4, 17 ("Tempest"), and 28. -- for Friends of Music at the Ossining High School.
The numbers are 271-3265 or 271-4800.
In another, also scheduled for 8:30 P.M., Vagan Papian, who emigrated to Israel from the Soviet Union in 1990, offers a varied keyboard program.
He will play works by Mozart, Prokofiev, Grieg and Liszt for his debut in the Music Room at Caramoor in Katonah.
The number for information is 232-1252.


Jet Lag, Rockets Await the Knicks
Asked if he spoke Spanish, John Starks had an answer.
"Adios, amigos" the Knicks' guard said with a smile.
"I guess that's what I'll say when we leave."


Bringing Hollywood Home
Before the emergence of the Seventh Avenue designer, an American fashion force rivaled, and even eclipsed, anything that sauntered down a Paris runway: the Hollywood costumer.
For Hollywood, promoting costumers was part of the marketing machine.
The studios publicized them along with the stars they dressed, feeding sketches to fan magazines and encouraging stores to adapt the clothes of film epics.
As early as 1917, Photoplay magazine enthused that D. W. Griffith's "Intolerance" would lead women "Back to Babylon" for their fashion looks, which the magazine helpfully illustrated so moviegoers could copy them.


Timely Tips From A.A.A.
The recent spate of attacks on tourists in Florida has prompted the American Automobile Association to publish a brochure advising travelers how to avoid trouble.
The six-page brochure, "Playing It Safe," is free to members and nonmembers of the A.A.A. and offers tips that range from what cautious tourists might routinely do to suggestions that might not occur to most people.


Corrections
A picture caption on Sept. 19 with an article about Yaddo, the artists' colony, referred incorrectly to Joseph Caldwell.
He is a novelist and playwright, not a poet.
Another caption with the article, about residents at Yaddo in 1942, misspelled the surnames of two artists.
They are Nicholas and Merle Marsicano.
A letter dated Oct. 6 from a Yaddo alumnus, about Mr.
Caldwell, and a telephone call on Oct. 14 from the Marsicano family alerted The Times to the errors; this correction was delayed for checking with Yaddo.


Turning Loose One of Texas's Best-Kept Secrets
A large town located about 90 miles east of Dallas, Tyler is, to say the least, an unusual place to see a country music concert.
With its spacious front yards, green shade trees and porticoed doorways on respectably sized homes, Tyler seems like the essence of modern Southern gentility.
On a recent Sunday afternoon, the manicured lawns are strangely empty; the streets are eerily quiet, and the broad intersections are bereft of traffic.
The weather is hot and bright like Indian summer, but most of Tyler seems to be locked away behind closed doors.
In the amphitheater of the public park, though, a small crowd of hippie-generation couples, plus assorted aunts and uncles and cousins, has gathered for what is surely an unusual event by Tyler standards: a free outdoor concert by the Texas singer and songwriter Jimmie Dale Gilmore.
But then Mr.
Gilmore is not your typical country performer.
For years he has been one of Texas's best-kept secrets.
An Austin resident in his late 40's, he has only recently begun to emerge into the national spotlight.
His show in Tyler is the first stop on a two-month national tour in support of his new album, "Spinning Around the Sun" on Elektra. (The tour arrives in New York this week for three shows Tuesday through Thursday at the Ballroom.)


Recreating 'The Age of Innocence' in Brick and Paint
EDITH WHARTON SET "THE AGE OF Innocence" in the New York of her childhood, the city of the 1870's.
In Martin Scorsese's new film adaptation, the scenes of New York and its environs are a glorious amalgam of intact Victoriana and the film makers' fantasies.


Lianna Singleton And Paul Scura
Lianna Singleton, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Arthur E. Singleton of Barrington, R.I., was married yesterday to Paul V. Scura, a son of the late Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Scura.
The Rev.
Jonathan J. D. Ostman, an Anglican Episcopal priest, performed the ceremony at St.
John the Evangelist Church in Newport, R.I.


Opening the Archives
EXACTLY 50 YEARS AGO TODAY, READERS OF THE New York Times Magazine got quite a jolt.
There, in this sober-sided publication, were 13 pages devoted to women's clothes.
The feature, "Fashions of The Times," was a patriotic gesture to illustrate the vitality of Seventh Avenue, cut off by war from Paris.
But after that, it was clear that New York was also a fashion source worth covering.
Cruising through a half century of The Times's fashion coverage is a trip.
In this yellowed and frayed-edged cache, pages turn, and silhouettes, attitudes toward dressing -- even the importance of the subject matter itself -- shift and twist with the times.
Some clothes -- and accessories like evening hats and Courreges's white boots -- are firmly grounded in an era.
But others -- Claire McCardell's 1940's sportswear and Norman Norell's glamorous gowns, for example -- transcend time. 40's -- On its own, American fashion emerged triumphant.
Claire McCardell invented sportswear that could be worn today.
Norman Norell was starting to create timeless, luxurious ready-to-wear.
But by the end of the era, Paris -- led by Dior's New Look -- had reasserted its leadership.


Coping With Squirrels Is No Laughing Matter
To the Editor:
Robert Lipsyte, in his Sept. 26 essay, and Maria Terrone, in her Oct. 10 letter, make light of their battle against squirrels, but it should be noted that improper animal handling can result in the transmission of diseases to human beings, including sarcoptic mange and Rocky Mountain spotted fever.
In their quest for political correctness, these writers are endangering themselves and the public, and breaking several New York State laws.


Volkswagen Introduces A New Golf And Jetta
THE first new import to live in our driveway was a Volkswagen Rabbit, a tomato-red '77 model that we loved dearly.
Actually, the car belonged to my wife, and it was the first new car that she had bought on her own.
The interior was black, and it packed an incredible amount of room into a small, square package.
We took the car camping, and we used it for all the usual family trucking.
It was thrifty and it was terrific.


Robin Friedman, Andrew Morrison
Robin Jo Friedman, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joel Friedman of Boca Raton, Fla., was married last evening to Andrew L. Morrison, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward Morrison of New York.
Rabbi Meyer Leifer performed the ceremony at the Hudson River Club in New York.
The bride, 30, is an account manager for TSS Ltd., a marketing and promotions company in Westport, Conn.
She graduated from the University of Rhode Island.
Her father, now retired, was a sales representative for children's apparel companies in New York.
Her mother, Jacqueline Friedman, also retired, was the president of Kid Stop Inc., which owned retail stores in Westport and in Danbury, Conn.


Women Gain Major Roles In Restaurant Kitchens
WHEN Donna Baird worked at the Lake Mohonk Mountain House in New Paltz more than 12 years ago, women were allowed in the kitchen only as dishwashers or pantry workers.
Ms.
Baird, who is now chef at the Station Bistro in Water Mill, was refused when she asked for a job as a line chef or baker.
At Christmas a Lake Mohonk executive saw a gingerbread house that Ms.
Baird had baked, decorated and placed, along with other seasonal specialties, on a display table in the dining room.
When the hotel baker learned of the house, he seized it, stalked to Ms.
Baird and slammed it down in front of her.


Neighborhood Report: Lower Manhattan; Historically Incorrect Dept.: TriBeCa Trees
Only God can make a tree.
And only in New York City could it require a waiver to plant one.
The city's Transportation Department was planning to add trees while reconstructing Hudson Street.
But the Landmarks Preservation Commission contended that would violate the no-tree policy of the TriBeCa Historic Preservation District.
Since trees once covered Manhattan, how could they be historically incorrect?
Because they had been largely eradicated in TriBeCa by the time it developed as a commercial district in the 1800's, the era designated for preservation.


A la Carte; A New Look in the New Year for a Great Neck Standby
THE 10-year-old Navona in Great Neck is changing, growing and redecorating.
The restaurant at 218 Middle Neck Road, which was voted the top Italian eating place on the Island in the 1993 Zagat suburban survey, will close for four to six weeks starting on Jan. 31 and reopen in March.
Navona is doubling its size, adding to its menu and starting a from-the-ground-up redecoration.
It is also importing an ice-cream machine from Bologna that will be used to make gelato and sorbet and a charcoal grill-roaster that is capable of cooking specialty fish and chicken dishes.


Sylvia Chanler, John Stumpfig
Sylvia Winthrop Chanler, the merchandising manager at Polygram Records in New York, was married yesterday to John Hartwell Stumpfig, a sales representative in New York for The Sciences, the magazine of the New York Academy of Sciences.
The Rev.
David Boulton performed the Episcopal ceremony at St.
Mary's of the Isles Church in Dark Harbor, Me.


Irene McNulty, Stephen Sabadics
Irene McNulty and Stephen A. Sabadics, graduates of Columbia University who received masters degrees in engineering from Rutgers University, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Gerard Sudol performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Holy Family Church in Nutley, N.J.
Mrs.
Sabadics, 32, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Richard B. McNulty of Elkridge, Md., is a staff manager in the business operations analysis division of the American Telephone and Telegraph Company in Morristown, N.J.


Ann-Marie Henry, Blake T. Myers
Ann-Marie Henry, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John Armstrong Henry 3d of Oklahoma City, was married there yesterday to Blake Tomas Myers, a son of Mrs.
Barbara L. Myers of Muncie, Ind.
The Rev.
Dr.
Michael Anderson performed the ceremony at Westminister Presbyterian Church.


Tunnel Speeds Marseilles Trip
A new tunnel enables drivers to cross the center of Marseilles in less than three minutes, compared with at least 15 minutes in the past.
The 1.6-mile tunnel, which opened last month, links the Prado train station, east of the city's center, to the Bassin du Carenage , on the tip of the Vieux Port.
The tunnel, called the Prado-Carenage, will not only ease inner-city traffic, but also act as a relay between the eastbound A50 highway to Toulon and the northwest-bound A55 to Mari gnane and Lyons.
Indeed, much of the traffic caught up in the mesh of small streets and traffic lights in the busiest section of central Marseilles -- 250,000 vehicles daily -- is from drivers who are only passing through France's largest Mediteranean port.


Mayoral Foes Roam the Dial for Votes
On WRKS, otherwise known as KISS-FM, Mayor David N. Dinkins wrestled recently with the name of the rap artist M. C. Lyte, calling her "McLyte." On the WKCR program "Opera Fanatic," Rudolph W. Giuliani reminisced the other day about the first Metropolitan Opera broadcast he ever heard: "La Giocanda." And in repeated appearances on WFAN, both candidates have tried to win the endorsement of Don Imus by adopting his ironic tone.
It has become a commonplace of modern politics that television is the medium that determines elections.
But as the New York City mayoral campaign enters its final days, both Mayor Dinkins and Mr.
Giuliani are challenging -- or perhaps simply ignoring -- this conventional wisdom.


Cabdriver Is Killed in Queens, Apparently During a Robbery
A 27-year-old cabdriver was found shot to death in his car yesterday morning on a street in Queens, apparently the victim of a robbery, the police said.
The killing, the third of a cabdriver in a week and the 32d this year, prompted protests by more than 100 other drivers, who demanded that more undercover officers be assigned to help curb the shootings.


Suzanne Sullivan, Grant A. Keith
Suzanne Margaret Sullivan, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Peter V. Sullivan of Severna Park, Md., was married yesterday to Grant Andrew Keith, a son of John and Barbara Keith of Thornbury, Ontario.
The Rev.
Paul Tizio performed the ceremony at St.
Mary's Roman Catholic Church in Annapolis, Md.
The bride, 27, is an assistant product manager at Sterling Health USA, a pharmaceutical company in New York.
She graduated from Bryn Mawr College and received an M.B.A. from New York University.


INFLUENTIAL GROUP SAYS HEALTH PLAN SLIGHTS THE AGED
The American Association of Retired Persons has expressed concern that President Clinton's health plan would let states lock elderly people into a two-tier system, providing them less generous benefits than would be available to people under 65 years old.
The association wields considerable political power and has 33 million members, most of them keenly interested in health care.
It ardently supports efforts to control health costs and expand coverage, and it has praised Mr.
Clinton's proposal as a "bold and constructive plan."


For Families of Troubled P.S. 156, Protest Disrupts More Than Just Class
For an hour or two this week there was an interlude of hope, when the parents occupying an elementary school in Brooklyn to protest their treatment in the asbestos crisis suddenly felt that their travails might be over.
Then, just as quickly, a realization dawned that the political and bureaucratic knot that led to the takeover was still as tangled as ever, and many parents wept.
One parent, Altagracia Lora, wept because the takeover had interrupted a school meals program, she was out of money, and she had no food at home for her children.
The president of the P.T.A., Miriam Rodriguez, wept because the accumulated demands of working-class motherhood and overnight political leadership suddenly became too much.
And Petra Ortiz wept, as did many other parents, she said, in a rush of deepening cynicism.


Christopher, Resign
As a loyal Democrat and supporter of President Clinton, I believe, with regret, that Secretary of State Warren Christopher should resign.
He has severely damaged the national interest through failed leadership in difficult situations that have required a firm hand.
These crises, in the former Yugoslavia, Somalia, Russia and Haiti, are likely to worsen because of the Administration's flawed policies.
Our Bosnia policy has been an utter failure.
Mr.
Christopher has vacillated and obfuscated the issue of Serbian aggression.
In early February, he defined our strong strategic interests in the region and stated that our response to the war would serve as a test case of how we handled ethnic and minority concerns throughout the world.
By June, he was saying we had no vital interests at stake and that our primary goal was to stop the killing.


We Are the Wired: Some Views On the Fiberoptic Ties That Bind
SOMEDAY, the visionaries tell us, we will be able to communicate with just about anybody by sending an electronic message; no matter where they are, the bundle of bits will find them.
On the information superhighway, the literature of the world and the videos, too, will be just a point and a click away.
So will anyone we want to hear from.
Someday, perhaps, but not yet.
When we asked four writers to give us their visions of the information future, the science writer James Gleick communicated with us entirely through the Internet, the loose confederation of computer networks that serves for the time being as a kind of two-lane blacktop for exchanging information.
But then Mr.
Gleick, who is building an access ramp to let common folk use the Net, is an old hand at this. (Getting his words from the Internet and into our own computer proved a little trickier.)


Neighborhood Report: Long Island City/Woodside -- CAMPAIGN FOR THE COUNCIL; Republican 'Reformer' Makes for a Feisty Race
Walter L. McCaffrey says he has long fought for the neighborhoods in his council district, from having trees planted on the streets of Woodside to battling the city's plan to build a huge sludge plant in Maspeth.
It is the sort of record that has kept him in office since 1985, but these days he is fighting for re-election against a Republican challenger who says that Mr.
McCaffrey, 44, is simply out of touch with the people of the district.


No Headline
The people's technology is ready to strike back. - STEPHEN DUNIFER, as he began an illegal radio broadcast in Berkeley, Calif.  [ 1:2. ]


. . . and Euridice


Outsmarting The Moles
To the Editor:
I greatly enjoyed Anne Raver's "You Can Never Be Too Thin, or Bulb-Rich" (Oct. 3).
Since my garden has been chosen as the headquarters of the International Mole and Vole Teamsters Union, I had to chose between giving up on all bulbs -- except for those boring daffodils, which even the enemy hates -- or to find a way to permanently rodent-proof my bulbs.


Bodega Life: Big Markups and Small Profits
MERENGUE plays continuously over the speakers at the Gelines Grocery in the western Bronx.
Every so often Santos Montilla, the proprietor, gets caught up in the music and, while talking to a customer, drums out the beat with his hands on cartons of canned food and soft drinks stacked in the narrow aisles.
It is a nervous gesture.
Mr.
Montilla, only 20, was thrown prematurely into running the family bodega by the death of his father, Damaso, who was shot on Aug. 5.
The shooting was one of numerous acts of violence that mar the lives of thousands of immigrants who, by opening small food stores, try to get a foothold in the New York economy.


Savoring Memories of Asmara In Downtown New Haven
ONE night recently at Caffe Adulis in New Haven, the chef, Ficre Gebreysus, prepared his special of the evening by spooning butter into a saute pan, then tossing in a small bagful of plump shrimp.
A ghostly pillar of flames exploded from the pan, then vanished.
"It's like magic, you know?" he said without losing his rhythm.
He sprinkled in a few spoonfuls of unsweetened coconut, then stirred in some chopped dates and an herb sauce.
"A little bit of dates, some coconut, some nice herbs and voila," he exclaimed, arranging the dish on a round platter.
"You have a symphony."


Bones of Contention in 'Conversations'
FUNNY how, in its New Jersey premiere, "Conversations With My Father" has found a rightful home after a year's run on Broadway.
There, Herb Gardner's contribution to the American theater's gallery of plays about ambivalent sons who struggle to make peace with contentious fathers was dwarfed by a star-driven production steered by Judd Hirsch's Tony Award-winning performance.


Miss Van Alen, Mr. Manigault
Elizabeth Langley Van Alen, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
James L. Van Alen of Millbrook, N.Y., was married yesterday in New York to Pierre Manigault, the son of Peter Manigault of Charleston, S.C., and Landine Manigault of Stonington, Conn.
The Rev.
Charles Amstein performed the ceremony at the Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Manigault, 24, was until recently an assistant at the Fowler Center for Wildlife Education in New York.
She graduated from Barnard College.
Her father is a partner in Kopstein, Van Alen and Nash, a stock brokerage in Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
The bride's paternal grandfather, the late James H. Van Alen, founded the Tennis Hall of Fame in Newport, R.I., and invented the tie-breaker scoring system for the game.


Insuring Coastal Homes
To the Editor:
The Sept. 5 article entitled "The Storm Over Insuring Coastal Homes" barely scratches the surface of an issue that some of us have been upset about for some years now.
More importantly, more and more of the general public is becoming incensed over the matter of our tax and insurance dollars financing absolutely silly gambles -- the buildings put up on some of the Earth's most unstable terrain.


Family Over Football: Williamses in Their Own Words
A week after Houston Oilers offensive tackle David Williams missed a game because he wanted to be at the birth of his first child, he and his wife, Debi, spoke with Samantha Stevenson for The New York Times.
The conversation centered on his choice of family over football, a decision that has brought him overwhelming attention and considerable support from around the country.
Some Things Just Can't Be Hurried
Debi Williams, 28, went into labor Friday night.
She and David, 27, went to a hospital in The Woodlands, the Houston suburb where they live, about 6:30 Saturday morning.
A boy weighing 9 pounds 15 ounces, named Scot Cooper Williams, was born at 6:25 P.M.
The last flight out of Houston Intercontinental Airport to Boston that night was at 6:50 P.M.


Off-Duty Officer Wounds Man in Brooklyn
An off-duty transit police officer shot and wounded a man who allegedly pointed a pistol at him on a Brooklyn street, the police said.
The officer, Rafael Morales, 26, was in his apartment in the Williamsburg section about 9:30 P.M.
Friday when he heard gunfire, said Lieut.
Robert Valentino, a Transit Authority police spokesman.


Match Backers Pleased at Response
The seven-week-long chess match between Gary Kasparov, the world champion, and Nigel Short, his British challenger, was hardly a cliffhanger.
Mr.
Kasparov is simply too brilliant a player.
He dispatched the bubbly, bushy-haired 28-year-old challenger without even a hiccup of suspense.
By drawing Thursday's game in the match, sponsored by The Times of London and officially named the the Times World Chess Championship, the 30-year-old champion won the best of 24 games with a score of 12 1/2 to 7 1/2.
He collects $1.43 million of the $2.55 million purse, and Mr.
Short picks up the rest, along with his tattered reputation.


Norah K. Hass, Timothy J. Kelley
Norah Katherine Hass, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Michael S. Hass of Brookline, Mass., was married yesterday to Timothy James Kelley, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Edward J. Kelley of West Harwich, Mass.
The Rev.
Leonard A. Coppenrath performed the ceremony at St.
Aidan's Roman Catholic Church in Brookline, Mass.
Mrs.
Kelley, 25, is a clinical case manager at the Castle School for emotionally disturbed adolescents in Cambridge, Mass.
She graduated from the University of Michigan.
Her father, an architect, is a principal of ADD Inc., an architectural concern in Cambridge.
Her mother, Joan Barkhorn Hass, is a partner in the Boston law firm of Peabody &amp; Brown.


Ann Marie Hoetjes, Marius F. Prezioso
Ann Marie Hoetjes, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Peter A. Hoetjes of Danbury, Conn., was married yesterday to Marius Frederick Prezioso, a son of Elvira Faye Prezioso of Brewster, N.Y., and the late Mario Prezioso.
The Rev.
Louis Mazza performed the ceremony at Immaculate Conception Roman Catholic Church in North Tarrytown, N.Y.


Artists Who Captured An Idealized America
WORN AND WEATHERED, its iron hinges one remove from rust, the unabashedly patriotic "Flag Gate" is among the great icons of American folk art.
Hand-carved in the late 19th century to guard a farmer's pasture in upstate New York, the red-white-and-blue gate stands at the entrance to "America's Heritage," the inaugural exhibition of the Daniel Cowin Permanent Collection Gallery at the Museum of American Folk Art.
The show's 64 ancestor portraits, trade signs, weather vanes, quilts, gypsum figures and decorated tin vessels, all produced over the last 200 years, reflect folk art's most important themes.


Rodeos Are Cruel
To the Editor:  Gay rodeo.
What a bummer.
Gay people themselves have endured so much hurt that it's hard to believe some of them are now into hurting other innocent beings ("Bustin' Stereotypes," Sept. 26).
All decent people should boycott rodeos.
CARLA BENNETT  Staff Writer People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Washington


And Now They'll All Know Who Carter Is
Life might be different for Joe Carter.
The days when he could return to Kansas City during the off season and play baseball with the neighborhood kids almost anonymously may have disappeared tonight when his bat sent the Toronto Blue Jays into World Series history.
Joe Carter as a no-name neighbor?
How about Joe Carter in an American Express commercial?
The latter is a more likely scenario after Carter lined a 2-2 slider from Mitch Williams over the left-field fence tonight for a three-run homer that catapulted the Jays to a dramatic 8-6 victory over the Phillies and their second straight World Series Championship.


Once Upon a Time in Prague
VACLAV HAVEL The Authorized Biography.
By Eda Kriseova.
Illustrated. 297 pp.
New York:  St.
Martin's Press. $22.95.


From Warhol to Rathole
NICO The End.
By James Young.
Illustrated. 207 pp.
Woodstock, N.Y.: The Overlook Press. $21.95.


OCT. 17-23: Hostile Bid; In Hotter Pursuit Of Paramount
It is called a tender offer, but there was nothing gentle about the latest twist in the hunt for Paramount Communications.


THE NATION: Season of Fear; Polititians Feel a Crime-Induced Chill in the Air
IT could be your next-door neighbor describing her fear for the safety of her teen-agers when they leave the house on weekend nights -- but it isn't.
It's Christine Todd Whitman, the Republican candidate for Governor of New Jersey, looking squarely into the camera as she tries to convince voters that she is not soft on crime, as Gov.
Jim Florio would have them believe.
"As Governor," she says in a new campaign ad, "nobody will be tougher than me on drunk drivers and criminals, especially those who prey on women and children."


Venus Envy
Given the opportunity to switch places with women, most men would politely decline, for two reasons.
The first is childbirth.
The second is women's fashion.
It's too hard.
Women reinvent themselves every day.
And they face an intimidatingly large field of choices.
Consider the skirt (if, in fact, it's going to be a skirt and not slacks, or leggings with some sort of loose outer garment, or those culotte things that look like a skirt).
It can hit at the shoe, the ankle, midcalf, just below the knee, just above the knee or onward and upward to midthigh.


POSTINGS: The Four Seasons; A Landmark Upheld
The New York State Court of Appeals ruled last week that the Landmarks Preservation Commission had acted properly in designating the fashionable Four Seasons restaurant a landmark.
The 5-to-0 ruling, written by Chief Judge Judith S. Kaye, upheld decisions by the State Supreme Court and the Appellate Division.
Those decisions rejected arguments by the restaurant's landlord, the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association of America, that the designation would cause it economic loss because it would not be able to use the space for any other purpose.
The court also ruled that the commission was within its authority in giving landmark status to the striking interior architecture and furnishings, including the wide staircases, bronze railings, hanging sculptures, walnut bar, marble pool and ceiling panels.


Janet Dempsey, Robert Malone
Janet Marie Dempsey, a vice president at Chemical Bank in New York, was married yesterday to Robert Kevin Malone, a partner in Shanley &amp; Fisher, a law firm in Morristown, N.J.
The Rev.
Peter K. Funesti performed the ceremony at Our Lady of Sorrows Roman Catholic Church in South Orange, N.J.
Mrs.
Dempsey Malone, 35, graduated from Seton Hall University, from which her husband, a graduate of the Catholic University of America, received a law degree.


Turning Beans Into an Innovation
BEANS are no longer just a food to be cooked with a ham hock and served on a cold day.
Innovative chefs are preparing them in all kinds of interesting ways, making them into creamy purees to go with meat or fish, topping them with green vegetables or even serving them on crostini -- grilled country bread -- as a snack, as the Italians do.
Carol Field, in her excellent new book, "Italy in Small Bites" (William Morrow), gives a recipe for dried fava beans, which are pureed and mixed with wild greens.
The nutty flavor of the favas makes a splendid foil for the bitterness of the greens.
If you can't find wild greens, broccoli rape, escarole, frisee or chicory can be substituted.
The puree is also good spread on grilled, lightly oiled bread and topped with steamed or sauteed greens (winter's answer to summer's tomato bruschetta).


Lisa Weinstock, Ronald Ciubotaru
Dr.
Lisa Sundeen Weinstock, a resident in psychiatry at McClean Hospital in Belmont, Mass., was married last evening to Dr.
Ronald L. Ciubotaru, a fellow in pulmonary and critical care medicine at the New England Medical Center in Boston.
Rabbi Sandy Bogin officiated at Le Chateau, a restaurant in South Salem, N.Y.
The bride, 30, is keeping her name.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and from its medical school.
She is the daughter of Dr.
John Weinstock and Dr.
Comilda Weinstock of Goldens Bridge, N.Y.
Her father is an internist with the Health Insurance Plan of Greater New York in New York.
Her mother is a psychologist in Manhattan and Goldens Bridge.


For These Parents, Winning Is Everything
THERE was a time on Long Island when high school athletic events ended with the two teams sharing milk and cookies.
The home team supplied the treats.
Some were better than others.
"I use to serve ice-cream bars," said Cathy Gallagher, a former physical-education teacher and coach in Cold Spring Harbor and now executive director of Section XI, the governing body for Suffolk County interscholastic athletics.


Born In the U.S.A.
Preview of American classical art, Whitney Museum, Oct. 18.


From Tulipmania to a Glory of Spring
THERE is still time to plant hardy spring-flowering bulbs.
But the opportunity is fast dwindling since the bulbs must grow roots before the ground freezes.
It is these roots that absorb the soil's moisture, which in turn pushes up the leaves and the stems that support the flowers.
Tulips will probably take top priority this year, in celebration of their 400th anniversary.
To mark the event, the Netherlands begins a yearlong tulip quadricentennial.
The country, the center of an industry that propagates more than 3,500 tulip hybrids and species that are planted in gardens all over the world, has long been noted for its beautiful tulips and its vast bulb-growing fields are indeed a sight to be seen.


CRIME
When an American art historian is stabbed to death in Venice, Flavia di Stefano, a smart and terribly chic investigator with the Italian National Art Theft Squad in Rome, reacts to the murder with serene indifference.
"Foreigners die in Venice all the time," she says.
"People write books on it." But like the reader of Iain Pears's sophisticated mystery THE TITIAN COMMITTEE (Harcourt Brace, $19.95), Flavia soon becomes intrigued by the political esthetics of the case.
It seems that the murdered woman, who served on a learned committee that authenticates works by Titian, was about to publish a paper that would pin back the ears of the international art world.
Flavia carefully reconstructs the dead expert's scholarship, in which she discerns tantalizing clues about an obscure Renaissance art scandal and dark hints of corruption within the Titian committee, whose surviving members are now being killed at an alarming rate.


Corrections
A report in the Night column on Oct. 10 about the opening of the restaurant Dish misattributed an anecdote about a fight in which a co-owner, Daisy Fuentes, was reportedly involved in high school.
The anecdote was told by Ada Olivera, not Louis Pacheco.


Austria's Share of the Danube
I HAVE long associated the Danube with Hungary and especially Budapest, the city so closely defined by the magnificent river that flows through it.
That is because the Danube seems scarcely to make an impression on Vienna as it skirts the capital.
But 60 miles west of Vienna, the river broadens, slicing and curving through hilly Austrian countryside so rich with Baroque abbeys and medieval fortresses, vineyards and villages, bike trails and pleasant back roads, that visitors who thought the river was principally Hungary's are unlikely to make that mistake again.


Velvet Sees the Sun
Black velvet has come out of the evening closet and is now being worn in the daytime.
Sure, velveteen blazers and pants suits (worn by twins on Fifth Avenue, top, center-right) have been a daytime option.
But the soft, rich, luminous pile of a black velvet long dress (center and lower right) worn on its own during the day captures the spirit of today's Edwardian revival -- doing away with a fashion taboo that has relegated the wearing of velvet to the evening hours.


RESULTS PLUS
BASKETBALL  Suns Continue Streak The Phoenix Suns, behind Charles Barkley's 28 points, beat Buckler of Bologna 112-90 yesterday to win the McDonald's Open, keeping the National Basketball Association's unbeaten strike alive during the tournament's six years.
Before a crowd of 10,000 at the Olympiahalle in Munich, Germany, A. C. Green, acquired two weeks ago from the Los Angeles Lakers, added 21 points for the Suns. (AP)


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
LONG ISLAND CITY  Artists Open Their Doors For a Walking Tour
The local painters, sculptors, photographers and printmakers who make up the membership of Long Island City Artists will open their studios to the public today.


Psychobabble?
FIRST there was Bill Moyers on Joseph Campbell.
Then came Clarisa Pinkola Estes's "Women Who Run With the Wolves." Now, for those who find solace in "myth lite," there is Lloyd Glauberman, a psychologist, hypnotist and recording artist who spins whimsical fairy tales with feel-better-about-yourself messages on convenient cassette tapes.
Recorded on the Psycho-Technology label, which he founded five years ago in New York City, each half-hour tape offers two simultaneous tales that are embedded with 40 hypnotic suggestions.
The two-tape "Floating Holograms" series is aimed at improving self-esteem.
"Procrastination, a Rhythmic Approach" is another program, and "Inside, Outside" is a two-tape series for losing weight.
There are four other programs.


Neighborhood Report: Harlem; The Playground That Plastic Built
A new school playground on 134th Street has 20,000 plastic containers and 34,000 aluminum cans, according to its donor.
But it is a proud count: recycling has turned the castoffs into the makings of a jungle gym and slide.
Even the mats to cushion children's falls are fashioned from old tires.
The playground, at P.S. 175, was donated by Lever Brothers, which makes cleaning products like All, Wisk and Snuggle.
The company is using the playground, and similar ones in six other cities, as an example of what recycled materials can do.


Unbeaten Bama Gets Leg Up on Ole Miss
Alabama 19, Mississippi 14
Michael Proctor kicked four field goals and David Palmer did a little bit of everything -- except score -- as Alabama beat Mississippi, 19-14, yesterday in Oxford, Miss.


Taking Violence For Granted
To the Editor:
After reading Caryn James's essay "As a B Movie, 'True Romance' Is Grade A"  [ Sept. 19 ] , I feel compelled to ask: Do the critics who are rushing to praise this film have no perspective?
Are they totally unaware of the epidemic of violence in this country?


If TV Drives Foreign Policy, We're in Trouble
To the Editor:
On Sept. 30 there appeared on your Op-Ed page an excerpt from my personal diary for Dec. 9, 1992, concerning the initial landing of United States forces in Somalia on that very day.


Moments of Connection On the Streets of New York
To the Editor:
I hope all the readers who perused Caryn James's Page 1 article, "The New York Walk: Survival of the Fiercest," made it to the Soapbox for Vivian Gornick's counterpoint article, "A Writer Finds a Way to Heal a Sore Heart."


THE NATION: The New, Harsher Westerns; Myths Die With Their Boots On
MEN were men in the American West conjured up in the movies of a generation ago.
Cavalrymen, for that matter, were cavalrymen.
But these days, with Hollywood rekindling its old infatuation with the Western, things are not nearly that simple.
For one thing, in the recently released "Ballad of Little Jo," a feminist interpretation of the Old West, women are men.
To survive in a depraved, misogynistic mining town after her family banishes her for having an illegitimate child, Josephine Monaghan assumes a man's identity, even slashing a scar into her face to complete the ruse.


BOSNIAN EXCHANGE OF PRISONERS FAILS
A plan that would have resulted in the exchange of 6,400 detainees and prisoners of war by all three sides in the Bosnian war has in effect collapsed as new conditions set by the warring parties caused the plan to be set aside pending new negotiations.
Andre Collomb, a senior official of the International Committee of the Red Cross, said after four hours of talks at Sarajevo airport on Friday that there had been no breakthrough in an impasse that has blocked the exchange of about 900 Serbian and Muslim prisoners.
Earlier in the day, a similar exchange involving more than 5,000 Muslim and Croatian prisoners was also postponed indefinitely.


Cherkasky and Pirro Trade Fire On Contributions
TWO candidates, Jeanine Ferris Pirro and Michael G. Cherkasky, vying fiercely for the office of district attorney -- which is being vacated after 25 years by Carl A. Vergari -- have found no shortage of issues, including the assertion that both have a lot to explain when it comes to campaign contributions.
Mr.
Cherkasky, a leading prosecutor under Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan District Attorney, said that Mrs.
Pirro, when running for County Court judge in 1990, "solicited and accepted contributions from individuals and organizations intimately connected with organized crime."


Tax-Cut Backlash Swelling in California and Oregon
The tax revolt has come full circle on the West Coast, where two states are trying to make up for revenue they lost in earlier tax rollbacks, while another may pass sweeping restrictions on how government can raise money.
When residents of Washington, Oregon and California vote on pocketbook initiatives on their November ballots, they may send out a mixed message.


Integrate the Care of Women's Health
To the Editor:
It's true that a woman's body is fragmented among the various medical specialties ("Is Women's Health Harmed by Medical Specialization?", front page, Oct. 13).
But more fragmented is the experience and knowledge related to medically managing a woman's body.
As formidable is developing lines of communication that would allow for exchange of information.


Corrections
An answer in the New Jersey Q &amp; A column on Oct. 10, about Dr.
May Hollinshead, who leads the Bergen County chapter of the Gray Panthers, misstated her history at the Seton Hall College of Medicine and Dentistry (now the New Jersey Medical School of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey).
She said that she was the only woman on the faculty of the anatomy department in 1956, not that she was the only woman on the faculty in 1972.


The Season's Outlook At the Emelin Theater
"A TRUE performing arts center offers everything and we have come a long way since we used to book in a regional company for one or two nights."


Undead


A SENSE OF PLACE
WILLIAM S. HAINES JR. leaned against a green pickup truck and gazed out across an expanse of cranberry bogs that stretched nearly a mile in every direction.
The bogs -- a checkerboard of large rectangular fields enclosed by raised dams and flooded with water from nearby reservoirs -- were bordered in the distance by stands of pitch pine, oak and American white cedar.
"This is absolutely the best part of New Jersey," Mr.
Haines said, describing Hog Wallow, a section of Washington Township in Burlington County that is considered by some to be the epicenter of the Pinelands.


Corrections
The Recordings View column on page 26 of the Arts and Leisure section today, about a new album by Pearl Jam, misidentifies the group's drummer.
He is Dave Abbruzzese, not Dave Crusen.


Requiem for the Supercollider
The death of the Superconducting Supercollider at the hands of Congress last week is a cause for sadness.
Not because the huge project was the most important research on today's scientific frontiers -- it clearly wasn't.
And not because it would have had an enormous impact on America's technological or economic growth -- those claims were always far-fetched.
But the supercollider was undeniably a worthy scientific project and was indispensable to the continued advance of the esoteric field of high-energy physics.
It was science at its most pure and most costly, so fundamental and impractical that only the Federal Government could afford to support it.
And now even the Government has concluded that the price is too high.


Los Angeles Portrait; A Judge Who Challenges the System
Judge Terry J. Hatter Jr. brooks no behavioral dissent when it comes to his courtroom.
Let a spectator's eye wander down to a newspaper and Judge Hatter catches him like a frog snaring flies; let a lawyer try theatrics before a jury and the judge's acerbic tongue lashes him back to the lectern.
"So many of them look at 'L.A. Law' and think that's the way you practice law," Judge Hatter said in an interview.
"They find out quickly in my courtroom I won't have any strolling minstrels."


The Deepest Finesse Has a Huge Impact
THE deal shown in the diagram has two claims to fame: It is probably the only time in the history of bridge that a player has successfully finessed a three on the first trick, and it belongs on any short list of the most entertaining deals of all time.
It was reported some three decades ago by M. Harrison Gray, the great English player-writer.
He was surely one of the best players who never won a world title, although he had plenty of victories.
Seven of them were in the British Gold Cup, the equivalent of the Vanderbilt Cup in America, and he won four European Championships, once with an incredible 98 percent score.


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
THE HEADLESS HORSEMAN
A production of "The Legend of Sleepy Hollow," commissioned three years ago by the Cleveland Opera Company's Opera-on-Tour division and based on the Washington Irving tale, will come to the Tarrytown Music Hall on Main Street for a single performance on Oct. 31 at 5 P.M. .


Paul Taylor Hates Ballet. 30 (Want to Bet?)
Paul Taylor has on his desk a goldframed portrait of Lincoln Kirstein, co-founder of the New York City Ballet and an outspoken critic of modern dance.
"I've always admired him," the 63-year-old Mr.
Taylor said recently with a grin.
"I think Lincoln likes me and my work. Which is a funny relationship, because he has stood for ballet. And I can't stand ballet."
There was a time when ballet was ballet and modern dance was something else.
Modern dancers studied ballet at their peril in the 1930's and 40's, when modern dance was establishing itself as a distinctly different American art form.
Who wanted to be a swan or a sylph when they could express love, hate or the persistence of memory by digging their bare feet into the ground like a rooted tree or curving their torso into a deep and voluptuous arc?
Yet who would be content to flex a dusty foot when they could spin and fly and stretch into beautiful shapes and regal distillations of emotion?


A Warhol Footnote
IN A CORNER OF THE MORGUE, AS this newspaper affectionately calls its dusty, labyrinthine archives, stand 5 tall filing cabinets packed with fashion photographs and illustrations.
A photo researcher for The Times Magazine was digging through them, looking for illustrations for this issue, when she unearthed a few of Pop Art's roots.
Among the crumbling sheets crammed into a bulging file devoted to accessories, the researcher, Jody-Lynn Quon, came upon a drawing of a shoe.
She had been tracking down copies of 50's I. Miller advertisements with Andy Warhol illustrations for Hal Rubenstein's article in this issue on fashion advertising photography; and this drawing, not an ad but an original, looked familiar.
She flipped over the drawing, marked up with art department crop lines, and there was the name, Warhol, along with the date on which the drawing ran in The Times.
Then a file of materials from the 50's yielded up a second original Warhol.
After 10 solid days buried among thousands of fashion papers in the windowless morgue, Quon emerged with a cache of nearly 30 Warhols, some credited, some uncredited, but clearly his.


NOTES
New York's movers and shakers won't have to stay home and watch "60 Minutes" on Sunday nights in November.
Al Pacino's film "Carlito's Way" will have its premiere on Nov. 7, followed by a supper party at the Plaza.
On the 14th, celebrities and their children will be at Planet Hollywood for burgers, fries and a screening of the film "Addams Family Values." Then there's the premiere of the film "George Balanchine's 'The Nutcracker,' " and a fund-raiser for the New York City Ballet and the School of American Ballet at the Ziegfeld Theater on Nov. 21.
"Sundays nights are ideal because I don't have to compete with all the other charity balls and parties," said Peggy Siegal, the publicity agent who is coordinating the screenings.


OCT. 17-23: The Bond Scandal; Avoiding Appearances Of Impropriety
The big Wall Street bond houses have tossed the political contribution issue back at the politicians.
Last week, 17 of New York's biggest firms, which had been embarrassed by a series of scandals that began in New Jersey, agreed to a voluntary ban on the contributions they make to candidates who may be in the powerful position of choosing who sells the billions of dollars worth of bonds issued by states, cities and towns each year.
The voluntary approach will be made mandatory by early next year by the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board, the self-regulatory body for the municipal bond dealers.


Florio Faults Whitman on Spending
Gov.
Jim Florio's campaign, which has spent part of the last two weeks defending itself against complaints of election law violations, has leveled accusations of its own against the campaign of his Republican opponent, Christine Todd Whitman.
The Florio campaign on Friday filed two complaints with the State Election Law Enforcement Commission asking that Mrs.
Whitman's campaign be forced to pay for two brochures distributed in recent weeks by some of her supporters.


Turning Beans Into an Innovation
BEANS are no longer just a food to be cooked with a ham hock and served on a cold day.
Innovative chefs are preparing them in all kinds of interesting ways, making them into creamy purees to go with meat or fish, topping them with green vegetables or even serving them on crostini -- grilled country bread -- as a snack, as the Italians do.
Carol Field, in her excellent new book, "Italy in Small Bites" (William Morrow), gives a recipe for dried fava beans, which are pureed and mixed with wild greens.
The nutty flavor of the favas makes a splendid foil for the bitterness of the greens.
If you can't find wild greens, broccoli rape, escarole, frisee or chicory can be substituted.
The puree is also good spread on grilled, lightly oiled bread and topped with steamed or sauteed greens (winter's answer to summer's tomato bruschetta).


What He Did for His Country
PRESIDENT KENNEDY Profile of Power.
By Richard Reeves.
Illustrated. 798 pp.
New York:  Simon &amp; Schuster. $30.


Chronicler of City Life
Museum of the City of New York's 70th anniversary party, Oct. 19.


Purity of Spirit Doesn't Cost $120
To the Editor:
Emily Prager's "Serious Sport" (The Dressing Room, Oct. 10) is a good illustration of the superficiality that pervades so much of today's society.
There is nothing egalitarian about a pair of Nike Carnivores, which retail for $120.
Wearing them, one is a member of the "real, regular" group of people who would rather spend and pretend.


Corrections
A column on October 10, "If You're Thinking of Living in Noroton and Noroton Heights," misstated the affiliation of Barbara Clarke, a broker.
She is with Country Living Real Estate in Darien.


Complex Marriage, to Say the Least
WITHOUT SIN The Life and Death of the Oneida Community.
By Spencer Klaw.
Illustrated. 337 pp.
New York: Allen Lane/The Penguin Press. $25.


Impatience Is Not the Same As Urgency
One of the most remarkable musical moments in Steve Reich's new theater work, "The Cave," which was given its New York premiere at the Brooklyn Academy of Music's Next Wave Festival recently, was not actually composed by Mr.
Reich at all.
The work, in which Israeli Jews, Palestinian Moslems, and Americans are given a sort of religious Rorschach test about the patriarch Abraham and his immediate family, includes ritualistic chanting from the Hebrew Scriptures by an Ethiopian Jew, Ephraim Isaac.
By tradition, each word in the Hebrew text carries fixed melodic tropes, but Mr.
Isaac's chant was unlike any I have heard.
Its sinuous ornamentation was marked by strong, irregular accents; the chant was clearly influenced by African and Middle Eastern music.
One preoccupation of Mr.
Reich and his wife, Beryl Korot, who created the video portions of "The Cave," is the transformations and interpretations of sacred texts, including such traditional musical settings as Mr.
Isaac's.
The authors explore how tales are understood and misunderstood by Arabs, Jews and Americans.
And while "The Cave" does not live up to its promise to illuminate contemporary mythologies -- only the bluntest distinctions can be made in the sound bites coming from the video screens -- its ambition is intriguing.
The authors are trying to reveal the continuing life of ancient stories.


Former Tennis Pros Share Their Talents
DESPITE a proportionately large number of public and private tennis courts -- and players -- Connecticut has hardly been an incubator of big-time tennis talent.
Nor for that matter have any of the New England states.
Barbara Potter of Woodbury and Beth Norton of Fairfield have been the only women players from the state to achieve world-class status in modern times.
And only one player, Paul Gerken of Norwalk, ever approached stardom on the professional men's tour.
Another, Bud Schultz of Meriden, played briefly on the international circuit in the mid-1980's and is now a teaching pro in Brookline, Mass.
Successful Careers
Both Ms.
Potter and Ms.
Norton were touring pros for more than a decade, and both recorded victories over some of the world's best players.
But Mr.
Gerken's career was more spectacular, albeit shorter, before it ended at the age of 27 because of a serious shoulder injury and chronic tennis elbow.


Winifred Barnes And W. W. Linen
Winifred Anne Barnes, a managing partner of Bastoni Barnes, an advertising agency in New York, was married yesterday to Worthington Warren Linen, the president in New York of BMG Direct Inc., the music club division of the Bertelsmann Music Group.
The Rev.
Lawrence C. Provenzano performed the Episcopal ceremony on Spring Island in South Carolina.
Ms.
Barnes, 32, who is keeping her name, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Warren Whitfield Barnes of Wilmington, N.C.
Her father is the president of the Barnes Construction Company in Wilmington.
Her mother, Maryanne G. Barnes, is an agent with Coldwell Banker Real Estate in Wilmington.


Our Miss Pope
VIRGINIA POPE'S SEAT at any fashion show was unmistakable.
The sign on it said "Dean of Fashion Editors." She was the journalist who always wore a rakish hat perched on her blue-tinted hair and pristine white gloves -- the right one removed so she could take notes.
A diminutive figure with ramrod posture, she had a quick humor, unlimited charm, a commitment to accuracy and fairness, and the exquisite manners of an Edith Wharton heroine.
She was also among the first fashion journalists who could write "in a literary idiom," said the designer Charles James.
For anyone who knew her, the first response to the name Virginia Pope is "She was a lady!" For many in the American fashion world in the 30's, 40's and 50's, Miss Pope was also a hero.
She was instrumental in helping American designers to emerge as a world influence.
As the fashion editor of The New York Times from 1933 until 1955, she turned fashion writing into news.


In the Coming Free-Agent Market, It Could Be a Whole New Ball Game
This is the off season that clubs are supposed to retard their rush to put free agents on the Forbes 400 roster.
Television revenue will be slashed drastically beginning next season, small-market clubs say they won't spend because they are hurting badly, and large-market clubs say they have to trim their payrolls or at least practice their version of fiscal responsibility.
Owners have made similar noises in the past, but their promises -- or threats -- have often turned out to be empty and the players' pockets full.
In other words, watch their actions; don't listen to their words.


Biking the Adirondacks
RAIN sounds much softer in the country than in the city, so when I awoke on the first morning of a weeklong bicycle trip through the Adirondacks in late June, what I mistook for a rustling of leaves in the breeze was a fairly heavy rain.
My fears were confirmed by our bed and breakfast host, who had nothing but sympathy for my wife, Abby Schultz, and I, yet refused to give us a weather forecast.
"You're going to ride anyway, right?" he said.
We plugged along for two days and 110 miles in the rain as our rear wheels relentlessly kicked road grit up on our backs.
Grinning and bearing it seemed appropriate for the Adirondacks, six million acres of stunning lakes, forests and mountains where the climate and the economy can be harsh.
Life in the Adirondacks is not easy, residents like to say, but they add that the joy of living in the largest wilderness area east of the Mississippi far outweighs the pain.


Mark Kirsch, Deborah Feyerick
Deborah Feyerick, a reporter for New York 1 News, a cable television program, was married last evening to Mark Kirsch, an assistant United States attorney for the Eastern District of New York in Brooklyn.
Rabbi John Schecter officiated at Temple B'nai Abraham in Livingston, N.J.
Mrs.
Kirsch graduated from Barnard College.
She is the daughter of Ada and Philippe Feyerick of Short Hills, N.J.
Her father is an investment counselor in Short Hills.
Her mother is a freelance editor and a writer.


Other Normandy
To the Editor: Somewhere in the article "Normandy's Historic Coast" by Libby Lubin (Sept. 5), your readers should have been advised about the other Normandy -- the Normandy to the north of the Seine, of which Rouen is the capital.
It is the Normandy of soaring Gothic cathedrals, of narrow cobblestone streets, of impregnable sculptured chalk cliffs harboring pebbled beaches and the haunts of the Hundred Years' War and its heroine, Joan of Arc.
Libby Lubin's Normandy is wonderful in its own right, but it is only half of one of the most lovely and rich areas of provincial France, one that abounds in old inns and in chateaus that welcome visitors.
Next time I hope she will head north across the bridge at Tancarville to discover the old-fashioned delights in the other Normandy.
CAROLYN HOPPE  Jenkintown, Pa.


50 Who Mattered Most
ANY LIST IS ARBITRARY.
CERTAINLY THIS ONE IS.
HERE ARE 50-odd people who have perpetrated -- or who have come to symbolize -- significant shifts, swings and movements in the business of fashion over the last 50 years.
Not everyone will agree with the choices.
That's life.
But let no one question the importance of those accounted for here.
Compiled by Carrie Donovan MOST IMPORTANT FACTORS . . .
Place: London.
Animal: Leopard.
Institution: The armed forces.
Uniform: T-shirt and jeans.
Foundations: Panty hose.
Essentials: Running shoes.
Fabrics: Anything with stretch.


F.Y.I.
Hearing in Theaters Q. Isn't there a law requiring movie theaters to have some accommodation for people with hearing disabilities?


Sarah Myers, Richard Altman
Sarah Myers, a daughter of Norma and Lewis Myers of Scarsdale, N.Y., was married last evening to Richard Ian Altman, a son of Carole Altman of San Jose, Calif., and Dr.
Edward Altman of Carmel, N.Y.
Rabbi Daniel Wolk officiated at the Tarrytown (N.Y.) House.


Mary N. Alvarado, William F. Danylko
Mary Noreen Alvarado, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Cristobal Alvarado of Manhasset Hills, L.I., was married yesterday to William Farr Danylko, the son of Walter Danylko and Barbara Danylko, both of Fairfield, Conn.
The Rev.
Warren Gress performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at Notre Dame Church in New Hyde Park, L.I.


Plea Deal Is Sought in Killing of a Journalist, Lawyers Say
Federal prosecutors are seeking a plea deal under which they would gain information and testimony from the man accused of planning to kill a crusading anti-drug journalist, lawyers in the case say.
A deal with the suspect, John Mena, would be a major development in the case because it would help prosecutors strengthen their evidence both against a teen-ager charged with shooting Manuel de Dios Unanue and against the high-level Colombian cocaine traffickers who they say ordered the 1992 slaying in Queens.


Conversations: Richard Petthia; Keeping Things Safe and Orderly In the Neighborhoods of Cyberspace
A DECADE ago science-fiction writer William Gibson coined the term cyberspace to describe a new world spawned by a global array of intersecting computer networks.
Today that world has arrived with the Internet.
For millions of people the Internet has become a computer-generated neighborhood dotted with avenues, residences and commercial centers.
Richard Petthia is its fire chief.


Susan D. Mastronardi, C. Scott Fahey
Susan Dee Mastronardi, a daughter of Virginia D. Mastronardi of Jersey City, and the late Vincent Mastronardi, was married yesterday toC.
Scott Fahey, the son of Anita A. Fahey of Holbrook, L.I., and the late Thomas J. Fahey.
The Rev.
Stan Moseley, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.
Mrs.
Fahey, a graduate of Rutgers University, is a sales associate in the equity division of Morgan Stanley &amp; Company, the investment bank in New York.


Manager's Profile
James W. Stratton Fund: Stratton Monthly Dividend Shares, $190 million in assets.
Manager since 1981 inception. (Sponsor: Stratton Management Company, Plymouth Meeting, Pa.)  Born: Dec. 18, 1936; Philadelphia.


Leather Everywhere
Harley-Davidson Cafe makes its debut, Oct. 19.


Toronto Wins World Series on Carter's Ninth-Inning Home Run


Mary B. W. Tabor, Robert A. Engel
Mary Britt Wellford Tabor, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Owen B. Tabor of Memphis, was married there yesterday to Robert Andrew Engel, the son of Jane V. Engel of Ho-Ho-Kus, N.J., and the late Robert G. Engel.
The Rev.
James S. Lowry performed the ceremony at Idlewild Presbyterian Church.
Mrs.
Engel, 29, is a reporter on the metropolitan news staff at The New York Times.
She and her husband graduated from Princeton University.


Traffic Alert
TODAY AUTUMN JUBILEE STREET FESTIVAL: Second Avenue will be closed between 14th and 34th Streets from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.


IN SHORT: FICTION
HORROR STORIES  NIGHTMARES AND DREAMSCAPES  By Stephen King. Viking, $27.50.


Paolo Bortoluzzi Is Dead at 55; A Ballet Star and Choreographer
Paolo Bortoluzzi, an Italian dancer and choreographer, died on Oct. 16 in a hospital in Brussels.
He was 55 years old.
The cause was a stroke following viral pneumonia, the French newspaper Le Figaro reported.


Air France Chief Quits Amid Strike
Air France's chairman, Bernard Attali, resigned today as the state-owned French carrier suffered a seventh day of crippling strikes and the Government said a cost-cutting plan would have to be revised for the airline.
Mr.
Attali was the chief architect of the plan to eliminate 4,000 jobs and reduce bonuses at the nation's flag carrier that prompted the strike.
It has already cost the airline more than $100 million.
He had argued that the cost-cutting was essential to return Air France to profitability after losses of $678.6 million in the first half of this year and $583.9 million in 1992.


Caveat Venditor
Once again, companies in the United States, Europe and Japan are helping a third world dictatorship acquire technology that can be used to develop weapons of mass destruction.
The equipment and materials they are selling are not leaking out inadvertently, but going out with the approval of the export-control authorities of their governments.
This time, the dictatorship is not Iraq.
It is Iran, whose leaders continue to vow "Death to America" and which tops the State Department list of terrorist countries.


Ms. Bansavage, Mr. Potter
Elisabeth Anne Bansavage, an actress in New York, was married yesterday to Edward John Potter, a business executive.
The Rev.
Warren Sterrett Beaven officiated at the Bellport (L.I.) United Methodist Church.
Ms.
Bansavage, 40, is keeping her name.
A graduate of Carnegie Mellon University, she is the daughter of Joseph W. Bansavage and Dr.
Judith C. Bansavage, both of Pittsburgh.


Dueling Financiers Call Off a Nasty Feud Over Harrods
A meeting between the British tycoon Roland W. (Tiny) Rowland, the Saudi financier Adnan Khashoggi and officials representing the Palestine Liberation Organization concerning Mideast investments has resulted in a declared end to Mr.
Rowland's expensive legal battle over the ownership of Harrods, London's famous department store.
Mr.
Rowland, whose vast African interests are managed by his company, Lonrho P.L.C., and his adversary, Mohammed al-Fayed, an Egyptian billionaire and co-owner of prestigious properties like the Ritz of Paris, shook hands at the Harrods food halls on Friday, calling a halt to a legal feud with some aspects that carried over into international politics.


Kara Unterberg, Roy Niederhoffer
Kara Jan Unterberg, a daughter of Seymour and Cynthia Unterberg of Westbury, L.I., was married yesterday to Roy Gary Niederhoffer, a son of Elaine Niederhoffer of Great Neck, L.I., and the late Dr.
Arthur Niederhoffer.
Rabbi Arthur Rulnick officiated at the Woodbury (L.I.) Jewish Center.
Ms.
Unterberg is keeping her name.
She is a marketing associate at Weiss Peck &amp; Greer, an investment management firm in New York.
She graduated magna cum laude from Yale University and received an M.B.A. from Harvard.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Oct. 13, about Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Company's agreement to sell more of the Allstate Corporation's insurance products, misstated the relationship of Allstate and Sears, Roebuck &amp; Company.
Sears sold about 20 percent of Allstate to the public earlier this year, but it still owns 80 percent.


Dividend Meetings


Dinkins Gathers Democratic Power Players for a Final Push
Rushing around New York City, with stops at a union hall in Flushing, Queens, the Abyssinian Baptist Church in Harlem and the Gurdwara Sikh Temple in Ozone Park, Queens, Mayor David N. Dinkins kicked off the final full week of the mayoral campaign yesterday by attacking Rudolph W. Giuliani as a hard-core Republican who lacks compassion for the homeless and tolerance for New York's diversity.
Mr.
Dinkins, who was joined at some events by senior Congressional Democrats from Washington, including the House Speaker, Thomas S. Foley, and Senator Paul Simon of Illinois, worked persistently at themes that he has refined in recent weeks -- and that mayoral aides say he is likely to invoke often during the coming week.


Advocate Candidate Steps Up Attacks on Rival
Susan D. Alter, the Republican-Liberal candidate for public advocate, intensified her attacks yesterday on her Democratic opponent, Mark J. Green, the former Consumer Affairs Commissioner.
In recent days Ms.
Alter has accused Mr.
Green of unethical behavior as a commissioner, saying he used sheriffs to intimidate small-business owners into paying fines from the city.
"I think it's the height of hypocrisy," Ms.
Alter said in an interview.
"Mark Green, who claims his specialty is preventing consumer fraud, is engaged in massive unethical behavior in order to extract money from small-business people."


Congress Defends Religious Freedom
Three years ago the Supreme Court threw away decades of precedent and watered down the religious liberty of all Americans.
In a case involving the religious use of peyote by American Indians, the Court declared that states could criminalize all consumption of the substance without considering their laws' impact on the free exercise of religion.
By radically changing the ground rules for deciding claims of religious liberty, the Court alarmed organized religion, civil liberties organizations of all stripes and Senators as different in outlook as Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts and Orrin Hatch of Utah.
The House has passed a bill aimed at correcting the situation and now the Senate is expected to pass it overwhelmingly.


Fateful Decision: Staying to Guard a Pilot's Body
As the bullets and grenades whizzed through the streets of south Mogadishu on the night of Oct. 3, the Rangers made a fateful decision: after they retrieved two wounded soldiers from a downed Black Hawk helicopter, they stayed to guard the body of a dead pilot caught in the wreckage.
"Some people may think it is not normal to stick around a dead pilot," said Robert Gallagher, 31, a platoon sergeant who was wounded in a firefight near the Olympic Hotel.
"But when you work with people on a daily basis, you develop a bond. Whether you are killed or wounded, you need to have someone look after you."


9 Lives, Powerful Thighs: Iraq's Quest Continues
The 1990's have been all about surviving for the Iraqi people.
War, despotic leadership and United Nations sanctions: the Iraqis have seen them all.
Small wonder that their soccer team is a survivor, too.


World Economies


Political Memo; Even Now, 1996 Calls To Many In G.O.P.
With a sly smile, Senator Phil Gramm of Texas offered a wholly unconvincing explanation for his arrival here tonight.
"Actually," he said, "I was responding to Bob Dole, who said the weather was great up here this time of year."
Gov.
Carroll A. Campbell Jr. of South Carolina, who landed in New Hampshire about the same time, was in no mood for jokes.
"I'm not here for the vacation or the leaves," he said, explaining that he came to salute a fellow Republican, Gov.
Stephen Merrill, at a fund-raising dinner tonight.


Sports of The Times; It's 'Jets Football': That's the Problem, It's Losing Football
NOBODY was heard saying it after the Jets' 19-10 loss to the Buffalo Bills, but Coach Bruce Coslet often talks about how his players are not playing "Jets football." Several of his players have parroted that phrase, bemoaning their inability to play "Jets football."
As if it were 49ers football or Cowboys football or even Giants football -- teams with a tradition of winning.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Media Business
Rather than let QVC Network walk away with its long-sought prize, Viacom, the friendly suitor in the war over Paramount Communications, has reluctantly decided to match the rival bid.
Viacom said it would pay $10 billion to buy Paramount, a package nearly identical to that of QVC, a home-shopping service.  [ A1. ]
CBS hopes its contract with Major League Baseball, regarded as a flop, will at least bring extra viewers to "South of Sunset" and other heavily promoted shows.
Bill Carter: Television  [ D1. ]


Gateway Fed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


FOR SARAJEVO JOB, A MOST BITTER MAN
To see the man expected to be named Prime Minister of Bosnia this week, the first essential is a flashlight to negotiate the darkened stairwells and corridors of the main Government building in Sarajevo, known as the Presidency.
Even the anteroom to Haris Silajdzic's office is pitch dark, with his secretaries and bodyguards finding their way about with tiny penlights.
Inside the office of the Foreign Minister, the post Mr.
Silajdzic currently holds, the painting on the wall of a pastoral Bosnian scene hangs askew, weighted on one side by an electric cable bearing a single naked bulb powered by a generator in the basement.


MOGADISHU MARCH MAY STIR VIOLENCE
This city was braced today for a possible eruption of factional violence after the United Nations failed to dissuade a Somali faction that opposes Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid from directing a "peace" march on Monday into southern Mogadishu, which is controlled by General Aidid.
United Nations and United States officials said the march by the faction, which is led by Mohammed Ali Mahdi, was the biggest threat to security in Mogadishu since General Aidid's forces declared a cease-fire on Oct. 9.


Books of The Times; On the Making of War To a Point of Pointlessness
A History of Warfare By John Keegan  Illustrated. 432 pages. Alfred A. Knopf.


Bell Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Hispanic School Wasn't Ready to Open
To the Editor:
Contrary to assertions in your Oct. 13 news article, the opening of New York's Leadership Secondary School emphasizing Hispanic culture and bilingual learning was not "quietly postponed" because of a bias inquiry.
The decision to wait was made jointly by New York City school officials, the school's planning team and the Fund for New York City Public Education at meetings held in June and July.


Bombing Causes Delay in British-Irish Talks
A day after 10 people were killed here by an Irish Republican Army bomb, the British and Irish Governments today postponed a meeting they had planned to hold on Wednesday in Belfast to discuss peace prospects for Northern Ireland.
Among those killed in the blast in a Protestant shopping area were two young girls and a guerrilla of the I.R.A. itself, an overwhelmingly Roman Catholic movement that is campaigning to end British rule of Northern Ireland.


Is the Economy Strengthening? White House Officials, Cautiously, Say Yes
After puzzling for months over why lower interest rates have not produced faster growth, Clinton Administration officials say they are now confident that the economy has turned the corner and is finally on a path of steady recovery.
News this month that showed housing construction finally picking up, business investment strong and consumer spending humming along has convinced President Clinton's economic team that it can shelve new proposals for stimulating the economy.


Equity Issues This Week
The following equity and convertible debt offerings are expected this week:
Amrion Inc., Boulder, Colo., 1.9 million shares. John G. Kinnard &amp; Co.


United Federal Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hebert Finds There's No Place Like Home
Falcons 26, Saints 15
Bobby Hebert, the Cajun quarterback who called Louisiana his home and the Saints his home team for the past seven years, showed no regard for his former teammates yesterday.


Treasury Plans to Auction Bills and Notes
The Treasury's schedule of financing this week includes today's regular weekly auction of new three- and six-month bills, and auctions of new two-year notes tomorrow and five-year notes on Wednesday, respectively.
According to traders, at the close of the New York cash market on Friday, the rate on the outstanding three-month bill was 3.02 percent, and the rate on the six-month issue was 3.13 percent.
In when-issued trading, the two-year note was being offered at a price to yield 3.94 percent and the five-year note at a price to yield 4.78 percent.


United Bankshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Music; 'Figaro,' Played for Efficiency
Although long stigmatized for its sleepy productions of the standard repertory, the New York City Opera put on a "Nozze di Figaro" on Saturday afternoon that told a very different story.
Saturday's performance -- and there will be four more through the rest of this month and into early November -- offered a model of limited resources turned to artistic advantage.
Carl Toms's sets and costumes are handsome without ostentation.
Christian Smith's current staging of the John Copley production does not pretend to originality, but every gesture and arrangement of players onstage are thought through and make perfect sense.
Almost to the rear ranks of Mozart's large cast, the singing on Saturday sounded strong.
Cast members listened to one another and paid attention to Scott Bergeson's wisely paced conducting from the pit.
Larger and richer opera houses could have put this performance before their own audiences without shame or hesitation, and charged them higher ticket prices in the process.


Jets Look Bad Again, But Insist They're Not
As the Jets continue their downward spiral, they are asking their fans: Who are you going to believe, us or your lying eyes?
Contrary to what the team has shown in its last three games -- all losses -- the Jets continue to maintain that they are better than their 2-4 record would indicate.


A Dinkins Bulwark in Queens
St.
Albans is Dinkins country, where many residents feel the Mayor has done the best job in tough times and many feel he has empathized with the concerns of blacks.
Page B3.


Tension in Mogadishu
United Nations and United States peacekeepers in Somalia worried that there would be a new round of violence in the capital after the leader of one major faction refused to reroute a march set for Monday that is planned to go through the territory of the other major faction.
Article, page A10.


ResultsPlus
GOLF Pavin Defeats Faldo  Corey Pavin rolled in a 5-foot putt for par on the final hole yesterday for a 1-up victory over Nick Faldo, becoming the first American in 14 years to win the world match-play championship in Virginia Water, England.
Pavin got his opening when Faldo landed a 3-wood approach shot in the trees on the 36th hole.
Faldo, the defending champion and ranked No. 1 in the world, settled for a bogey-6 on the par-5 hole, leaving Pavin with the pressure putt to win. (AP) Love Cruises to Victory: Davis Love 3d eagled two of his first three holes yesterday en route to a six-under-par 66 and cruised to an eight-stroke victory in the $1.4 million Las Vegas Invitational in Nevada.
He started the day with a six-stroke lead and finished the five-day, 90-hole tournament at 29-under 331. (AP) Douglass Wins With Birdie: Dale Douglass birdied the first hole of a playoff with Jim Dent yesterday to win the Ralphs Senior Classic in Los Angeles.
Douglass and Dent closed with seven-under-par 64's to finish the three-day tournament at 17-under 196 on the Rancho Park course. (AP) TENNIS It's Sampras Again  Top-ranked Pete Sampras, playing in his first tournament since beating Cedric Pioline in the United States Open final in September, defeated the Frenchman again, 7-6 (7-5), 1-6, 7-5, yesterday to win the Lyons tournament in France.
Because he won for the third consecutive year, Sampras was given a diamond-studded trophy in addition to $82,000 in prize money.
The 10th-ranked Pioline, who has yet to win an ATP tournament, lost in a final for the third consecutive week. (AP) Chang Wins in China: Top-seeded Michael Chang defeated Greg Rusedski, 7-6 (7-5), 6-7 (6-8), 6-4, and won the Salem Open in Beijing's first ATP professional tournament.
Chang lost only two service points in the third set. (AP) Ivanisevic Passes Muster: Second-seeded Goran Ivanisevic, relying on his serve, wore down the local favorite, Thomas Muster, to win the Austrian Open in Vienna yesterday, 4-6, 6-4, 6-4, 7-6 (7-3).
Muster, seeded No. 1, had 18 aces, but Ivanisevic added 24 for 71 in the tournament. (AP) HORSE RACING Boom Towner's Boojum  Boom Towner drew off to a 2 1/2-length victory over late-rallying Take Me Out in the $100,000 added Grade III Boojum Handicap at Aqueduct yesterday.
Thelastcrusade weakened to finish another 2 1/2 lengths back in third in the field of seven.
Under Frank Lovato Jr. and carrying 113 pounds, Boom Towner dueled throughout before taking command in midstretch, covering the six furlongs in 1:091/5 over a fast track. (AP) Square Cut Wins Laurel: Square Cut went to the lead early and stayed there all the way to win the $200,000 Laurel Turf Cup at Laurel Race Course in Laurel, Md., by 1 3/4 lengths.
The 4-year-old gelding covered the one and a half miles in a leisurely 2:322/5 . (AP) AUTO RACING Wallace Tops in N.C.
Rusty Wallace recorded his ninth victory of the season yesterday, winning the AC Delco 500 in Rockingham, N.C.
Wallace's triumph keeps the pressure on Dale Earnhardt in their battle for the Winston Cup championship.
In a virtual replay of the finish of the spring race at North Carolina Motor Speedway, Wallace's Pontiac Grand Prix beat Earnhardt's Chevrolet Lumina to the finish line by 3.23 seconds. (AP) Senna Takes Japanese Race: Ayrton Senna outdueled Alain Prost to win the Japanese Grand Prix in Suzuka.
Senna took advantage of a long Prost pit stop during a sudden downpour to defeat the Frenchman by 11.435 seconds before 151,000 spectators. (AP) YACHTING  Coutts Alpha in Omega  Russell Coutts, of New Zealand, the No. 1 ranked match racer in the world, captured his second straight title yesterday in the Omega Gold Cup, an eight-day match-racing regatta off Hamilton, Bermuda.
In second place was Rod Davis, representing Australia; he is ranked No. 3 internationally.
Coutts beat Davis, 3-0, in the three-of-five-race final aboard identical 33-foot sloops.
HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL  St.
Michael Triumphs  Mount St.
Michael defeated Iona Prep, 34-7, for its fifth straight victory yesterday.
Homero Radway (20 carries for 88 yards), Brian Patterson (3 carries for 87 yards) and Sheldon Hall (6 carries for 84 yards) helped the Mounties (5-1) pound out 380 yards against Iona Prep (1-5) in the Catholic High School Football League game.
Hall had a 65-yard touchdown and Patterson a 55-yard score.
Xavier 32, Christ the King 6: James Chiarcharo had scoring runs of 22, 37, and 36 yards to lead Xavier (1-5) over Christ the King (2-5).
Ralph Dupont keyed Xavier's first victory of the season with a 75-yard kickoff return.


A SWEETENED OFFER INTENSIFIES BATTLE TO BUY PARAMOUNT
Rather than let a rival walk away with its long-sought prize, Viacom Inc., the friendly suitor in the bidding war over Paramount Communications Inc., decided yesterday to match the competition.
At meetings yesterday, Viacom and Paramount reached a revised merger agreement under which Viacom would pay $10 billion to buy the giant entertainment company, approving a package nearly identical to a hostile bid by QVC Network Inc., the television home-shopping service.


Automatic Fare Booths Prevent Robberies
To the Editor:
Every single tollbooth operator must live in understandable and constant fear at the prospect of being robbed for cash (news article, Oct. 18).
One solution would be to adopt with all deliberate speed the electronic automatic fare booth system where drivers make advance deposits into an account, thereby providing them with a windshield device that signals a debit each time their vehicle uses a tunnel or bridge.


First National Bancorp (Ga.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Essay; Sleazy Senate Inquiry
In a cynical attempt to make Bob Packwood a scapegoat for generations of Congressional sexism, the Senate Ethics Committee put Americans on notice: no private diary is safe from government investigators.
Ironically, the recently established constitutional right to privacy, which forms the basis for all the pro-choice law in this country, is being undermined by panicky senators determined to punish one of their own for boorish behavior in a previous era.


Suzanne J. Groisser, Allen S. Keller
Suzanne Jacqueline Groisser, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Victor W. Groisser of West Orange, N.J., was married to Dr.
Allen Scott Keller, a son of Dr. and Mrs.
Samuel S. Keller of Woodcliff Lake, N.J.
Rabbi Jeshaia Schnitzer performed the ceremony at the Tamcrest Country Club in Alpine, N.J.
Mrs.
Keller, 29, is an assistant district attorney in Manhattan.
She graduated from Haverford College and received a law degree from Harvard University.
Her father is a gastroenterologist in Montclair, N.J.


Details of U.S. Raid in Somalia: Success So Near, a Loss So Deep
At the time, the Oct. 3 raid into south Mogadishu by Army Rangers seemed like just another security sweep to round up troublemakers.
But judging from its early political impact, the firefight, in which 18 Americans were killed and 75 wounded, may well be one of those searing battlefield experiences whose memory shapes public opinion and sharply influences what the United States will and will not do in the world.


Politics Mirrors Diversity's Drive In the Suburbs
For decades Westchester and Nassau Counties have flourished as places of escape.
And just as people left behind the frenzied harshness of city life, they also turned their backs on Democratic politics.
In this century, Westchester and Nassau have each selected only one Democratic county executive, and Westchester has never had a Democratic district attorney.
But all that could change soon.
For the first time in years, both of these Republican strongholds face formidable Democratic challenges for the job of county executive, and Westchester has a tight race for district attorney.
Urban-Like Cynicism
Those contests say as much about the changing character of the suburbs -- the growing ethnic and racial diversity, the faltering economies and a rising urban-like cynicism about politicians -- as they say about the character of the candidates.


Tara P. Davey, Joseph C. Rosa
Tara Patrice Davey, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph D. Davey of Carmel Valley, Calif., was married yesterday to Joseph Christopher Rosa, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
William E. Rosa of Brooklyn.
The Rev.
Dennis Gilbert performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the chapel on the campus of the Santa Catalina School in Monterey, Calif.
Ms.
Davey-Rosa, 28, is an associate in the Greenwich, Conn., office of Whitman &amp; Ransom, a New York law firm.
She graduated from Georgetown University and she and her husband received law degrees from St.
John's University.
Her father is a professor of law and her mother, Linda Davey, a professor of child development at Hartnell Community College in Salinas, Calif.


Dance in Review
'Converging Forms'  The Miller Theater/Circum-Arts Series Columbia University


5-Year-Old Boy Survives a 7-Story Fall
A 5-year-old boy fell from a window of his parents' Upper East Side apartment yesterday and survived a seven-story fall to a concrete courtyard below, officials said.
Though the child, Paul Rosen of 330 East 79th Street, had no external injuries, he was listed in critical condition last evening at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center as doctors monitored him for any sign of internal injuries, according to the hospital's administrator, Carolyn Migliore.


Mitchell Is 1 for 1 as the Dolphins' Starter
The throbbing question facing the Miami Dolphins tonight: Can they remain a title contender without Dan Marino, their record-busting passer?
The early answer: Dan Who?


Security First reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Edwards Shooting Way Into a Big Role With Nets
Derrick Coleman, recovering from root canal surgery, was still not with the Nets in Knoxville, Tenn., for their exhibition game last night against Larry Johnson and the Charlotte Hornets.
It was Johnson's eight-year, $68-million contract extension just before camp that sparked Coleman's quest for a reported eight-year, $95 million extension.
"He had to go back to the dentist's today," Nets Coach Chuck Daly said concerning Coleman's absence.


Calumet Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Don't Go Into Haiti Under Democracy Fig Leaf
To the Editor:
Between political corruption and military violence lies a place called Haiti.
Not having enough to occupy our own "peacekeeping" forces in Somalia, the United States now seems determined to practice gunboat democracy in the western one-third of the Caribbean island of Hispaniola.
For somewhere between United Nations resolutions and U.S. troops there is a mythic past called Haitian "democracy," which must now be "restored" at once and at all cost.


British Poll Says Gypsies Face the Most Bias
Nearly one in three Britons would prefer not to have Arabs or Pakistanis as neighbors, and two of three say they do not want to live near Gypsies, according to a nationwide survey on British attitudes toward minorities.
The survey was conducted by Gallup of Great Britain on behalf of the American Jewish Committee, which has sponsored similar surveys in the United States and elsewhere in Europe.


Review/Music; Celestial Romance and the Darker Side
People in Austin must think a lot about rain, angels, card games and open roads.
Or so it seemed on Wednesday night at the Lone Star Roadhouse, the New York stop for "Songwriter: Austin on the Road," a tour by David Halley, Jo Carol Pierce, Jimmy Lafave and Michael Fracasso.
The four songwriters sat side by side -- Ms.
Pierce at an electric piano, the other three with guitars -- and played songs, sometimes alone, often with Mr.
Halley adding lead guitar.
For the early set, romance was the prime topic.
Lovers were extolled as angels; ex-lovers were put down: "You're like the sun behind clouds of gray/It don't get much darker when you take it away," Mr.
Halley sang in "When It Comes to You." But there were also glimpses of family matters, paranoia and death.


Agencies Respond to Possible Bias Attack in Bronx
Police officals say they are investigating as a possible bias incident an attack on four eighth graders by a group of black teen-agers in Riverdale Friday afternoon.
No arrests have been made, the police said.


Patents
EVERY year, more than a million Americans require surgery to remove cataracts, opaque areas on the lens of the eye that cause blurred vision.
The problem is especially common in the elderly, but cataracts can also result from eye injuries or diseases like diabetes.
Whatever the cause, cataract surgery usually requires fine, hair-like stitches in the eye, and the patient must wear a bandage for weeks.
But an eye surgeon in Florida has patented a device that he says will eliminate the need for stitches and make full recovery possible within 10 days.


SFFed Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lord, Dentsu Chosen By Retail Chain
Home Base Inc., a home-improvement warehouse retail chain based in Fullerton, Calif., said it had selected Lord, Dentsu &amp; Partners in Los Angeles to handle the creative and production portions of its $15 million to $20 million broadcast advertising account, which had been at the Colby Agency in Los Angeles since December 1991.


Pulse Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Resource Bancshares Mortgage Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Big Ten Has a Run for the Roses Among Five Contenders
Florida State and Notre Dame, the No. 1 and No. 2 teams in The Associated Press and USA Today-CNN polls, remain on track for their match at South Bend, Ind., on Nov. 13, while the Big Ten has some big games this weekend.
Florida State (7-0), which was idle Saturday, is also No. 1 in The New York Times's computer ranking and Notre Dame (8-0), a 31-13 winner over Southern Cal, is rated by the computer at No. 7.
Miami (5-1), which routed Syracuse by 49-0, is ranked No. 2 by The Times.


Midland Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cragin Financial Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


DIALOGUE: Staten Island Fights City Hall; Alone, We're Better Off
In the 1894 referendum that approved the consolidation of the City of New York, the strongest support -- 78 percent -- came from Staten Island.
How times have changed!
This Election Day, Staten Islanders will vote on a proposal to ask the State Legislature to let them form a separate city, and I will be voting yes.
In recent years the interests of the people of Staten Island have become lost among the interests of the four larger boroughs.
Staten Island has become a dumping ground, literally and figuratively -- first on the list for the most undesirable aspects of city government and last when it comes to desirable services rendered.


Vicki Vasilopoulos, Glenn Ball
Fredericka Vasilopoulos, the senior fashion editor at The Daily News Record, a men's wear trade publication, was married yesterday to Glenn Ball, an investor.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Theodore Nedelson officiated at Annunciation Greek Orthodox Church in New York.


Corrections
A headline in the Business section yesterday about a class action suit against Prudential Securities misstated the company's potential liability.
The total of the Prudential Utility Fund's assets is $5.3 billion; there was no estimate of liability in the lawsuit, which contends that some investors were charged excessive fees.


Mountaineer Bankshares of West Virginia Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Rozlyn Coleman, Jonathan Engel
Rozlyn Coleman, an editor and writer at the International Monetary Fund, was married yesterday to Jonathan William Engel, a teacher of history at the Georgetown Day School.
Both work in Washington.
Rabbi Ethan Seidel officiated at the Adas Israel Congregation there.
The bride, 29, graduated from Smith College and received a master's degree in economic history from the London School of Economics.
She is the daughter of Morgan Coleman of Plainfield, Ind., and Nancy Coleman of Rockaway, N.J.


Issue in Race for Mayor: The Right Temperament
IS Rudolph W. Giuliani too mean to be mayor? Is David N. Dinkins too mild?
To paraphrase an old campaign slogan, after decades of debate about charisma, the clubhouse, competence, character and even color, New York City's mayoral election this year may turn on another intangible altogether: temperament.


Bonnie Samuels, Dane Solomon
Bonnie Sue Samuels, a daughter of Daniel and Iris Samuels of Armonk, N.Y., was married yesterday to Dane Solomon, the son of Martin and Elaine Solomon of Merrick, L.I.
Rabbi David Greenberg performed the ceremony at Temple Shaaray Tefila in Bedford, N.Y.
Mrs.
Solomon, 29, is the director of advertising for Barneys New York.
She graduated from the University of Massachusetts.
Her father is an electrical engineer with Hardesty &amp; Hanover, an engineering consulting firm in New York.
Her mother is a sales coordinator at Fabulous Foods, caterers in Armonk.


Career Maverick Has a New Home at Conde Nast
When Conde Nast stunned the magazine industry in March by announcing the acquisition of Architectural Digest, the looming question was what would happen to Paige Rense, the 60-something editor in chief who has headed the magazine for 24 years.
Ms.
Rense is generally considered one of the most powerful editors in the industry.
She has also been somewhat of a maverick.
She operated out of Los Angeles when the rest of the competition was in New York.
And she was part of Knapp Communications, a small, tight-fisted magazine company, while her rivals reveled in the big budgets and lavish perks at Conde Nast, Hearst, Meredith and Hachette Filipacchi.


Abroad at Home; Warning: Hysteria Ahead
You are an immigrant from Ireland, five years in the United States.
You and your wife are expecting to become citizens soon.
Then one day you get a notice from the Government.
It says a judge has found probable cause to believe you are an "alien terrorist" and must be deported.
It is the first you have heard of the charge or the proceeding, whatever it was, before the judge.


Workers' Compensation
Workers' compensation costs have soared in the region over the last decade, fueled by rising health-care costs, leaving the states struggling to cut spending on programs to compensate employees for work-related injury or disease.
For example, while new claims in New York have not gone up appreciably in the past ten years, payments have tripled, and medical payments alone increased 30 percent from 1991 to 1992.
The premiums for workers' compensation insurance, which businesses are required to carry, went up 14.4 percent in New York on Oct. 1.
Connecticut cut costs in June by reducing insurance premiums 17.5 percent and lowering minimum benefits.


First Commercial Corp. (Ark.) (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Helmut Gollwitzer Is Dead at 84; An Anti-Nazi German Theologian
Prof.
Helmut Gollwitzer, a German Lutheran theologian who was an advocate for peace and human rights and an opponent of Nazism, died on Oct. 17 in Berlin.
He was 84 years old and lived in Berlin.
Professor Gollwitzer was on the faculty of the Free University in West Berlin from 1957 until his retirement in 1975 and taught at the University of Bonn from 1950 to 1957.


Manhattan Residents Protest Hotel and Its Owner


Davis Makes His Case Down in Mexico City
Making a case that he should become the backup shooting guard, Hubert Davis (18 points) helped the Knicks to a 103-93 victory over the Houston Rockets tonight at the Sports Palace.
Davis shot 7 for 8 from the field, including three 3-pointers.
He did not miss in the second half.
Meanwhile, Rolando Blackman did not play.
Blackman is battling Davis for minutes at shooting guard behind John Starks, but Blackman is shooting just 28.7 percent during the preseason.
Coach Pat Riley will continue to evaluate Davis and Blackman during the remaining three preseason games, but it was hard to find fault with Davis's performance tonight.


CHRONICLE
PETER MARINO, the architect and designer of the new Barneys store on Madison Avenue as well as the homes of numerous celebrities, has always had a yearning to create an opera set.
His wife, JANE MARINO, a costume designer who has done the clothes for "Kate and Allie" and "Beverly Hills 90210" has always wanted to do opera costumes.
On Saturday, they will make their dreams come true, by putting on a Haydn opera in the theater of their East Side apartment for their 10th wedding anniversary.


Allen Applbaum, Barbara D. Olinsky
Barbara Diane Olinsky, a merchandising manager for Family Circle magazine, was married yesterday to Allen Daniel Applbaum, an assistant United States attorney for the Southern District of New York.
Both work in Manhattan.
Rabbi J. Shelley Applbaum, the bridegroom's father, performed the ceremony at the New York Palace Hotel.
Mrs.
Applbaum graduated from Bryn Mawr College and received a master's degree in English literature from Rutgers University.
She is a daughter of Leonard T. Olinsky of Willingboro, N.J., and the late Bernice D. Olinsky.
Her father, now retired, was a supervisory auditor for the United States Navy in Philadelphia.
Her mother was the executive director of Temple Emanu-El in Willingboro.


Giuliani, Striving to Be Liked, Tries to Elude Shadow of '89
Rose Marie O'Keefe, Democratic state committeewoman and stalwart doyenne of the Bay Ridge party organization, saw the baby suddenly standing in the aisle of the American Legion hall, toddling up toward Rudolph W. Giuliani like an elfin litmus test as the mayoral candidate studiously made his argument to an overflow rainy-night crowd last Wednesday.
"He reached out and touched the baby on his head -- did you see that?" asked the amazed Ms.
O'Keefe, who first took Mr.
Giuliani around her Brooklyn streets in his 1989 campaign, when she was one of his pioneer Democratic defectors, and privately despaired at his prosecutorial stiffness.
"He never would have done that, been that mellow, four years ago."


INSIDE
Muting Good Economic News
The White House is confident the economy is recovering, but the President is being very cautious about spreading the good news.
Page A14.
Overhauling Science Classes
Saying curriculums now aim high and fall short, a panel is recommending sweeping changes in the way public schools teach science.
Page A12.
Preview of Campaign '96
Twenty-eight months before New Hampshire holds its first Presidential primary, this weekend looked a lot like February 1996.
Page A15.
In Japan, a Silent Rebuke
The press is pondering the nature of Empress Michiko's illness, and if recent articles were a cause.
Page A4.
Boy Survives 7-Story Fall
A 5-year-old survived a seven-story fall from his East Side apartment to a concrete courtyard.
Page B4.
Toronto Hails Its Heroes
Joe Carter rides in a victory parade yesterday, hours after his ninth-inning homer gave the Blue Jays their second consecutive World Series championship.
SportsMonday, C1.


Black Women Writers
To the Editor:
Without diminishing by one iota the well-earned recognition of our Nobel Prize winner, Toni Morrison, whose early books I read with great enjoyment and appreciation, I must assert that another black woman writer of an earlier day deserved this distinction as well.


Committed to 'New Forestry' in Montana
To the Editor:
Some important facts were ignored in your Oct. 19 front-page article on the Champion International land transaction in Montana and the role of the Plum Creek Timber Company, to which Champion sold 867,000 acres at $300 an acre.


People's Westchester Savings Bank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times: World Series; Joe Carter Puts an End to the World Series
THERE was a fin-de-siecle gloom hanging over the 1993 World Series.
Last year the barbarians ransacked the commissioner's office.
This year the vandals besieged the ancient baseball tradition of champions-only-need-apply.
Revolution by ownership.
And next year, who knows?
"Next year, you get a five-game series," ruminated an uneasy Pat Gillick, the architect of the Toronto Blue Jays, still reeking of champagne, only minutes after becoming world champions for the second straight year late Saturday night.


TRANSACTIONS
Saturday Football National Football League  MIAMI DOLPHINS -- Activated Doug Pedersen, quarterback, from the practice squad.
Waived Frankie Smith, cornerback.


Oriental Federal Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Circuit City Takes a Spin At Used Car Marketing
Who could blame Todd Jancaitis for a little trepidation the other day as she embarked on her latest search for a quality used car?
Years ago, shopping for a four-wheel-drive vehicle, she encountered a friendly saleswoman at one dealership, only to be steered toward station wagons.
"She told me that's what I needed," said Mrs.
Jancaitis, a mother of three.
So much for female bonding.
As for the salesmen who assisted her at other lots, she said: "They don't talk seriously to women buying a used car. They assume you have no money, no brains and no willpower."


TriCo Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Dance; Exploring Sexual Identity With the Tactile and the Text
Mark Dendy, whose dancing and choreography have been seen in New York since he graduated from the North Carolina School of the Arts in 1983, presented two very different premieres at Performance Space 122 on Friday night.
"Drum" was an explosion of pure-dance choreography for six dancers to a tape of African drum music by Wall Matthews, an eruption of highly structured energy that came to a satisfying rest.


Washington Talk; Ahead of the Health Bill, They Jockey
In a week when little seemed to be happening with the Clinton effort to overhaul health care, the Senate offered intricate examples of the indirect maneuvering this issue will demand for the next year or so.
Two Senate Republicans, John H. Chafee of Rhode Island and John C. Danforth of Missouri, who want to require individuals to buy insurance, met with other lawmakers who oppose any required insurance.
That left others wondering which side was thinking of changing its position.


Jefferson Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kazakh Uses America To Enhance His Stature
The President of Kazakhstan played politics with the United States today and won.
President Nursultan A. Nazarbayev and Secretary of State Warren Christopher were scheduled to sign and celebrate an excruciatingly technical agreement detailing how Kazakhstan would spend $85 million of American aid to dismantle its nuclear weapons.


Review/Music; Muy Caliente, Salsa Comes to the Garden
"Marlboro Music's Combinacion Perfecta," a salsa show at Madison Square Garden on Saturday night, had all sorts of significance, not the least of which was the nearly four hours of extraordinary music and vocal improvising it presented.
No one looks on the present as a golden age, but the concert, which let a series of salsa's best vocalists challenge each other, argued that salsa is a genre overflowing with talent, and not all of it always heard on records.
And with the concert's corporate backing, the show suggested the weight Hispanic culture continues to gain in the United States; Marlboro is in the middle of a Hispanic concert series.
With the performers' constant cries of "Mi gente!" (My people!) or "Soy Borinqueno!" ("I'm a Puerto Rican!"), along with the parade of Puerto Rican flags wending their way through the audience, it was clear that the music was a rallying point for a group, bilingual and bicultural, whose identity has hardly been compromised.


Far East National Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tikkanen Wins in Revival Meeting With Gretzky
When the Rangers play the Los Angeles Kings in this era, it is always a reunion of the Edmonton Oiler dynasty, with enough Stanley Cup rings around both locker rooms to trigger every airport metal detector from La Guardia to LAX.
Appropriately, two former Oilers -- Esa Tikkanen and Wayne Gretzky -- played the biggest starring roles as the Rangers ended a three-game losing streak with a 3-2 victory in an excellent hockey game at Madison Square Garden last night.


Dance in Review
Dianne McIntyre and Olu Dara Bessie Schonberg Theater


NEWS SUMMARY
International A2-11 SOMALIA ACTION THAT WENT AWRY
The Oct. 3 raid by U.S.
Army rangers in Mogadishu whose failure created public pressure for a change of United States policy in Somalia came close to succeeding, a reconstruction of the action indicates.
A1


Rivals Wage Fierce Debate In New Jersey
Gov.
Jim Florio and his Republican rival, Christine Todd Whitman, held their third and most freewheeling debate today, frequently cutting each other off, talking over each other and uttering sarcastic asides in their last scheduled encounter before Election Day.
Neither candidate broke any new ground or appeared to win an outright victory.
But seated side-by-side and freed of the format of the first two debates, which limited their ability to respond to each other, Mrs.
Whitman and Mr.
Florio had their most intense confrontation yet.


Stacey L. Lane, Ira Arthur Pion
Dr.
Stacey Laura Lane, a resident in psychiatry at the New York University Medical Center in New York, was married yesterday to Dr.
Ira Arthur Pion, the chief resident in dermatology at the hospital.
Rabbi Louis Frishman officiated at Temple Israel in Lawrence, L.I.
Dr.
Lane, 27, is keeping her name.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a medical degree from N.Y.U.
She is a daughter of Brenda and George Lane of Monsey, N.Y.


North Side Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Killers Indeed Fear Life More Than Death
To the Editor:
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo's wish to have Thomas Grasso serve 20 years in a New York prison is not the best use of state resources.
For example, I'd rather see the funds that would be used for Mr.
Grasso's imprisonment allocated to a Head Start or prenatal program.
Such endeavors would be of greater interest and benefit to New Yorkers.
WILLIAM S. DIXON  New York, Oct. 15, 1993


CHRONICLE
In Washington, MARLA ROMASH, director of communications for Vice President Al Gore, is on the move.
She has become the Administration's chief spokeswoman for health care.
Asked why she had made the change, Ms.
Romash, 36, who became Mr.
Gore's press secretary in 1989, when he was a Senator, said simply, "Because Mrs. Clinton asked and because health care is of vital importance to the President, the First Lady and the American people."


Health Proposal Could Leave Aliens in U.S. Without Care
At Su Clinica Familiar, the largest community health care center in the Rio Grande Valley, the issue of whether a patient is an illegal immigrant is met with a kind of "don't ask, don't tell" policy.
If a pregnant women provides a utility bill or phone bill showing she has a local address, she is legally entitled to treatment, though only part of it is reimbursable to the clinic through Medicaid.
A few miles away, at the McAllen Medical Center, where care for indigents costs the hospital up to $1 million a month, a different strategy prevails.
Private security guards with green uniforms that bear an uncanny resemblance to those of the United States Border Patrol have been periodically posted at the entrance.
Critics say they are put there to discourage illegal aliens from walking in.


Phillies Refuse To Blame Williams
Jim Fregosi called his team together in the clubhouse, the doors closed to the outside world so that the manager could deliver his eulogy in peace.
He laid down the rules, quickly and simply.
Others may believe that Mitch Williams had lost the World Series, but that attitude would not be permitted in the Philadelphia locker room.
Williams, Fregosi reminded his team, had saved 43 games for the Phillies this season, and no one -- not one player -- would be allowed to forget that.


Loyola Capital (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Jersey Rivals Hold Their 3d and Most Freewheeling Debate


No Headline
There's a real dilemma here.
The economy is starting to move in the right direction.
We think it's good to tell people that, because it helps increase confidence, but when so many people and communities are still hurting, you also don't want to sound out of touch with their plight. -- GENE SPERLING, an assistant to the President for economic policy.  [ A14:4. ]


'92 Titlists Repeat on Charles
Vester Boat Club of Philadelphia and the Boston Rowing Center both successfully defended their 1992 men's and women's championship eights titles at today's annual Head of the Charles Regatta.
This fall rowing rite, patterned after the English "head" style races in which the crews are timed over the course rather than in side-by-side racing, has become in its 29-year history the largest single-day rowing competition in the world.
Today's racing conditions on the Charles River were difficult for the 4,000 competitors, who contended with gusting winds that produced slow times over the winding three-mile course.
Vester overpowered its hometown rival Penn Athletic Club to retain the men's eight's title, winning in the time of 14 minutes 19.97 seconds, 15.05 seconds ahead of Penn A.C.
Brown University, which last year was disqualified from first place in this race, finished third this year.


Canada Votes Today With Polls Suggesting a Victory by Liberals
Canada, whose 18.5 million eligible voters inhabit six time zones, chooses a new Parliament on Monday and appears virtually certain to end nine years of Progressive Conservative government.
The Liberal Party leader, Jean Chretien, who is expected to become the country's 20th Prime Minister, spent the last day of the seven-week campaign in his home town of Shawingigan, Quebec, urging voters to give the Liberals at least the 148 seats they will need in the 295-seat lower house of Parliament to form a majority Government.


Metcalf Pushes Steelers Past Point of No Return
Eric Metcalf had injured his right knee in the Cleveland Browns' victory over Cincinnati last Sunday.
So, in preparation last week for what in this city is Public Enemy No. 1 -- the Pittsburgh Steelers -- he did not practice on Monday.
Or Tuesday.
Or Wednesday.
Or Thursday.
On Friday he did some light work and proclaimed to the Browns' owner, Art Modell: "I'm playing in the Pittsburgh game. I'm just not going to miss that."


Mandela, the Politician, Does as the Zulus Do
South Africans know Nelson Mandela as a cosmopolitan man who favors gray suits over skins and feathers and English over Xhosa, his native language.
Some of his urbane lieutenants in the African National Congress scarcely hide their distaste for tribal rites.
But there is an election coming, and so today 60,000 admirers watched another Nelson Mandela -- grimacing uneasily while tribal diviners wearing beads and goat bladders in their hair swayed at his feet, burning incense to drive off evil spirits; hearing his praises screamed in the sing-song cadences reserved for African kings; and finally rising to read a speech in clumsy Zulu.


Networks Gain Riches From News Magazines
On Sunday, more Americans turn to "60 Minutes" than any other television show.
By Monday, if they haven't had their fill of news magazines, they can turn to "Day One," ABC's newest entrant to the genre.
And on Tuesday, there's more with "Dateline NBC"
So it goes throughout the week.
Every day except Saturday there is a network news magazine to choose from: "Eye-to-Eye," "Now," "48 Hours," "20/20" and "Prime Time Live." Often indistinguishable from one another, each seeks a niche in an increasingly crowded field.


Diana Trilling at 88 Remembers, Rebukes And Ponders Marriage
"What does long life avail?" asked the poet Delmore Schwartz.
"The best seats at the funerals of friends." It also offers the chance to set the record straight while having the last word.
Diana Trilling has just accomplished this difficult feat.


Irving Torgoff, 75, L.I.U. Star in 30's and N.B.A. Player
Irving Torgoff, a star college basketball player and a leading pro player in the early days of the National Basketball Association, died on Thursday in Fort Lauderdale, Fla.
He was 75 and lived in Lighthouse Point, Fla.
The cause of death was a heart attack, his family said.


Trans Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Television; Sun Sets on CBS Baseball Amid 'South of Sunset' Spots
CBS is long past the point of looking for silver linings in its four-year contract with Major League Baseball that ended Saturday night with the last pitch of the World Series.
That deal, in fact, cost CBS just about every ounce of silver it owned -- along with gold, nickel and copper.
CBS absorbed losses of about $500 million on the $1 billion contract.
But perhaps the investment will help CBS bring a few extra viewers to "South of Sunset." According to George Schweitzer, the senior vice president who creates and executes on-air promotion for CBS, the business of inducing viewers to watch a new television show is "a contact-impact business -- you've got to make contact to have impact."


Laura Molnar, Gabriel Bramson
Laura Anne Molnar, the daughter of Thomas and Francesca Molnar of Tenafly, N.J., was married yesterday to Gabriel Bramson, a son of Morris and Mira Bramson of New Rochelle, N.Y.
The Rev.
Richard Leonard, a Unitarian minister, officiated at Tappan Hill in Tarrytown, N.Y.
The bride is a lawyer for the Teachers Insurance and Annuity Association-College Retirement Equities Fund, a pension fund in New York.
She graduated from Princeton University and received a law degree from New York University.


Two airlines promote images, not just fares, to win new customers.
DISCOUNTED air fares are as common these days as delayed flights out of Atlanta.
American Airlines touched off a round of fare cuts to Europe last month.
Northwest Airlines started another round of discounting over the weekend.
With all this focus on price, price and price, why bother trying to pump up an airline's brand name in an age when a perfect flight often means one that is uneventful, inexpensive and adds enough frequent-flier mileage to qualify for a free trip?


Awards at Hamptons Film Festival
The first Hamptons International Film Festival came to an end yesterday with the presentation here of Golden Arrow Audience Awards for best film, best short and best director, and 10 Student Film Showcase Awards.
Carlo Carlei won the Golden Arrow for his direction of "Flight of the Innocent," an Italian-French release about a young boy abandoned after his family is assassinated in Calabria.
"Flight of the Innocent" also won the prize for most popular film.
The winner of the award for most popular short film was "The Big Gig," directed by Jeffrey Nachmanoff.


After Talks, Haitian Aides Hope for a Break in the Impasse
With two American warships visible less than a mile offshore to help enforce an economic embargo against Haiti, Haitian officials expressed cautious optimism today that the army and the Prime Minister would break a stalemate that is blocking the return of the country's ousted President.
Participants in negotiations held on Saturday between Prime Minister Robert Malval and the head of the Haitian armed forces, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras, said the issue of amnesty for military officers remained a stumbling block.
The two sides plan to resume the talks on Monday.


Gateway Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article on Wednesday about Russia's consideration of military intervention to protect the Georgian Government from rebel attack misstated the year the rebel leader, Zviad K. Gamsakhurdia, was ousted as President.
It was January 1992, not January 1991.


Review/Television; Losing Jobs and Hope In 'The Great Depression'
Experiences burned into the memories of those who endured America's toughest times are at the heart of "The Great Depression," a gritty seven-hour documentary that begins tonight on PBS.
The producers, led by Henry E. Hampton ("Eyes on the Prize"), also make effective use of strong black-and-white newsreel clips from the 1920's and 30's, zesty folk songs and an intelligent narration, but it is the memories that give this history its punch and drive.
The first hour, "A Job at Ford's," focuses on the automobile company that drew tens of thousands of European immigrants, Mexicans and Southern blacks to Detroit after World War I to produce the Model T, then the most popular car in the world.


Sovereign Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First United Bancshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chicago Gangs, Extending Turf, Turn to Politics
On a gray afternoon not long ago, Lu Palmer stood in the city's downtown business district watching thousands of young blacks march past, circle City Hall and stall traffic for blocks.
They were ostensibly protesting Chicago's troubled school system, but a few also carried signs declaring it was time for another black mayor.
The marchers were as disciplined as an army. Or a street gang.


Review/Television; Wisecracks and Angst: Fortyish Baby Boomers
"Dave's World" is a prime-time approximation of the world of Dave Barry, the humorist who writes his syndicated Pulitzer Prize-winning "Dave's World" column for The Miami Herald.
While the sitcom, Mondays at 8:30 on CBS, is based on two Barry books, Mr.
Barry pointedly keeps his distance from the series, not wanting the real Dave to be confused with the television version.
Yeah, sure.
Just keep those checks coming.
Like Mr.
Barry, this television family lives quite comfortably in a Miami suburb.
Unlike Mr.
Barry and his wife, who have one son, television's Dave (Harry Anderson) and his wife, Beth (DeLane Matthews), have two.
They also have two close friends, Shel (Meshach Taylor), a plastic surgeon, and Kenny (Shadoe Stevens), Dave's editor.
Kenny's secretary is Mia (J. C. Wendel), who wouldn't think of missing a production of "Fiddler on the Roof" starring John Davidson.


Seeking Support for P.L.O. Pact, Israel Is to Free 760 Palestinians
Israel is to begin a gradual release of 760 Palestinian prisoners on Monday under an agreement reached with the Palestine Liberation Organization, Cabinet ministers said today.
But Islamic militants killed two Israeli soldiers in the occupied Gaza Strip today, fueling charges by rightist politicians that freeing Palestinians would abet anti-Israeli violence.


The Blue Jays Tease but Can't Be Caught
The team Paul Molitor played for last year finished four games behind the Toronto Blue Jays.
"When we were after them last year," he said, recalling the last of his 15 seasons with the Milwaukee Brewers, "the better we played chasing them, the better they played."


Strong Sports Agency Key in Yankee Saga
In 1971, when the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority set out to build its huge entertainment complex in the swamps of East Rutherford, it had one overarching priority: luring the New York Yankees away from the Bronx.
Two decades later, after enticing New York's two professional football teams, a Long Island basketball team and a Denver hockey franchise to the Meadowlands complex, the sports authority is still without its ultimate prize, the nation's most valuable and storied franchise in sports.


Pressure Mounts on Contributions
The president of the National Association of State Treasurers says there is growing momentum for limiting the acceptance or soliciting of political contributions.
"I think there is going to be public pressure for people to not ask" for contributions, said Lucille Maurer, the State Treasurer of Maryland.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the cloning of a human embryo misidentified the researcher in some copies.
He is Dr.
Jerry L. Hall, who works in the in vitro fertilization program at George Washington University Medical Center; Dr.
Robert Stillman is director of the program.


Give Science More Life, A Panel Urges Teachers
A commission appointed by an independent science organization will recommend sweeping changes today in science education in public schools, saying that existing curriculums try to cover too much, do not teach enough practical application of science and fail to integrate the subject with math and technology.
In its four-year study, "Benchmarks for Science Literacy," the commission offers broad recommendations for what students should know after the second, fifth, eighth and 12th grades.
Students as young as 5 years old should receive regular science lessons -- not just scattered experiments like collecting snowflakes and learning that they all have six points -- and these lessons should be given as often as reading or arithmetic, the study said.


No Larger NATO Now
The Czech Republic, Poland and Hungary want to join the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
But the Clinton Administration is right to say no for now.
The Administration is instead offering all the countries of the former Soviet empire closer ties to NATO and holding open the possibility of eventual membership without setting a timetable.
Eastern European countries understandably want the U.S. security guarantees that come with NATO membership.
Historically caught between the competing ambitions of Russia and Germany, they have learned the hard lessons of relying on themselves alone or on unreliable allies like Britain and France in the 1930's.
But the dangers they now face can be met without formally binding the U.S. to come to their defense.


Police Seek Links In 2 Disappearances
Police officials in New York State who are trying to find a missing 12-year-old girl have sent an investigator to Massachusetts, where the body of another girl was found on Saturday.
Massachusetts State Police believe the victim is Holly Piirainen, 10 years old, who disappeared from Sturbridge on Aug. 5 while taking a walk.
Two hunters found the body in a wooded area of nearby Brimfield at about 8:30 Saturday morning.


Customized Radio Services Find More Air Time
Two companies best known for supplying traffic reports for radio station listeners, Shadow Broadcasting Service Inc. and its larger rival, Metro Networks Inc., are expanding their scope by offering customized news, weather and sports broadcasts to a growing number of radio stations.
Such ventures are unusual in the highly fragmented radio industry.
While stations can supplement their own programming with syndicated segments like Casey Kasem's Top 40, Rush Limbaugh's talk show, or ABC News, more topical local information typically had to be produced by each station's news staff. 'A Logical Extension'
Even The Associated Press's broadcast wire, used by more than half of all radio stations, generally carries only regional, national and foreign, not local, news.


Your Very Own Cold War
It's the plot of a hundred cold-war novels, and who knows how many pre-1990 Hollywood films:
A patriotic American sneaks into Communist Moscow, hoping to get a look at -- and perhaps steal -- the latest in top-secret Soviet military hardware.
The future of the free world is at stake.
There's lots of action, tons of espionage, and in the end, the daring American triumphs, flying home safely with the knowledge that either (a) the Commies weren't as advanced as we thought or (b) we'll have to spend billions more to stay ahead in the arms race.


Jamie Grobman, Michael Bernstein
Jamie Grobman, a lawyer in the Office of the Chief Counsel of the Internal Revenue Service, and Michael Louis Bernstein, an associate in the law firm of Arnold &amp; Porter, were married yesterday.
The couple work in Washington.
Rabbi Jack Moline performed the ceremony at the Agudas Achim Synagogue in Alexandria, Va.
The bride, 25, is the daughter of Dr.
Sidney and Joyce Grobman of Camp Hill, Pa.
She graduated cum laude from Duke University and received a law degree from American University.
Her father is the chief of the division of program service for the Pennsylvania Department of Education in Harrisburg.


Market Place; A hot designer's planned offering still faces thorny issues.
ALTHOUGH many in the garment industry and on Wall Street doubted that it would happen, the Donna Karan Company is scheduled to offer the public a stake in its high-flying fashion business in the fourth week of November, according to Bear, Stearns &amp; Company, the lead underwriter of the offering.
Ms.
Karan is expected to go on the road to peddle shares in her company.
If her appearances at shows of her clothes at stores like Saks Fifth Avenue and Neiman Marcus are any indication of her sales abilities, the offering could be a rip-roaring success.


Jill D. Rosen, Scott M. Hyde
Jill Dana Rosen, a daughter of Marion Murray of Floral Park, Queens, and the late Richard L. Rosen, was married yesterday to Scott Michael Hyde, a son of Theresa M. Hyde of New Seabury, Mass., and Robert W. Hyde of Natick, Mass.
Richard George, a justice of the peace, officiated at the Veronique Restaurant and Ballroom in Brookline, Mass.
Mrs.
Hyde is an associate with Gadsby &amp; Hannah, a law firm in Boston.
She graduated from Newcomb College and received a law degree from the New England School of Law.


Building Superindent Accused of Sodomy
A building superintendent sexually assaulted a 14-year-old in Brooklyn yesterday, forcing him into a building basement and sodomizing him, the police said.
The attack occurred about 7:30 P.M. near the intersection of Avenue J and East 46th Street in Midwood, where the boy was riding his bicycle, said Sgt.
John McCluskey, a police spokesman.
The boy, who is deaf and dumb, was not identified.


Bridge
Shouting orally at the bridge table is always discouraged.
Shouting technically is another matter.
That is often welcomed, sometimes by an opponent.
An example is the diagramed deal, played two decades ago.
The declarer was Richard Khautin of Manhattan, whose death three weeks ago deprived the New York bridge community of one of its most popular members.
At the time of the deal he held a national title that no longer exists: the Life Master Men's Pairs.
The traditional jump raise of three spades, game forcing, was still common then and was used by the partnership en route to an optimistic six spades.


Boitano in Search of His Version of Bliss: One More Heavenly Day
He has made small, inevitable concessions to age and injury since that unearthly night when Brian Boitano felt "as if angels were lifting and spinning me" to a gold medal at the 1988 Winter Olympics.
Once, he gave pet names to his individual gray hairs.
Now, Boitano joked, he must name entire tufts.
Two years ago, he tore a tendon in his right knee.
The knee, along with chronic soreness in his back and groin, sometimes distracts his laser focus from skating to his aching body, but he insists that he expects more from himself at age 30 than at 24.


Sunrise Bancorp Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Liberty Bancorp (Okla.) Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Daneyko Doubles His Fun As a Defender for Devils
There are smiling faces galore around the streaking Devils these days, but a lucrative four-year contract just about sealed and delivered makes Ken Daneyko's smile more radiant than the rest.
Daneyko has displayed such remarkable loyalty to the Devils in his 11 seasons with the organization that John McMullen, the team's chairman, has a special place in his heart for the rugged defenseman.


USBancorp Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chiat/Day May Get Cherry Coke Account
The Coca-Cola Company is moving closer to awarding its Cherry Coke brand to Chiat/Day in Venice, Calif.
Advertising executives who spoke on the condition of anonymity said on Friday that although the discussions on the assignment had not been completed, Chiat/Day seemed likely to join soon the widening roster of Coca-Cola agencies, which expanded earlier this month to include similarly unconventional creative shops like Wieden &amp; Kennedy in Portland, Ore., and Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis.


Review/Theater; Futile Wait for a Ferry to a Mystical Island
In the most famous scene in Brian Friel's "Dancing at Lughnasa," five Irish sisters in County Donegal, 1936, suddenly break loose from their household drudgery to explode in dance to the music pouring out of their new Marconi radio.
The scene has a power transcending language.
As if by magic, the women levitate in spiritual ecstasy even as every fact of their lives pulls them closer to poverty, heartbreak and death.
"Wonderful Tennessee," Mr.
Friel's new play at the Plymouth Theater, explores more or less the same themes, and why not?
It is an eternal drama that time never heals.
Life rushes on, fast and cruel, and still we cannot stop hungering irrationally for some mystical release, or, as "Wonderful Tennessee" puts it, for "whatever it is we desire but can't express."


People's Bank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dykstra, a Winner, Goes Home a Loser
There was an element of disbelief in Lenny Dykstra's face as he sat with his back to the crowd, looking into his locker.
He had watched Joe Carter's home run off Mitch Williams sail past Milt Thompson in left field, over the blue wall, ending the World Series.
He knew the Phillies had lost, 8-6, to Toronto in the sixth and final game, ending a ride even he could not have predicted.


Jiri Hajek, 80, Dies; Human Rights Aide And Czech Official
Jiri Hajek, the Foreign Minister of Czechoslovakia during the short-lived liberal reforms in 1968 that became known as the Prague Spring, died Friday in a hospital in Prague, the Reuters news agency reported.
He was 80.
The agency, citing a human-rights advocate, Libuse Silhanova of the Czech Helsinki Citizens Assembly, said the cause was cancer.


Review/Music; Masur's Gewandhaus: A Display of Tradition And Maybe the Future
There were times, during the performances by the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra in Avery Fisher Hall on Friday night, when a listener was granted a glimpse of the musical future.
Kurt Masur, Kapellmeister of the 250-year-old orchestra since 1970, was not only displaying the distinguished ensemble's natural sense of breath and gesture, he was also revealing how he might continue to transform his local orchestra, the 151-year-old New York Philharmonic, during coming seasons.
In the performance of Mendelssohn's "Italian" Symphony, and even in the same composer's operatically demonstrative Overture to "Ruy Blas," technique and incisiveness were less the point than comradely dedication.
It was as if Mr.
Masur and his players were saying: "We are a community in agreement here. Join us in musical exploration." In the Mendelssohn symphony this sometimes made for too relaxed an approach, creating slack lines in the midst of the score's skittish energy, but the beauty and sense of communality in the playing was unmistakable.


Joyful Molitor Is the Blue Jay With the Red Eyes
Paul Molitor might as well have been a teddy bear.
Over and over again, different Blue Jays sought him out and hugged him.
Over and over again.
There was Dave Stewart.
There was Joe Carter.
There was Cito Gaston.
Gaston was not crying until he saw the tears dripping from Molitor's eyes.
So the manager cried, too.
Of all those who rejoiced after Toronto's second straight World Series championship Saturday night, there may not have been anyone who relished it more than Molitor.
This was the reason he started playing baseball.
This was the reason he spent 15 years in Milwaukee, playing and losing in a World Series in 1982 and futilely waiting for the next chance.
It was the reason he left Milwaukee for Toronto.
He wanted the World Series ring.


Ethnic Shifts in Electorate Play Part in the Mayoral Riddle of Who Will Win
How can David N. Dinkins possibly win again when his margin over Rudolph W. Giuliani four years ago was less than 50,000 votes and when public opinion polls suggest that Hispanic and white liberal Dinkins voters are defecting?
The most tantalizing mathematical riddle of the New York City mayoral campaign might be answered, in part, by changes in the city's complexion: the proportion of older whites has shrunk; the share of black and Hispanic registered voters appears to have climbed.


Parkvale Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Don't Go Into Haiti Under Democracy Fig Leaf; U.S. Military Aid
To the Editor:
"Haiti's Curse: Power Means Brutality; Practice Makes Perfect" (The Week in Review, Oct. 17) tells of Haiti's misery and gives some historical background, such as the 19-year occupation by United States marines from 1915 to 1934, but the post-1934 role of the United States is omitted.


One Valley Bancorp of W. Va. Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Charles Decker, 51, Building-Code Expert
Charles M. Decker, a New Jersey state official who led national efforts for strong and uniform construction and building safety codes, including access for the handicapped, died on Thursday at a hospital in Livingston, N.J.
He was 51 and lived in Tewksbury Township, N.J.
The cause was complications from cancer, his family said.


Killers Indeed Fear Life More Than Death
To the Editor:
While opportunistic opponents of New York's Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo vie for headlines, readers who look beyond the rhetoric will see the Governor is correct in the Grasso case.


First Colonial Bankshares Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Michelle Love, Michael Marchildon
Michelle Berman Love, the daughter of Dr.
Lewis Berman of New York and Deborah Weissman-Berman of Gainesville, Fla., was married yesterday to Michael Jeffrey Marchildon, a son of Ralph and Harriett Marchildon of Bend, Ore.
The Rev.
Pat Traynor, a Roman Catholic priest, performed the ceremony at St.
Paul the Apostle Church in West Los Angeles, Calif.
Mrs.
Marchildon, 32, graduated from Skidmore College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.
She is a marketing and sales manager for International Software Design in Los Angeles.
Her previous marriage ended in divorce.


Campaign Stop: A periodic report on neighborhood reaction to the mayoral race. -- 4. St. Albans, Queens; In St. Albans, Black Voters Express Faith in Dinkins, Wariness of Giuliani
When police stepped up patrols recently in St.
Albans, Queens, Rodney Williams, a 20-year-old college student, was pleased, believing it would help reduce the selling of crack in the neighborhood.
But Mr.
Williams, who in his limited free time likes to hang out on the corner with friends, soon had another perspective.
"The guys who live around here, we all know each other, we talk," he said.
"The cops say, 'Where do you live?' and 'You've got to get off this corner.' We have all lived here for years."


Ami L. Weil, Todd A. Chanko
Dr.
Ami Lisa Weil, a psychologist in Manhattan, was married yesterday to Todd Anthony Chanko, a television producer and film buyer for WNYC-TV in New York.
Rabbi Marshall Meyer officiated at the 24 Fifth Avenue Ballroom, a catering establishment in New York.
Dr.
Weil, who is keeping her name, also works at the Interfaith Medical Center in Brooklyn.
She graduated magna cum laude from the University of Rochester and received a Ph.D. in clinical psychology from New York University.
She is a daughter of Warren and Michelle Weil of Scarsdale, N.Y.


Dance in Review
Poppo and the Go-Go Boys  La Mama


Auto Workers Gain Contract With G.M. Increasing Pensions
The General Motors Corporation and the United Automobile Workers tentatively agreed early this morning to a three-year labor contract that raises wages, enriches pensions and preserves health care benefits that are fully paid by the company.
The agreement, reached at 1 A.M. after a 16-hour bargaining session, hews to the pattern negotiated at the Ford Motor Company five weeks ago, the president of the union, Owen F. Bieber, announced.
The Chrysler Corporation agreed to a similar contract on Oct. 1.


Nancy Siegel, Eric Brachfeld
Nancy Siegel, a daughter of Sheila and Bernard Siegel of Commack, L.I., was married yesterday to Eric Brachfeld, a son of Rosalind and Dr.
Jonas Brachfeld of Moorestown, N.J.
Rabbi Leonard Troupp officiated at the Puck Building in New York.
Ms.
Siegel, 30, is keeping her name.
She is a freelance video production manager in New York.
The bride graduated from the University of Michigan.


Coral Gables Fedcorp Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


NFS Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ms. Steier, Mr. McNamara
Wendy Jane Steier, a daughter of Mildred Steier of Brooklyn and Herbert Steier of Baldwin Harbor, L.I., was married yesterday to Michael Joseph McNamara, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
John F. McNamara of Mahopac, N.Y.
Rabbi Albert Sturmer officiated at the Bear Mountain (N.Y.) Inn in Bear Mountain State Park.
Mrs.
McNamara, 32, is a project manager in the marketing services department of the New York City Transit Authority in Brooklyn.
Her father, who is retired, was a member of the newsroom staff at The New York Times.
Her mother, also retired, taught English at Mark Twain Junior High School for the Gifted and Talented in Coney Island.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY CONGENIALITY PLAYS ROLE IN CAMPAIGN For years, as he became a career master of indictment and conviction, Rudolph W. Giuliani could afford to treat likability as a secondary characteristic of private, not necessarily public, value.
His defeat in 1989 changed that, he said.
In this campaign, he is determined not to "play into that stereotype of a mechanical man." His success may determine the outcome of the vote.
A1.


Merchants N.Y. Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Re-elect Governor Florio
America's politicians are seeking an answer from next week's election in New Jersey.
Is it possible to survive after raising taxes?
New Jersey, meanwhile, seeks a capable governor.
We recommend re-electing the one they have.
In 1990, newly installed Gov.
Jim Florio put through the biggest tax increase in the state's history, having said in his campaign that he saw no need for any increase.
In light of the prevailing anti-tax sentiment, it was a brave move.
And it was absolutely necessary for New Jersey, as it has been for other states and for the Federal Government, Republican supply-side nostrums notwithstanding.
The added revenue solved the problems at hand -- balancing the budget while boosting school aid.


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about the two orchestras conducted by Kurt Masur reversed the identities of two musicians shown hailing a cab.
Christian Kretschmar was at the left and Hans Schlag at the center.


Economic Calendar
Listed below are the scheduled release dates for major economic indicators this week.
Monday  Existing-Home Sales . . .
September  10-Day Auto Sales . . .
October  Tuesday  Consumer Confidence . . .
October  Wednesday Durable Goods Orders . . .
September  Thursday Weekly Jobless Claims  Gross Domestic Product . . . 3d Quarter  Friday  Personal Income . . .
September


CNB Bancshares (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Investors Bank Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article on Thursday about the suicide of a Japanese right-wing militant misspelled the name of the newspaper executive in whose office it occurred.
He is Toshitada Nakae.


One Jury's Journey; Amid Case's Facts and a City's Fears, Seeking Rationale for Jurors' Findings
The verdicts in the city's second case of a videotaped beating, announced piecemeal last week by a jury trying to avoid a deadlock, have produced a new set of incongruous images to symbolize the social and racial dissonances of Los Angeles.
There was the scene of one defendant, Damian M. Williams, his head shaved for the verdict, raising his arms in jubilation in the courtroom much as he did in the riots 18 months ago after he hurled a brick at the head of a white truck driver, Reginald O. Denny.


'Write Me,' a Senator Says, And the People Take Heed
Senator Barbara Boxer of California has adopted as her theme song a ditty she remembers from the Perry Como show in the 1950's: "Letters, we get letters. We get stacks and stacks of letters."
The lyrics are something of an understatement.
Ms.
Boxer, a Democrat elected last year, gets more than 10,000 letters a day -- not counting the 5,000 or so mass mailings sent daily to every member of Congress by lobbying groups.


Review/Music; Chamber Society's 25th Anniversary
Lincoln Center took a chance when it established a resident Chamber Music Society in 1969.
Although not entirely moribund, chamber music was a backwater then.
Several string quartets and mixed-timbre groups toured and made recordings, and depending on how one approached it, the repertory was either the nectar of connoisseurs or the height of elitist stuffiness.
But classical-music elitism was not yet the whipping boy it has lately become, and it was possible in those days to redefine a supposedly elitist repertory as revolutionary and egalitarian, by virtue of its one-player-to-a-part structure.
The folksy charm of the society's founding director, Charles Wadsworth, gave this new populist image a push.
By the late 1970's, Mr.
Wadsworth and his group were widely credited with starting a chamber music boom.


Plot by Baghdad to Assassinate Bush Is Questioned
The evidence of an Iraqi assassination plot against George Bush, the basis for a United States missile attack in June on the intelligence headquarters in Baghdad, was significantly weaker than the Clinton Administration asserted, a new article says.
The article, written by Seymour M. Hersh and published in The New Yorker this week, says no evidence directly linked President Saddam Hussein of Iraq, his intelligence service or his senior advisers to an assassination attempt on the former President.


Series Rating Drops From '92
The CBS telecast of Game 6 of the World Series Saturday night drew an overnight Nielsen rating in 29 markets of 20.0 with a 34 share.
That's down 11 percent from last year's overnight rating of 22.6 and 40 for Game 6, which, like this year, was the final game of the Series.
Toronto was the winner in both cases.
Full national ratings for Game 6 will not be available until tomorrow.
A ratings point represents 1 percent of all television households in America, or about 942,000 homes.
The share represents the percentage of televisions in use.


Bank of New Hampshire Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Music; A Vocally Outsize 'Tosca'
Franco Zeffirelli's sprawling production of "Tosca" at the Met poses considerable challenges to the mere mortals who must sing within it.
The opera can become a contest of simply making oneself heard.
In a cast change on Wednesday night, Janis Martin was the clear winner over her male rivals, plowing across the lead role in high diva style. (Her tone suffered as a result: notes in the upper range had a rough finish and sometimes broke apart altogether.)
Yuri Mazurok was weaker by comparison.
He made the motions of a successful Scarpia, but his burnished baritone got lost in the tumult of the first-act finale.
Emil Ivanov, singing Cavaradossi, made more headway; his tenor, while not enormous, came through in rich, dark, Russian fashion.
The audience received him rather coolly, perhaps because of some awkward diction and a wobbly pressure on the final note of each major aria.


Tokyo Journal; What Great Grief Has Made the Empress Mute?
Even in a new age of openness for Japan, the subject is just too hot to touch, on television and in print.
But for the last several days a single question has been whispered throughout the country: has the Japanese press driven Empress Michiko to the brink of a nervous breakdown?
Outside the Imperial Palace, very little is known about the condition of the much-admired Empress since she collapsed last Wednesday, on her 59th birthday.
The only confirmed report is that she cannot speak.


Pursuing Fairness in Big Prudential Settlement
Irving M. Pollack, a father of modern securities regulation, is a judicious man steeped in the ways of Wall Street, so he is not about to come right out and reveal his deepest convictions about the Prudential Securities case.
But given his life work as a Government crusader, it is perhaps safe to say that the allegations against Prudential turn his stomach.
A visceral reaction to wrongdoing has long motivated Mr.
Pollack, and it seemed to figure prominently in his decision last week to take a job that could prove fraught with frustrations: the administrator overseeing the settlement of the vast fraud charges against Prudential, which is accused of cheating hundreds of thousands of customers in the sale of more than $8 billion of limited energy partnerships in the 1980's.


A Singular Defense Team; Religion and Variety of Styles Help Set Lawyers Apart in Trade Center Bombing Trial
There comes a moment in the trial of four men in the bombing of the World Trade Center when worlds mingle and sometimes clash.
The scene is this: A tall Federal agent with the standard-issue mustache and dark blue suit has been led through his testimony by a prosecutor (who, except for the mustache, looks quite a lot like the witness).
The prepared testimony finished, the moment for improvisation arrives and Hassen Ibn Abdellah, a slim, agile man with a closely cropped beard, strides to the lawyer's podium and interrupts the smooth and cozy proceeding.


Bills Take Away a Lesson From Super Bowl
In a victory produced by forcing a total of four Jet fumbles and intercepted passes, the Bills continued today to erase the memory of their Super Bowl-record nine turnovers committed against the Cowboys.
Even when they win, though, the Bills are reminded of past Super Bowl flaws, as if under some perpetual cloud that follows them around.
So today's 19-10 opportunistic decision over the Jets evoked the 52-17 loss to the Cowboys in Super Bowl XXVII.


Fearful Rural Haitians Yearn for Aristide's Return
For the people of this lush green hamlet set amid eroded hills, the debate in the United States about the mental health of their President seems cruelly sterile.
After two years of hardship and violence under military rule, no hope rings more fervently than for the return of the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Frightened to speak openly, residents of Cazales leaving church in their Sunday best or sitting in the shade of their neat courtyards whispered their thoughts in furtive snatches to a visiting foreigner.
Six days before the scheduled but still uncertain return of Father Aristide, Haiti's first democratically elected leader, the conclusions were the same almost everywhere.


Harris Bankcorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Tuesday about the stock of Spectrum Information Technologies Inc. misidentified the plantiffs in lawsuits that accuse Rafi Khan, a West Coast broker, of stock fraud and omitted the identity of the stock involved in the case.
Mr.
Khan was sued only by private investors, not the Securities and Exchange Commission; the case involved the stock of Future Communications Inc.


Clinton Denies Washington's Request to Use Guard
President Clinton refused today to give Mayor Sharon Pratt Kelly authority to call up the National Guard to fight escalating violent crime in the nation's capital.
He said such a decision was best left to Congress, which he urged to act affirmatively.


The Focus Is on Halloween


Corrections
The "On Stage, and Off" column in Weekend on Friday misidentified the talent agency for which Wiley Hausem, the new director of public affairs for the New York Shakespeare Festival, worked previously.
It was International Creative Management, not the William Morris Agency.


San Diego Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


UKRAINE MISSILES: TERMS ARE TOUGH
Reflecting the ambivalence and political pressures involved in becoming a non-nuclear state, Ukraine's leaders told Secretary of State Warren Christopher today that they were committed to ridding the country of nuclear weapons, but wanted billions of dollars and pledges of Western military protection to do it.
Even then, Foreign Minister Anatoly Zlenko told reporters at a joint news conference with Mr.
Christopher, there was no guarantee that Ukraine's Parliament would approve the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, as demanded by the United States.


Lawrence Kuskin, 92, Children's Fever Expert
Dr.
Lawrence Kuskin, an authority on children's rheumatic fever, died on Thursday at St.
Francis Hospital in Poughkeepsie.
He was 92.
The cause was injuries sustained in a car accident on Oct. 18 near Red Hook, N.Y.


Ladd Furniture Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


A Backward Step For Injured Workers
To the Editor:
Your discussion of the workers' compensation "crisis" describes the apparent willingness of some New York legislators and Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo to embrace managed care as a panacea (news article, Oct. 18).


ACX Technologies Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Yield on 30-Year Bond Rises to 6%
The yield on the 30-year Treasury bond jumped to 6 percent yesterday amid uncertainty about the outlook for economic growth, inflation and interest rates.
The selloff, the fourth in the last six trading days, was aided by stronger- than-expected car sales for the second 10-day period of October.
Sales came in at an annual rate of 7.8 million, up from 6.8 million in the first 10 days of the month and more than the 6.6 million pace in September.
In addition, sales of existing homes rose 2.6 percent last month, to the highest level of the year.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the mayoral campaign of Rudolph W. Giuliani misstated the party affiliation of one of his supporters, Rose Marie O'Keefe of Bay Ridge, Brooklyn.
She is a Republican state committeewoman, not a Democrat.


Evergreen Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Safeco Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Centerbank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


One Smile (Only One) Can Lift A Mood
AS smiles are beginning to come under precise study, researchers report that not just any happy face will actually make the smiler feel happy.
A polite smile, a smile of feigned enjoyment or a grin-and-bear-it grimace will not give the physiological lift that accompanies a genuine grin.
The truly happy smile, new research suggests, can be described quite precisely in terms of the two main muscles involved, the Zygomaticus major, which runs from the cheekbones to the corners of the lips, and the Orbicularis oculi, which circles each eye.
A smile that does not involve both muscles, like the one at left on page C1, does not make the grade, the research suggests.


Phew! Victory Was a Long Time (7 Months) Coming
One by one, the Rangers stopped to congratulate Mike Richter, whose face was a picture of relief.
A 3-2 victory over the Los Angeles Kings at Madison Square Garden Sunday night was big for the Rangers, who were on a three-game losing streak and looked awful last week.
For Richter, the triumph was huge.


Philadelphia Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Observer; Candidate for Czar
Janet Reno was vague in her Congressional testimony last week about how the Government might go about censoring violence in movies and television.
I think they will need a czar.
Writing law to cover every conceivable form of violence to be banned is obviously impossible.
Screenwriters' imaginations will always be ten miles ahead of the plodding Congressman.


Liza A. Bosworth, 35, Partner in a Law Firm
Liza Anne Bosworth, a partner in a Manhattan law firm, died on Oct. 18 in San Francisco, where she was on a business trip.
She was 35 and lived in Manhattan.
The cause was accidental drowning, her family said.


Indiana Federal reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CDI Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Famous Line Was 'Quiet!' Not 'Shut Up!
Almost ever since election night four years ago, Rudolph W. Giuliani has been haunted by his image as an agitated candidate shouting "shut up" at his supporters when some of them began booing at the very mention of David N. Dinkins's name.
The image of him shouting "shut up" that night became so much a part of the mayoral campaign mythology that even he accepted it suggests the ease with which fact and impression can sometimes merge in politics.


Clinton and Mubarak Differ on Israel-Syria Timing
President Clinton and President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt differed today on how quickly to press Israel and Syria to reach a settlement in the wake of the breakthrough between Israel and the Palestinians.
In a joint news conference in the White House after their talks there today, Mr.
Mubarak urged the United States to move speedily to bring about an Israeli-Syrian deal over the Golan Heights, which Israel seized from Syria in the 1967 Middle East war.
Such a deal would require an Israeli withdrawal in exchange for normalized relations with Syria.
In his talks with Mr.
Clinton, the Egyptian leader volunteered to serve as the main mediator between Damascus and Jerusalem.


Davis Lifts Game, and Chances of Game Time
If Hubert Davis becomes the primary backup for John Starks, mark down Sunday's performance as a turning point.
Before a capacity crowd of 20,088 at the Sports Palace in Mexico City, Davis played with the poise of someone who feels his time has come.
He made six of seven attempts, shot 3 for 3 from 3-point range, and finished with 17 points and 3 assists during 22 strong minutes of play against the Houston Rockets.


Clarence Lewis Barnhart Dies; Editor of Dictionaries Was 92
Clarence Lewis Barnhart, a lexicographer and editor of dictionaries, died on Sunday at Hudson Valley Hospital Center in Peekskill, N.Y.
A longtime resident of Bronxville, N.Y., he was 92 and lived in Garrison, N.Y.
Mr.
Barnhart fell five weeks ago and his injuries became complicated by an infection, his son David said.


Cheesecake Factory (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Judge Backs School Chief In Dispute With Parents
Turning aside the arguments of parents who have occupied a Brooklyn elementary school to protest their treatment during the asbestos crisis, a State Supreme Court justice ruled yesterday that a local superintendent acted properly when he closed the crumbling building and transferred its students to nearby schools.
Justice Joseph Dowd of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn also ordered a resumption of busing from Public School 156 in Brownsville to a nearby school.
District 23 officials had canceled the busing last week after rock-throwing incidents and parent protests.
Justice Dowd ordered the police to protect the buses.


NovaCare reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


College Soccer Report
Atlantic Coast Conference  The Virginia Cavaliers, who won the the last two national championships, have been struggling late in the season just like they did last year.
Virginia has lost three of its last five games, including a 1-0 setback to Duke on Sunday.


Program Is to Ease Co-op Unit Loans
A new $500 million program that eases guidelines for loans on cooperative apartment units in New York City and that is expected to bolster the lagging co-op market was announced yesterday by the Federal National Mortgage Association.
At a news conference at the Hampton Court Cooperative in Kew Gardens, Queens, Fannie Mae's president, Larry Small, as well as Borough President Claire Shulman of Queens and Representative Charles E. Schumer of Brooklyn and Queens, said the new guidelines would make it easier for prospective buyers to qualify for co-op loans.


A Writer Moves Beyond the Notion of Demons
For months the Rev.
Donald Wildmon, the head of a lobbying group called the American Family Association, has attacked "N.Y.P.D. Blue" -- ABC's new hit police drama, which includes profanity and partial nudity -- as morally unfit for network prime time.
One wonders what he would make of David Milch, the show's creator and one of two executive producers, whose resume includes stints as a Yale University lecturer, a promising novelist, a heroin addict and a compulsive gambler.


Irish Are Taking Navy Seriously
Late last Saturday afternoon, after his team's victory over Southern California was complete, Jim Flanigan, a senior tackle and important part of the Notre Dame defense, was looking ahead.
Not to Nov. 13, when Florida State meets the Fighting Irish in a game that could inspire as much anticipation as any in the history of Notre Dame Stadium.
Flanigan was looking toward the daily effort that fuels those Saturday spectacles in South Bend.
It did not seem to matter that Navy, while a dramatically improved opponent, has not made the strides necessary to compete with the best teams in the nation.


Israel Starts Freeing Hundreds of Palestinian Prisoners
After gingerly stepping off the bus that had brought him here from jail, Suleiman Awajneh, one of hundreds of Palestinian prisoners freed by Israel, said today that he knew exactly what he would do once he got home to Jericho.
"I'll put a Palestinian flag on my house," Mr.
Awajneh said, noting that that he had served more than six months of a one-year sentence for raising the flag, throwing stones and painting nationalist graffiti.


Detroit Edison Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Baskin-Robbins Picks an Agency
Baskin-Robbins U.S.A. said yesterday that it had selected D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles in Los Angeles to handle its account, which had been at Asher/Gould in Los Angeles for the last five years.
Billings were estimated at $13 million.


Classical Music in Review
Olga Borodina  Mezzo-soprano Alice Tully Hall
One of the most promising voices among the many that the Kirov Opera brought to New York in 1992 was that of Olga Borodina, a mezzo- soprano whose beautifully rich sound filled the Metropolitan Opera House with seemingly little effort.
Miss Borodina returned on Sunday evening to give her New York debut recital under the auspices of the Opera Orchestra of New York.
Her able accompanist was Larisa Gergiyeva, the sister of Valery Gergiyev, the director of the Kirov.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-13  LIBERALS WIN CANADIAN ELECTION  Canadians voted in record numbers in national elections to end nine years of Conservative rule and bring the Liberals and their leader, Jean Chretien, to power.
A1


Classical Music in Review
Pavel Berman and Lazar Berman Violinist and Pianist Carnegie Hall
In 1976, when Lazar Berman became the latest thundering Soviet pianist to capture the imagination of American piano fans, Mr.
Berman's 6-year-old son, Pavel, was learning the rudiments of the violin.
Now 23, the younger Berman has been making a name for himself.
He won the gold medal at the International Violin Competition of Indianapolis in 1990.
Since then, he has made a couple of impressive recordings, including one recorded in concert with his father.


Dinkins's Narrow Lead in Poll May Be No Lead at All, a Study Suggests
The latest New York Times /WCBS-TV News Poll shows Mayor David N. Dinkins slightly ahead of his Republican-Liberal challenger, Rudolph W. Giuliani, with 46 percent of registered voters supporting him, compared with 40 percent for Mr.
Giuliani.
But polling experts said yesterday that those apparently positive numbers should make Mr.
Dinkins very nervous.
Not only is his lead within the poll's margin of sampling error, but it may also be overstated.
A national study of nine general elections in which a black Democrat faced a white Republican found that polls consistently overestimated the black candidate's strength.
Larry Hugick, the pollster who studied those elections, concluded that a black candidate who leads by fewer than 8 percentage points probably has no lead at all.


Joseph Driscoll, 70; Educator Opposed Antiwar Protesters
Joseph L. Driscoll, the president of Southeastern Massachusetts University who attracted national attention for his fight against student and faculty opposition to the Vietnam War, died on Friday at his home in Sandwich, Mass.
He was 70.
The cause was pancreatic cancer, said his wife, A. Katina Boyatzis Driscoll.


Menotti Leaves Spoleto U.S.A.
In what has become virtually an annual ritual, the composer Gian Carlo Menotti announced on Sunday evening that he was severing his ties with the board and management of Spoleto Festival U.S.A., the arts festival he founded 17 years ago in Charleston, S.C.
In previous skirmishes, Mr.
Menotti, the festival's artistic director, presented demands and ultimatums and the festival's board acquiesced, but this time reconciliation seems unlikely.
In a telephone interview from his castle in Gifford, Scotland, yesterday, Mr.
Menotti, who cited as reasons for his withdrawal both the festival's financial problems and the board's opposition to his policies, said that his decision was irrevocable.
"It's the end, and I'm glad," he said.
"I'm just tired of putting up with the mess down there. Now I want to take my festival and do it my own way, not their way."


Ousting Tricksters Is a Treat
IT is a question few communities have ever had to answer, but one that Camden could not avoid: what do you do when Halloween phantasms become real enough to kill you?
Two years ago, on Oct. 30, neighborhoods all over the city went up in the flames of 130 fires, most of them deliberately set.
Trash cans blazed, Dumpsters and garages smoldered, houses burned.
No one died, but what the authorities later determined to be largely the work of rival gangs, perhaps 250 young people altogether, held an entire city hostage.
It was Mischief Night, the night before Halloween, a time that in the not-too-distant past meant shaving cream on windows, toilet paper in the trees and a few smashed jack-o'-lanterns by the curb.


Classical Music in Review
20th-Century Classics Ensemble  Sylvia and Danny Kaye Playhouse Hunter College 68th Street, between Lexington and Park Avenues
" 'Pierrot Lunaire' is Schoenberg's greatest achievement," wrote Robert Craft in notes for the program of two 20th-century classics on Saturday evening.
" 'Histoire du Soldat' . . . is lightweight compared to 'Pierrot.' "


FirstFed Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Environment Ebbs as Suffolk Issue
In a county Legislature once known for bold initiatives to preserve the environment, Nora Bredes may be the last of her kind: an unabashed environmentalist.
Ms.
Bredes, a 43-year-old Democrat, is seeking re-election in a passionless election year where holding down government costs, even for popular environmental programs, is the dominant issue.


Zenith Laboratories (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sears Canada reports earnings for Qtr to month 00


Imperial Oil Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Citizens BancStock reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


St. Louis Strengthens Its Expansion Hopes
The race for two expansion franchises in the National Football League took a dramatic turn yesterday when a St.
Louis ownership group acquired the controlling investor it had been seeking.
As a result, when the N.F.L. owners meet in Chicago today to pick the new franchises, St.
Louis and Charlotte will be clear favorites.
Jerry Clinton, the leader of the original St.
Louis group, bowed out of that role yesterday morning and apparently is out of the picture.
That cleared the way for a group formed last week by Stan Kroenke of Columbia, Mo., who is said to have a net worth of $500 million.
The 46-year-old Kroenke has grown from the co-owner of one clothing store to the developer of more than 50 shopping centers across the nation.
He is the son-in-law of James Walton, whose brother, Sam, founded the Wal-Mart chain.


Howell Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


QVC's Move Is Awaited As Viacom Begins Bid
Amid a flurry of hastily convened news conferences and analysts' meetings, Viacom Inc. began its $10 billion tender offer for Paramount Communications Inc. yesterday.
But Wall Street's attention remained focused on Viacom's nemesis, QVC Network Inc.
For a few weeks, Barry Diller, QVC's supremely confident chairman, was riding high.
His $9.5 billion bid was $2 billion better than Viacom's and the market adored him.


3 Guilty Pleas In Killing, Say Court Papers
Three people have pleaded guilty to helping arrange the murder of a crusading anti-drug journalist and are cooperating with the authorities against other conspirators, according to court papers unsealed yesterday.
The papers also say that the execution-style killing of Manuel de Dios Unanue at a Queens restaurant on March 11, 1992, was ordered by a man identified as Jose Santa Cruz Londono, who the authorities say is a leader of a Colombian drug cartel, because he was angered by articles Mr. de Dios was publishing in one of his Spanish-language magazines that were based in New York.


Doubts on Reno's Competence Rise in Justice Dept.
Six months after taking over as Attorney General, Janet Reno has achieved wide public popularity, but inside the Justice Department the euphoria has waned.
Career lawyers have begun to question whether her personal appeal will translate into substantive gains for the agency.
Many people got their first taste of the crusty former prosecutor during her commanding performance after the Federal Bureau of Investigation's April assault on the Branch Davidian compound.
Aides say she still gets hundreds of admiring letters each week.


Japan Officials Move to Open The Construction Market
In what could prove to be the first breakthrough in tense trade negotiations between the Clinton Administration and the new Japanese Government, the chief Cabinet secretary announced this morning the outlines of a program for opening Japan's scandal-tainted construction market.
The outlines of the program -- which were negotiated at the end of last week -- were sketchy, and they did not meet some of the basic American demands for concrete actions.
But some American officials indicated they would probably be enough to halt the United States from imposing sanctions against Japanese construction companies in the United States because they suggested a commitment to real change.


Study Offers Support For an Apple a Day
THERE might be something to the adage "an apple a day keeps the doctor a way." Scientists in the Netherlands have evidence that flavonoids, chemicals naturally present in certain foods and drinks like apples, onions and tea, may reduce the risk of death from coronary heart disease.
Previous studies have suggested that flavonoids in red wine might provide similar protection.
The findings, reported in the current issue of The Lancet, are from a five-year study of 805 Dutch men from 65 to 84 years old.


For Harding, Not All Sequins and Music
Tonya Harding skates to music from "Jurassic Park," perhaps feeling that if fictional dinosaurs can be resurrected, so can her unfulfilled career.
She is the most athletic and capable of America's women figure skaters.
An Olympian.
The 1991 United States champion.
Second at the 1991 world championships.
The only American woman to land a triple axel, which requires 3 1/2 revolutions in the air.
Trouble is, there haven't been many soft landings.


G.M.'s Pact Disappoints Wall Street
Wall Street expressed its disappointment today with the three-year labor contract tentatively reached on Sunday between the General Motors Corporation and the United Automobile Workers as shares of G.M. fell sharply.
An announcement by the company after the stock market closed today bodes more woes for the stock on Tuesday.
General Motors said it would take a $950 million pretax charge against third-quarter earnings to add to its reserves for plant closings.


Nova Vicosa Journal; Art From the Amazon's Ashes Is Arousing Brazil
Deep in the forest, the woodsman with splayed peasant's toes and a graying hermit's beard descended from his treehouse and recounted a visit he made last year to the elegant galleries of the Museum of Modern Art in Rio de Janeiro.
"Women came up to me crying, wanting to talk to me," the shy 72-year-old sculptor, Frans Krajcberg, recalled of his foray to Rio, 430 miles down the Atlantic coast.
"People ran after me, just to touch me. It was the first time in my life I managed to have a real impact."


Sports of The Times; A Gladiator In That Dark Valley
I N the savage world of football, American civilization's substitute for the Peloponnesian War, it was a routine play in Giants Stadium Sunday, a normal collision of 300-pounders, or thereabouts, and one that resulted in a player going down and writhing in pain on the green playing floor.
Common enough.
Except this was a Jets' player with an injury that had caused concern before the game, and it took no great leap of the imagination, as the team trainer and doctor hustled onto the Astroturf field, to remember Dennis Byrd.


Nichols Institute reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cincinnati Bell reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


In War of Words, Advanced Micro Gains 2
Advanced Micro Devices Inc. has added a powerful ally in its war of words with the Intel Corporation: the Microsoft Corporation.
In a move clearly intended to add credibility to its clones of Intel's microprocessors, Advanced Micro said today it had entered into a licensing agreement with Microsoft to use the "Windows Compatible" logo on its Am386 and Am486DX microprocessor packaging, advertising and collateral marketing materials.
Intel and Advanced Micro are in protracted litigation over Advanced Micro's rights to make clones of Intel chips.


New York City Elections; Alan Hevesi for Comptroller
In the race for city comptroller, we urge New Yorkers to support Assemblyman Alan Hevesi over his chief opponent, the Republican-Liberal Herman Badillo.
A Conservative, Howard Lim Jr., is also in the race, but the contest centers on Mr.
Hevesi and Mr.
Badillo -- two unusually intelligent candidates who are both well versed in government.
Mr.
Badillo, a lifelong Democrat who lost the Democratic primary to Mr.
Hevesi and is running on a fusion ticket with Rudolph Giuliani, served as Bronx Borough President, as Deputy Mayor and as the first Puerto Rican member of Congress.


Circle Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.19
2.95
3.12
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.08
3.02
2.97
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.19
3.13
3.22
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.99
4.95
6.41
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.00
5.98
7.65
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.03
7.05
8.69
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.43
5.40
6.69
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Carter Wallace reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bernard Ross Morris; TV Producer, 61
Bernard Ross Morris, a television producer for ABC, CBS and NBC who won five Emmys for public affairs documentaries, died at his home in Short Hills, N.J.
He was 61.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Ellen.


James T. Clarke, 49, A Fashion Designer
James T. Clarke, a fashion designer whose clothing store, James T's, on Lexington Avenue near East 70th Street offered simply cut, classic clothing that was easy to wear, died on Friday at Cabrini Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 49.
His associates said he died of AIDS.


Hamilton Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Some Aren't Just Eligible, They Are Officially Free
Most of the premier players on the list of free agent eligibles sent a message to their clubs yesterday.
To show that they were serious about the possibility of moving elsewhere, they filed for free agency on the first day they could.
A pair of New York pitchers, Sid Fernandez of the Mets and Lee Smith of the Yankees, filed.
So did first basemen Andres Galarraga of Colorado, the National League batting champion, Will Clark of San Francisco and Rafael Palmeiro of Texas; outfielder Otis Nixon of Atlanta; third baseman Chris Sabo of Cincinnati, and pitchers Mark Portugal of Houston and Dennis Martinez of Montreal.


New York City Elections; Mark Green for Public Advocate
We endorse the Democrat Mark Green over both Susan Alter, the Republican-Liberal candidate, and Ronald Reale, a Conservative, in the race for public advocate -- a job in search of a definition.
As we said during the crowded Democratic primary, which Mr.
Green won over Ms.
Alter, Mr.
Reale and three other candidates, the voluble Mr.
Green is so enthusiastic about public service that he might actually find a rationale for a city post that now has little meaning.
Mr.
Green's chief opponent is Ms.
Alter, a 15-year veteran of the City Council.
Ms.
Alter -- a Democrat running, like Herman Badillo, on Rudolph Giuliani's fusion ticket -- is familiar with city issues.
But is she forceful and effective enough to give shape to a city position that has lost its only real power?


INSIDE
Auto Sales Climb 18.4%, Led by a Rebound at G.M.
Sales of domestically built cars and light trucks climbed 18.4 percent in mid-October, helped by a rebound by the General Motors Corporation.
Analysts said the surge in G.M.'s sales was a good sign of recovery for the entire auto industry.
Page D1.
AIDS Advance
Researchers say they have identified a receptor molecule that helps the AIDS virus enter the cell.
The finding may be a step toward developing a vaccine.
Science Times, page C1. 10 Die in Somali Clan Battles
Deadly violence erupted again in Mogadishu as one clan-based faction tried to march into territory controlled by that of another.
American forces kept their distance.
Page.
A9.
Japanese Trade Move
In what could prove to be the first breakthrough in tense trade negotiations with the Clinton Administration, Japan moved to open the nation's construction industry.
Page D1.


White House Puts on a Holiday Face


Rockefeller Center Properties Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lord Grimond, 80, Led Liberals In Britain in the 1950's and 60's
Lord Grimond, a charismatic leader of Britain's Liberal Party in the 1950's and 1960's, died on Sunday in his home on the Orkney Islands, off the north coast of Scotland.
He was 80.
He died of a stroke, his family told The Associated Press.


Jordan's Role in Israeli-Palestinian Peace Effort
To the Editor:
"Jordan Has Its Own Palestinian Problem. The Mideast Kingdom Threatened by Peace" (The Week in Review, Oct. 10), arguing that the future of Jordan is threatened by peace between Israel and the Palestinians in the occupied territories, reflects a serious misreading of the facts and positions of Jordanian leadership and a skewed understanding of Jordanian-Palestinian relations.


Airborne Freight Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Investors Jam Prudential Fraud Line
Investors throughout the country continued yesterday to deluge state securities regulators with telephone calls seeking information about the huge fraud settlement last week by Prudential Securities.
By 5 P.M. yesterday, more than 11,100 people had called a hot line set up by state securities regulators to provide information to investors about Prudential's settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission and state securities regulators.


Integrated Health Services Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Can Whitman Win as the Anti-Florio?
If the race for governor of New Jersey were simply a personality contest, Christine Todd Whitman would win hands down.
Affable, charming and impressive in person, she is her campaign's second-best asset (the first being Gov. Jim Florio himself).
People who know her like her.
People who meet her like her.
Even people who may not be inclined to vote for her find her a lot easier to talk to than her opponent, a man so naturally guarded he spent a few minutes before the second debate practicing his smile.
But with a week to go before the election, Mrs.
Whitman finds herself down in the polls, if gaining quickly, against one of the most harshly vilified governors in New Jersey's history.
She has staked her campaign more on anti-Florio sentiment and Republican party doctrine, largely obscuring the woman behind the campaign and leaving many voters with a sense that they still do not know who she is.


Ross Systems
Shares of Ross Systems Inc., a software maker based in Redwood City, Calif., plunged yesterday in heavy Nasdaq trading after the company posted an unexpected loss for its fiscal first quarter because of sluggish international sales and higher expenses.
The stock had been edging up steadily since midsummer.


Casting the Star Roles at Bell Atlantic
Raymond W. Smith, the chief executive of Bell Atlantic, has seen to the cutting of 20,000 jobs.
He has confronted his regulators in hearing rooms and the courts, usually winning.
And to press John C. Malone to strike a deal for the sale of Tele-Communications Inc., he had an aide spread the word that competing cable companies were eager to sign up.
But it's Mr.
Malone they call a prince of darkness.
"He has been referred to as Darth Vader outside, in the press," Mr.
Smith told a Bell Atlantic executive training class a few days ago.
"I have only been referred to as Darth Vader inside."


Inco Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Safeguard Scientifics Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Agency Drops Abuse Inquiry in Allen Case
New York State child welfare investigators have dropped their inquiry into the charge that Woody Allen sexually molested his 7-year-old daughter, saying they consider the accusation unfounded.
The state Department of Social Services informed Mr.
Allen in a letter dated Oct. 7 that it had closed the 14-month-old investigation.
"No credible evidence was found that the child named in this report has been abused or maltreated," the letter said.
"This report has, therefore, been considered unfounded."


Jury Inquiry Into Lopez
A Federal grand jury here is examining evidence that an executive of the General Motors Corporation took company secrets with him when he defected to Volkswagen A.G. last spring, lawyers for the executive and Volkswagen said today.
Justice Department officials said they could not confirm or deny this, but they have confirmed that the department is investigating whether the executive, Jose Ignacio Lopez de Arriortura, systematically looted trade secrets when he left G.M., where he was purchasing chief, for Volkswagen in March.
German justice officials are also investigating.


Recalling 1968, French Prime Minister Backs Off
The clear message emerging today from Prime Minister Edouard Balladur's extraordinary retreat on Sunday in his Government's conflict with Air France is that Mr.
Balladur has no stomach for conflict at a time when he judges France to be ripe for a social explosion of the sort that rocked the country a quarter-century ago.
"Mr. Balladur worked closely with Prime Minister Georges Pompidou during the May 1968 riots, and he has an abiding fear of a repetition," said Pierre Avril, a political analyst at the Sorbonne.
"So he opted for a retreat rather than confront a situation that risked becoming uncontrollable."


Plants Share Precious Water With Neighbors
TRACKING the global cycling of water from sky to earth and back again, scientists had thought they could count on at least one thing.
The movement of water through plants, it seemed, was simple: up into the roots and out through the leaves as vapor.
But now they are discovering that plants are not the passive water vaporizers they had been thought to be.
Instead, researchers have found an unsuspected detour in the routing of water.
And this discovery may enhance the understanding not only of how plants interact with one another but how ecosystems function and even how climate can change.
It turns out that in the night, many plants pull water up from deep in the earth and, rather than holding on to it to pass through their leaves the next day, they flush it out through their shallow roots into the ground around them.
Biologists say that plants ranging from sagebrush in the arid steppes of Utah to sugar maples in the rainy forests of upstate New York appear to be acting as subterranean watering systems, drenching the soil and their thirsty neighbors.


Q&amp;A
Predawn Chirping
Q.  Why do birds chirp before dawn?


Tremors Reported In Part of 2 States
Dozens of anxious residents in Mommouth County, N.J., and in Suffolk County, L.I., called local police stations last night to report a loud explosion followed by a tremor that resembled an earthquake.
Yet no evidence of any explosion, injuries or damage was found by the police in either area, and a geologist who tracks earthquakes said that no sign of any seismic activity appeared on his monitors.


SCI Systems Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


COMPANY BRIEFS
BLACK &amp; DECKER CORP., Towson, Md., said it had sold its Dynapert printed circuit board assets to the Universal Instruments division of the Dover Corp., New York.
The terms were not disclosed.
CALIFORNIA MICROWAVE INC., Sunnyvale, Calif., said it signed a definitive agreement with Telesciences Inc. to acquire its Telesciences Transmission Systems Inc. unit for $28.7 million.


Leader Denies Bias or Fear on Riot Jury
The jury forewoman in the trial of two black men who beat a white truck driver during the Los Angeles riots defended the jury's verdict today in an extraordinary meeting with reporters.
She asserted that the jury's rejection of the most serious charges was not influenced by racial motives or fears of provoking more violence.
But her statements were harshly challenged on the spot by a standby juror -- the only alternate who did not take part in the deliberations -- who called the outcome "a sad day in America."


Allied Holdings reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


GOVERNING TORIES IN CANADA ROUTED BY LIBERAL PARTY
The Liberal Party, led by Jean Chretien, a Quebec lawyer and former Cabinet minister, steamrolled to victory in elections Monday that foreshadowed major changes in Canada's political landscape.
The Liberals swept Ontario and the eastern provinces, crushing the Progressive Conservatives, who have led the country for nine years.
A preliminary count gave the Liberals 177 seats in the House of Commons, a clear majority of the total of 295, to just 2 for the Conservatives, who had held the majority.


The Limelight Shifts to New York
This may be the time New York gets its act together.
The spring showings will take place in a central location -- in tents established for the purpose in Bryant Park.
Milan and Paris organized their showings this way years ago.
The aim of the Council of Fashion Designers of America, which arranged to hold the shows in the park, situated between 41st and 42d streets and from the Avenue of the Americas to the back of the New York Public Library, is to elevate the standing of American fashion.
Ultimately, the relevance of the clothes rather than the elegance of the space will make the difference.


Business Digest
Companies
Sales of domestic cars and light trucks climbed 18.4 percent in mid-October, helped by a rebound by General Motors from earlier production difficulties.
Car sales rose 17.4 percent and light truck sales increased 19.8 percent, with the seasonally adjusted annual selling rate for cars at 7.8 million.  [ Page D1. ]


Valley National Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Three Heroines and a Woman They Love to Hate
The Robber Bride  By Margaret Atwood  466 pages. Nan A. Talese/Doubleday. $23.50.
Here are the main characters in Margaret Atwood's farcical new novel, "The Robber Bride": Tony, a diminutive and intellectually detached military historian, who lives in a Gothic town house in Toronto with her husband, a musicologist; Charis, a dreamy, health-obsessed New Ager, who worries about the psychic vibrations of her daughter and friends, and Roz, a self-assured and immensely wealthy businesswoman, who mourns the suicide of her husband.


G.M. Joins In Rising Auto Sales
Sales of cars and light trucks built in North America climbed 18.4 percent in mid-October, auto makers reported today, helped by a rebound for the General Motors Corporation from earlier production difficulties.
G.M. had contended for about a month that its relatively lackluster sales were a result of production slowdowns caused by problems with parts suppliers.
But because auto makers often blame everything but the quality of their cars and trucks for slack sales, some analysts had regarded G.M.'s excuse with skepticism -- until today.


Oklahoma Gas &amp; Electric reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corner-Cutting Runner Is Still Declared Winner
DOMINIQUE BARIOD of France, the first-place finisher in the Marine Corps Marathon on Sunday, was declared the official winner yesterday of the Washington race despite "uncontested evidence" he veered off course.
Race officials said he did not gain an unfair advantage over any other runner.
Bariod, running in his second marathon and first in the United States, admitted cutting corners in at least three parts of the 26.2-mile course.
He finished in 2 hours 23 minutes 56 seconds -- 24 seconds ahead of ESTEBAN VANEGAS of Ecuador.
Race officials reviewed videotapes and photographs, conducted interviews and conferred with USA Track &amp; Field, the sport's national governing body.


Rodney D. Andrews, Expert on Polymers And a Professor, 71
Rodney D. Andrews Jr., an expert in the chemistry of polymers, died on Oct. 19 at St.
Mary's Hospital in Hoboken, N.J.
He was 71 and lived in Weehawken.
The cause was complications from heart disease, said a spokesman for the Stevens Institute of Technology in Hoboken, where Mr.
Andrews had continued his research as an emeritus professor since 1991.


Taylor and Hampton May Sit Out Game
There is sure to be a lot of talk this week about the Giants-Jets rivalry.
Rivalry?
What rivalry?
Maybe if Joe Namath were playing and the Jets had a winning record.
It is not that the 5-1 Giants are looking past the Jets, the best 2-4 team in the galaxy.
But this game is clearly more important to the Jets than it is to the Giants.
Perhaps that is why the Giants will probably hold out linebacker Lawrence Taylor and running back Rodney Hampton when the two teams meet on Sunday.
Rather than push them in a non-division game, the Giants can save them for a huge game the following week against the Dallas Cowboys.


Abington Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Fisher Scientific International Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Clans Clash in Somali Capital, Leaving 10 Dead and 45 Wounded
As feared, violence erupted today in the Somali capital as members of one clan-based faction prepared to march into territory controlled by that of another, provoking battles between fighters using automatic weapons, heavy machine guns and rocket-propelled grenades.
The fighting, breaking a seven-month cease-fire between clans led by Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid and Mohammed Ali Mahdi, killed at least 10 Somalis and wounded at least 45, United Nations officials said.
As the various battles took place, American and United Nations troops kept a deliberate distance, although Pakistani peacekeepers fired warning shots as the fighting began and three United States Army Cobra AH-6 helicopters flew low over the most intense clash, dropping a tear-gas canister.


Clinic Chain Seeks a Deal With a Rival
Surgical Care Affiliates Inc., bidding to build a nationwide network of 146 walk-in surgery centers, said yesterday that it had offered to merge with Medical Care America, a troubled competitor, in a stock swap valued at $941 million.
"The urge to merge continues," said John F. Hindelong, a health care analyst at Donaldson, Lufkin &amp; Jenrette.


Caraustar Industries (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Holy Bull Produces Brilliant Encore
Maybe it was no fluke, after all.
The 2-year-old colt Holy Bull, who ended the winning streak of the superstar Dehere last month, rose to even greater heights on Saturday when he won the $400,000 Florida Stallion Stakes by 7 1/2 lengths.
No return match between the two juveniles will take place next week in the Breeders' Cup at Santa Anita because Holy Bull is spending the winter in Florida.
But they will begin a series of rematches early in the new year when they jostle for position as the two leading candidates on the road to the Kentucky Derby.
They have gone to the post a combined total of 10 times in their young careers, and the only time one of them lost was when Holy Bull outran Dehere by half a length in the mud in the Belmont Futurity on Sept. 18.


Loctite Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


When Is a Smile Really a Smile?


Led by Cyclicals, Dow Breaks Record
Blue-chip stocks galloped to new highs yesterday, but they failed to coax along the rest of the market, which seemed edgy.
Some investors appeared to be betting that an economic recovery was gaining strength, so large companies whose earnings are sensitive to the economy's direction were the darlings of the day.


Ashland Oil reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Giuliani Takes Message To Staten Island Voters
Returning to the borough that in 1989 gave him his largest margin of victory, Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday traversed Staten Island, delicately deflecting questions about just how he would deal with the secession movement if he is elected mayor and trying to impress upon the island's voters that regardless of the vote on that issue he would represent all five of the city's boroughs equally.
Trying to ride what is expected to be a larger than usual turnout driven by the passions over that vote -- yet careful not to alienate supporters with his open opposition to the secession movement -- Mr.
Giuliani criticized Mayor David N. Dinkins for having "horribly mishandled" the matter and vowed instead to give the island both his ear and his best efforts.


Knocked Out by the Freshmen
Perpetually teetering on the edge in Washington's annual budget battles, the superconducting supercollider had managed to survive one brush with death after another like an alley cat with extra spring in its legs.
But the proton smasher lost its ninth life on the House floor last week, the victim of a new generation of politicians whose faith in big science has been shaken by the kind of cost overruns and construction delays that have dogged the supercollider for years.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY CLOSE MAYORAL RACE INDICATED BY POLL  Hispanic New Yorkers, women and other vital swing voters appear to have drifted back toward Mayor David N. Dinkins in the last three weeks, but his overall support remains below 50 percent and voters continue to express enduring reservations about him in an unpredictable race, the latest New York Times/WCBS-TV News poll shows.
A1.
Two concerns for Mayor Dinkins in the latest poll: the sampling error and a pattern of polls overestimating a black candidate's strength.
B6.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt *
Battery Park City Authority, N.Y. is selling $90 million of housing revenue bonds, most of which are tax exempt, through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
For $84 million of series A bonds, the maximum yield is 5.70 percent for an issue due in 2023, and 5.65 percent for another due in 2013.
Shorter-maturity serial bonds were initially priced to yield anywhere from 4.30 percent in 1998 to 5.10 percent in 2004.
The financing also includes a bond due in 1998 that is subject to Federal tax, with an average life of 3.1 years and priced to yield 5.40 percent.
All the bonds are rated AAA by Standard &amp; Poor's.


Alliance Capital Management L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Unocal Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tommy Hilfiger reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Contacts Between Jews And Muslims
After outlining the hopes of their communities on the stage of a Denver concert hall, the rabbi and the imam reached over and clasped hands warmly on Sunday.
With that, the audience of Jews and Muslims erupted in applause.
The mere act of shaking hands across the religious divide has taken on new significance since Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin of Israel and Yassir Arafat of the Palestine Liberation Organization did that after the signing of the mutual recognition pact on the White House lawn on Sept. 13.


Review/Art; Trying to Balance the Art and the Architecture
Museums have art and they have real estate, and often they think the way to bring attention to the former is to make more of the latter.
At the Dallas Museum of Art, an institution with a good but not great collection, about $30 million has recently been spent on a 140,000-square-foot limestone addition, the Nancy and Jake L. Hamon Building, which opened last month with an overhaul of the way the museum displays its art.
The wing houses what the institution is calling its Museum of the Americas, covering 3,000 years of the art of the Western Hemisphere, from the ancient Americas through the early 20th century.


Alabama Passer Injured
Alabama quarterback JAY BARKER, who suffered a badly sprained shoulder in last week's game, is not expected to play against Southern Mississippi this weekend, Coach GENE STALLINGS said yesterday.


By Design; Laid-Back Bags
As clothes become less structured, so do handbags.
A stiff, boxlike bag just doesn't look right with a slouchy fluid jacket or tunic.
So pouches and drawstring bags have made a comeback, in soft materials like suede, velvet and nylon for day and in velvet or metallic cloths for evening.
Saks Fifth Avenue has crushable nylon bags by Citysac for $100 to $200.
At Henri Bendel, the most popular bags are soft, slouchy drawstrings or, surprisingly, backpacks in smaller, lighter versions.
There are even mini-backpacks no more than six to eight inches long.
They are priced from about $100 to $150.


Dr. Ernest B. Howard, A.M.A. Executive, 83
Dr.
Ernest B. Howard, a retired executive for the American Medical Association, died on Friday at the Northwest Community Care Center in Arlington Heights, Ill.
He was 83 and lived in Inverness, a suburb of Chicago.
The cause was cancer, the association said.


BancFirst Ohio Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Black &amp; Decker Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


University National Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Classical Music in Review
New York Philharmonic Dennis Russell Davies, conductor Avery Fisher Hall
"Bring us something new" is the plea we usually make to visiting conductors.
Dennis Russell Davies's work in New York almost always does, so it was paradox that the refreshment of Thursday's program (which will be repeated tonight) at the New York Philharmonic lay in a return to tradition.
In Beethoven's "Pastoral" Symphony, Mr.
Davies reminded listeners that classical style is founded on the dance.
Movement was buoyant and accents firm.
I found the "Country Gathering" uncomfortably fast and the finale's great wall of F-major climax more loud than triumphant, but everywhere, Mr.
Davies was reassuring us that his way with modern music grows from a solid grasp of the past.


2 Decades After Toxic Blast in Italy, Several Cancers Show Rise
ALMOST two decades after an explosion at a chemical factory released a toxic cloud of dioxin over northern Italy, a team of researchers has reported finding elevated rates of several types of cancer among area residents, but no overall increase in cancer.
The study, by Dr.
Pier Alberto Bertazzi of the University of Milan and five colleagues, was based on the medical records of more than 37,000 men and women living near Seveso, Italy, who were exposed to the highest concentrations of dioxin ever measured in a civilian population.


People
*
Peter Schweitzer, the vice chairman of agency operations at the J. Walter Thompson Company, was promoted to the new position of president and chief operating officer, dividing his time between Detroit and the corporate headquarters in New York.
He continues to handle his responsibilities on the agency's worldwide Ford account until a successor is named.


Dotting the I's and Crossing the T's
FEW companies dominate their product categories as the Hewlett-Packard Company has dominated laser printers.
And once again, Hewlett-Packard has introduced a laser printer that sets a new standard for print quality and features, this time for small-business and home office users.
The new HP Laserjet 4P ($1,229) and its Macintosh counterpart, the HP Laserjet 4MP ($1,729), which were introduced yesterday, are 600 d.p.i. printers, meaning they lay down 600 dots per inch both horizontally and vertically.


Ogilvy &amp; Mather Drops Shell as Client
Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide said yesterday that its Houston office had resigned a new credit card account from the Shell Oil Company, citing a conflict with American Express, a client of Ogilvy in New York.
Shell billings were estimated at $5 million to $10 million.
Mary Churchill, an Ogilvy spokeswoman in New York, confirmed a report of the resignation in Advertising Age this week.
She said that Promotional Campaigns Worldwide of London was opening an office in Houston to serve the account.
Promotional Campaigns, which, like Ogilvy, is owned by the WPP Group, works for Shell in seven other countries.


Ceballos Out Again
Phoenix Suns forward CEDRIC CEBALLOS will be sidelined a minimum of four weeks after tests showed he has another fracture in his left foot, which was stepped on during an exhibition game Oct. 17.
The 6-foot-7 Ceballos suffered a stress fracture of the fifth metatarsal in his left foot against Sacramento last April 8.
He missed three games, then helped Phoenix win the Pacific Division title before re-injuring the foot in Game 6 of the Western Conference finals against Seattle. (AP)


Deluxe Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Haiti's Premier and General Meet as Drive to Settle Crisis Intensifies
Haiti's military commander and the Prime Minister appointed by the exiled President met today for the second time in three days as international efforts to settle the political crisis here intensified.
Discussions between the two men, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras and Robert Malval, seemed to center on an initiative by conservative legislators allied with the army to rescue plans to restore democratic rule in Haiti on or shortly after Oct. 30, the scheduled date for the return of the elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.


Vermont Financial Services Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


United Parcel Service Redesigns Its Package


Marcam Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Qatar Cup Play Is Tough on Coaches
The day began with news that another head soccer coach -- Jose Candido of Saudi Arabia -- had made a premature exit from Doha.
It ended with victories from Japan and Iran that insured the two Asian spots in next year's World Cup finals would not be decided until the last round of matches here on Thursday.
Of the six teams in this qualifying tournament, only North Korea, a 2-1 loser to Iran tonight, has been eliminated.
Both Japan and Saudi Arabia, who have never reached the final phase before, will advance if they win on Thursday.
South Korea, Iraq and Iran need others to falter.


New York Term Limits Make for False Reform
To the Editor:
"Term Limits Limit Voters' Rights" (editorial, Oct. 21), urging defeat of New York City's term-limit proposition, argues that it would severely curtail a voter's right to choose.
I agree.


AMERICAN EXPRESS CO. (N)
Sharply higher earnings from its Lehman Brothers brokerage unit helped the American Express Company lift third-quarter profits more than analysts had expected.
Earnings of 83 cents a share exceeded analysts' expectations of 71 cents.
In the third quarter of 1992, American Express lost $205 million because of $408 million in charges related to restructuring and soured investments.


The Hot Debate About Cloning Human Embryo
A day after the world learned that scientists at George Washington University Medical Center had cloned human embryos, ethicists and fertility specialists were already engaged in a vociferous debate yesterday.
While some ethicists foresee a nightmare scenario that should be stopped before it is started, others say, "Why not?" Some ethicists argue that peoples' embryos are their own and that if they want them cloned, it is not society's role to stop them.
Several ethicists said that rarely had they seen an issue so provocative and so divisive.


A Parched Town In a Water-Rich State; Distribution Woes Plague Greenwich
For all its woodsy wealth, its understated downtown of bistros and boutiques and its ability to calculate millionaires per square mile, this corner of Fairfield County has a very humbling and down-to-earth problem: water.
Greenwich, one of the wealthiest towns in the nation, and a paradise for sellers of estate-sized lawn-sprinkler systems, imposed mandatory bans on nonessential water use in late July.
It is the only community in the state aside from nearby Darien, which is served by the same water company, with water restrictions, and one of only a handful in the region, state officials said.


Newark Schools Report Counters State Findings
The Newark school system, under threat of a state takeover and reeling from months of public criticism, has prepared a rebuttal that deals point by point with the state's harsh assessment.
Newark's analysis is not required by the state, but school officials here see its value as a public relations tool and, possibly, as a way to persuade Trenton that its evaluation, issued in May, overlooked or misinterpreted data that proved the system was gaining ground, not falling farther behind.


Thais' Work in Libya Brings a U.S. Warning
The United States has warned Thailand that Thai companies are now the principal foreign contractors involved in the construction of chemical weapons plants in Libya, American and Thai officials say.
A Thai company has acknowledged that it designed and is overseeing construction of two large tunnels in Libya that are for use as "civilian bomb shelters" and that it has been asked to design three similar ones.
American officials say that the tunnels already under construction are being built for the production and storage of nerve gas and other chemical weapons.


Computer Sciences reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Afternoon Session of Bomb Trial Is Canceled
The judge in the World Trade Center bombing trial abruptly canceled the afternoon's testimony yesterday and sealed the record of an out-of-court conference in which he reached the decision to postpone the trial until today.
Defense lawyers in the case indicated that the postponement stemmed from the refusal of one of the defendants, Mohammed A. Salameh, to show up in court yesterday.
Mr.
Salameh's lawyers, however, refused to comment on the reasons for his absence or for the postponement of the afternoon session.


Checkpoint Systems Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


Glacier Bancorp Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CHRONICLE
They will be saying a lot of laudatory things about a mayor of New York City on Thursday evening, but their subject has been long gone from City Hall: JOHN V. LINDSAY.
Mayor Lindsay, who served from 1965 to 1973, is to be honored by 200 people at a dinner in Staten Island at the Snug Harbor Cultural Center, which he rescued from the wrecking ball when he was still Mayor.


Crane Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Golf and Tennis Caucus Gets Busy
Less than a week ago, the House seemed ready to take a modest but welcome step to free itself from the grasp of special interests.
A House Judiciary subcommittee was about to finish legislation setting a $20 limit on gifts from any one source, including meals.
Also on the table were the lobbyist-financed golf and tennis vacations to which many members are addicted, and a provision requiring full disclosure of all the financial benefits from lobbyists not barred by the bill.
Yet the House simply cannot let go of its consoling, corruptive ways.
Amid complaints from senior Democrats and Republicans, many of whom balked at the idea of having to give up their lobbyist-subsidized life styles, the subcommittee meeting was suddenly canceled.


Public Service Co. New Mexico reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge
A finesse is decided by what the expert on defense didn't do, and what that meant.
There is one common suit combination that calls for expert defense, but also opens the door to a double-cross by the declarer.
Suppose dummy has A-J-10-x-x in a suit, but no side entry.
If the declarer has three small cards, or a doubleton, he will plan to finesse twice, but his left-hand opponent, if expert, will confuse the issue by playing the king or queen from a doubleton or tripleton holding: K-x, Q-x, K-x-x or Q-x-x.


Duran Duran Cancels
Duran Duran has postponed its concerts tonight, tomorrow and Friday at Radio City Music Hall because Simon LeBon, the singer, has torn a vocal cord.
Duran Duran is trying to reschedule the concerts and plans an announcement for ticketholders next week.
For refunds, see the ticket seller.
Information: (212) 247-4777.


Dinkins in Stride: Taking Good With the Bad
It was a good day for the Mayor out on the campaign trail, all things considered.
There was the unfortunate moment as David N. Dinkins campaigned on Saturday when a small, gray-haired woman in East Harlem poked a Puerto Rican flag at him and screamed, "Burn, baby, burn!"


Jordan's Role in Israeli-Palestinian Peace Effort; To Invigorate Economy
To the Editor:
The Clinton Administration and the international community have correctly recognized that rapid economic development in the West Bank and Gaza is critical to the success of any peace agreement.
The Palestine Liberation Organization, Israel, the United States and the West now share the common goals of economic stability and a rapid decrease in unemployment for the Palestinians.
To this end the United States is currently organizing donations from the OECD to a multibillion dollar investment fund for projects in the West Bank and Gaza.
Planning and implementation of investments will take time.
They cannot be expected to create new jobs immediately.
In the meantime, an additional, simple mechanism to aid the Palestinians would be a unilateral reduction of tariffs on exports from the West Bank and Gaza.


Vikings Intercept Bears at The Pass
Minnesota and Chicago played one of those forgetful games tonight where dropped balls and missed blocking assignments and close-to-the-vest play-calling made for a long, tedious affair.
When it was finally over, the Vikings had a 19-12 victory and moved one game behind the Detroit Lions in the National Football Conference's Central Division with a 4-2 record.
Chicago slipped to a 3-3 record as its three-game winning streak ended.


Boeing Profit Falls 45.2% As Airlines Stay Weak
The Boeing Company today reported a 45.2 percent decline in third-quarter earnings, citing continuing weakness in the airline industry and soft military and space business.
Boeing, based in Seattle, said earnings fell to $189 million, or 56 cents a share, from the third quarter last year.
Sales fell 25.3 percent, to $5.15 billion.


York Financial (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Airlines Discount Domestic Fares Up to 40%
Major airlines cut fares yesterday up to 40 percent on domestic routes, thus matching the discounts announced by Northwest Airlines late Saturday.
The sale lasts through Friday.
Sales are not uncommon in the fourth quarter of the year, but Chris Miller, the pricing analyst for US Travel, said: "The typical sale this time of year used to be 30 to 35 percent. Notice that now it's getting close to that 50 percent number."


School Evacuated in Fire
About 550 students and more than 150 school employees had to be evacuated from a Brooklyn elementary school yesterday afternoon when a small fire sent smoke through hallways and classrooms, fire officials said.
The fire, at Public School 106 in Bushwick, was confined to a closet in an empty fourth-floor classroom and was declared suspicious, said a Fire Department spokesman, Jerry Sanford.
Five adults suffered minor smoke inhalation during the fire, which began about 12:50 P.M. and was brought under control at 1:40 P.M., Mr.
Sanford said.
The school, at 1314 Putnam Avenue, is in the midst of an asbestos abatement program.


Composting Promotes A Cleaner, Greener City
To the Editor:
Your recent photographs and commentaries about autumn leaves remind us that fall is a great time to compost!
New York City's recycling education will get a boost as composting gains visibility.
At the Brooklyn Botanic Garden, we will open a new compost demonstration site on Oct. 27 that will show indoor as well as outdoor composting methods.


Exxon Posts Record Net For Quarter
The Exxon Corporation yesterday reported record third-quarter earnings, helped by gains from asset sales and lower tax rates overseas.
Profits of $1.36 billion, or $1.09 a share, were up almost 19 percent from the third quarter of last year.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Friday, about a National Science Foundation project to distribute Securities and Exchange Commission data over computer networks, misstated the views of Ronald L. Plesser, a lawyer for the Information Industry Association.
Neither Mr.
Plesser nor the trade group has yet taken a position on the project.


Corrections
A report in the Guide column of the Connecticut Weekly on Sunday about an exhibit of art by Swietlan Kraczyna at the Goldsmith Gallery in Madison misstated the opening date.
It is this Saturday, it did not take place on Sunday.


Met Opera Planning Summer Season In New Jersey in '96
The Metropolitan Opera has signed a letter of intent to make a planned $50 million theater at Waterloo Village in New Jersey its summer home beginning in 1996.
The New York Philharmonic and American Ballet Theater, which also have no permanent summer locations, confirmed yesterday they are also in discussions with officials at Waterloo Village.
The plans for the Metropolitan, the Philharmonic and Ballet Theater, which were reported on Sunday in The Star-Ledger, are all contingent on the completion of the theater, to be built about half a mile from Waterloo Village in Allamuchy Mountain State Park, a town restored as a historic village for tourists and arts patrons.


Present at the Transition of I.B.M.
He has perhaps the toughest management job in America and he's an I.B.M. executive, but he is not the company's new chief executive, Louis V. Gerstner Jr.
Nicholas Donofrio, a slender 48-year-old former chip designer, is faced with the Herculean task of trying to halt the rapid decline of the company's mainframe franchise -- still the company's biggest business, but one battered by vicious price-cutting and threatened by new computers using low-cost microprocessor technology.
It is Mr.
Donofrio's job to sell machines that have the image, deserved or not, of being the dinosaurs of computing.


Red Sox Drop Coaches
The Boston Red Sox will not renew the contracts of pitching coach RICH GALE, first-base coach AL BUMBRY or third-base coach RICK BURLESON for next season, the team said last night.
A spokesman said the decision to drop the three coaches does not affect the status of Manager BUTCH HOBSON, who is signed through the end of 1994.


Dentsply International (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Haitian Radio Host, Backer of Aristide, Is Killed in Miami
A popular Haitian radio broadcaster and local community leader who supported the ousted Haitian President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, was killed on Sunday night in the parking lot of a school here.
The victim, Dona St.
Plite, was leaving a fund-raising event he had headed to benefit the children of Fritz Dor, a Haitian-born radio personality who was also killed in Miami's Little Haiti neighborhood, in 1991.
In all, three Haitian radio show hosts have been killed since 1991, and all of them have been Aristide supporters.


West Coast Bancorp (Newport, Ore.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bay View Capital (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tombstones Overturned in Historic Long Island Cemetery


Goodyear Tire &amp; Rubber reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Accounts
*
CNBC, Fort Lee, N.J., to Kirshenbaum &amp; Bond, New York.
Advertising for the business cable television network of NBC was most recently handled by an in-house team and various shops on a project basis.
BBDO New York was the last agency of record.
Billings were estimated at $5 million. *
Fordham University Graduate School of Business Administration, New York and Tarrytown, N.Y., to Mad Dogs &amp; Englishmen, New York, to handle advertising for the school's M.B.A. program, previously handled by Severin &amp; Associates, New York.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Video Monitoring Services of America, New York, to Katz Dochtermann &amp; Epstein, New York, to handle advertising for the broadcast retrieval company, previously handled in-house.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Wellfleet Communications Inc., Billerica, Mass., narrowed the review on its $1.5 million account, previously at Saabe &amp; Co., Providence, R.I., to three Boston-based finalists: Clarke Goward Fitts Matteson, Duval Woglom Brueckner &amp; Partners and Rossin Greenberg Seronick. *
Whirlpool Corp., Benton Harbor, Mich., to Kobs &amp; Draft Worldwide, Chicago, as the first agency to handle direct marketing for the introduction of the Whirlpool Water Source System.
Billings were not disclosed. *
Keyfile Corp., Nashua, N.H., to Rossin Greenberg Seronick, Boston, to handle advertising and direct marketing for the software company, previously handled in-house.
Billings were estimated at $1.2 million.


AT&amp;T Capital Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Though Sikh Rebellion Is Quelled, India's Punjab State Still Seethes
For a decade, the Indian state of Punjab has witnessed the most violent of India's many sectarian and ethnic conflicts, with a rebellion by Sikh separatists that led to the assassination of Prime Minister Indira Gandhi and posed perhaps the most serious threat to Indian national unity.
But today, after the years of bloodshed in which thousands have been killed, the atmosphere has changed.
The anxiety of Punjabis is no longer driven by the Sikh rebels or gangs who have carried out killings in the past, but by the crackdown by the army and the police.


An Ad Campaign Says Two Terms Are Enough . . .
On the Nov. 2 ballot, New York City voters will decide whether to limit the mayor, Comptroller, Public Advocate, the borough presidents and city councilmen to two, four-year terms.
Supporters of term limits have begun an ad campaign.
SPONSOR: New Yorkers for Term Limits, paid for largely by Ronald S. Lauder, heir to the cosmetics company fortune of Estee Lauder.
ON THE SCREEN In quick succession, the camera zooms in on five characters in a setting suggestive of the City Council chambers.
They are comedic caricatures of political largess a fat, cigar-chomping pol, an old and frail council member asleep in a chair shrouded by cobwebs, a younger council member asleep with a newpaper drapped across his chest, a woman cutting a paper chain of dollar signs and a member of the council who appears so bored that he is cleaning his teeth.
Then, the scene changes to the New York City skyline, with the sun rising in the background.
The remaining text of the ad, urging people to vote for term limits, scrolls across the screen.


Getting Your Feet Wet In a Sea Called Internet
"THE government always discovers a technology after its moment is passing," the economist and author George Gilder says in an interview in the September/October issue of Wired.
"It's not going to change with Clinton and Gore. The dog technologies run to Washington, decked out like poodles. The politician is always the dog's best friend."
One of the technologies Vice President Al Gore is pushing is the information superhighway, which will link everyone at home or office to everything else -- movies and television shows, shopping services, electronic mail and huge collections of data -- starting perhaps with the elaborate structure envisioned by Bell Atlantic and Tele-Communications.
But the Internet, already linking 10 million to 15 million people in a version of the data superhighway (albeit without movies and shopping), shows, in Mr.
Gilder's words, that "to have a very rich fabric of services you don't need a regimented system of control."


Lyondell Petrochemical Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A World With O'Neal?
SHAQUILLE O'NEAL will likely play at next summer's world championships in Toronto despite a sponsorship conflict that so far has kept him off the United States national team.
"I think O'Neal will end up being added to the team," said ROD THORN, chairman of the USA Basketball committee that selects the squad.
"He wants to play very badly."


In One Day, A Full Range of Success
It was this kind of Sunday for National Football League quarterbacks:
BAD Two weeks ago, Vinny Testaverde replaced Bernie Kosar as the Cleveland Browns' starter.
Now Kosar will start again because the more mobile Testaverde separated his right shoulder scrambling for 9 yards in the 28-23 victory over the Pittsburgh Steelers.


Washington Memo; Economic Outlaw: American Health Care
In health care today, fundamental principles of the marketplace do not apply.
Prices are not determined by supply and demand or by competition among producers.
Comparison shopping is impossible.
Greater productivity does not lower costs.


Amfed Financial reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Spiegel Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; The tobacco industry seeks to assure America that it's against underage smoking, too.
SINCERITY is rarely a trait ascribed to the tobacco industry, unless the context is Congressmen from tobacco districts fighting higher taxes on tobacco.
But for several years, an organization called the Family C.O.U.R.S.E.
Consortium in Washington has run advertisements and public service announcements urging young people not to smoke.
One ad appeared in a recent edition of U.S.
News &amp; World Report, with the headline, "Smoking Should Not Be A Part Of Growing Up." The acronym stands for "Communication through Open minds, Understanding, Respect and Self-Esteem," and the ad included a coupon for a free booklet for parents, written in English or Spanish and called, "Tobacco: Helping Youth Say No."


Apple South Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


S. I. College Loses Chief After Dispute
The president of the College of Staten Island was dismissed yesterday by the board of trustees of the City University of New York, after months of rancorous dispute between the official and CUNY Chancellor W. Ann Reynolds.
The trustees issued a terse statement announcing that "following an earlier understanding" with the college president, Edmond L. Volpe, they had authorized the appointment of a search committee to find a new president and to appoint an acting president effective today.


Opening of New Denver Airport Is Delayed Again
The opening of the new $2.8 billion Denver International Airport has been pushed back again, to March, Mayor Wellington Webb announced today.
The delay will add millions to the cost of a project that is already more than $1.1 billion over initial projections.
The sprawling airport, which was started in 1989 under Federico F. Pena, then the Mayor of Denver and now Transportation Secretary, will be the first major new airport to open since Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport in 1974.


RESULTS PLUS
HOCKEY  Wings Double Losers  The Detroit Red Wings lost a game last night, by 5-3 to Dallas as the Stars' Dean Evason had a goal and two assists.
They also lost a proud attendance mark by drawing just 19,004 fans, breaking a string of 133 regular-season sellouts.
The Red Wings had filled the 19,275 seats at Joe Louis Arena for every game since late in the 1989-90 season.
The Red Wings outshot Dallas, 24-13, but allowed the Stars several uncontested short-range goals, scoring four times against Vincent Riendeau on eight shots and forcing him to the bench in the second period.


UNUM Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Coalition to Seek A Public Data Highway
Seeking to insure that the national data highway is not strictly a big-business affair, a coalition of more than 60 nonprofit, consumer, labor and civil rights groups will announce today the formation of an organization intended to broaden public discussion of the technology.
The group, to be called the Telecommunications Policy Roundtable, contends that in recent months too much of the planning has been dictated by the nation's largest telephone, cable and computer companies.


Grumman Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hospitality Franchise Systems reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vincent Price, a Suave but Menacing Film Presence, Is Dead at 82
Vincent Price, the suavely menacing star of countless low-budget but often stylish Gothic horror films, died at his home in Los Angeles yesterday.
He was 82 years old and died of lung cancer, a personal assistant, Reggie Williams, told the Associated Press.
The flamboyant 6-foot-4-inch actor with a silken voice and mocking air helped start a major revival of science-fiction films in 1953 with his portrayal of a cruelly scarred sculptor in "The House of Wax." He went on to play a succession of macabre characters in the director Roger Corman's film adaptations of stories by Edgar Allan Poe, including "Pit and the Pendulum" and "Masque of the Red Death."


How 5-Year-Old Boy Survived 7-Story Fall Baffles Medical Experts
While a 5-year-old boy continued to recuperate after falling seven stories from his parents' Upper East Side apartment, medical experts and city health officials were hard pressed to explain how he had survived, attributing his apparent lack of injury to youth and good fortune.
Paul Rosen remained in critical but stable condition at New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center yesterday evening, a day after he fell from a bedroom window in his parents' East 79th Street apartment to a concrete courtyard, hospital officials said.


No Headline
"It's a dangerous turn, trying to create the perfect child and then duplicating it. What do you do if you don't like the first child? Throw the cloned embryo away?" -- DR.
EDWARD L. MARUT, medical director of the in vitro fertilization center at Michael Reese Hospital in Chicago.  [ C3:5. ]


Chess
Only one American contender, the 19-year-old Brooklyn grandmaster Gata Kamsky, has won a place in the next round of the International Chess Federation's competition to select a challenger for its version of the world championship in 1996.
Five other Americans took part in the interzonal tournament organized by the federation, or FIDE, which ended in Biel, Switzerland, in early August, but none finished high enough to advance.
These are the pairings for the next stage, the candidates' matches, which will be held in Wijk-aan-Zee, the Netherlands, in January:


Cumberland Federal reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Commerce Bank (Va.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Landmark Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CB Bancshares reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Correction
A letter yesterday from the chairman of Plum Creek Timber Company rendered his name incorrectly.
It is David D. Leland, not Donald Leland.


CHRONICLE
"I'm drenched emotionally, I have felt like crying 50 different times this evening," RED BUTTONS said as he stood on a red, white and blue balloon-festooned bar at Mortimer's on Sunday addressing a 50th reunion of people involved in the World War II show "Winged Victory."
"Winged Victory" was written and directed by Moss Hart.
The play opened in 1943 and was turned into a movie by 20th Century Fox at the request of Gen.
H.
H. (Hap) Arnold, commander of the Army Air Forces.
The general wanted to do for the Air Forces what Irving Berlin had done for the Army.
A unit of more than 300 people, who were all in the military, was assembled to be in the play, which ran for seven months on Broadway before cast and crew moved to Hollywood.


Meditrust SBI reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


On My Mind; On Civil Respect
In the end, the mayoralty election in New York City will depend on how many New Yorkers vote for civil respect as their first priority.
Civil respect is based on civil liberty.
But it goes beyond, to problems that affect our lives and cannot be decided simply by law.
Easing these problems depends on the government's respect for the citizens and the citizens' respect for each other -- voluntary or imposed.


Lemaire Succeeding as Private Man in a Public Arena
The coach likes to teach his sport to his players, but he doesn't appreciate the skeptical attention of the news media and he doesn't seek the fickle approval of the fans.
So where does he go to pursue his career?
For Jacques Lemaire, the choice was metropolitan New York City, media capital of the world and the most populous urban center in North America.
It might seem an odd choice.
But for someone from the hockey hothouse of Montreal, where Lemaire grew up, played at a Hall of Fame level and later coached, it made perfect sense.


Corrections
An obituary on Saturday about Edward C. Perry, a financial adviser who died on Thursday in Manhattan, misspelled the names of a company for which he worked, and of his companion.
The company is the Encyclopaedia Britannica.
His companion is Adolfo Sardina, the fashion designer known as Adolfo.


Patterns
Song for an Unsung Hero
Fashion's publicity machine has been churning out celebrities with the prefix "super." Everyone in the United States can now go backstage with Cindy Crawford or in the front row with Elsa Klensch and can keep up with the dating habits of models, photographers and even hair stylists.


Vallone Calls For Changing School Repair
Attributing the decline in the maintenance of New York City public schools to "muddled bureaucracy" more than chronic underfinancing, City Council Speaker Peter Vallone yesterday said he would oppose additional maintenance money until the system for making repairs is overhauled.
Mr.
Vallone laid down his conditions as he released a City Council report that describes an unresponsive maintenance system in which, he said, repairs are poorly coordinated, supplies often unavailable and contractors inadequately supervised.
Custodians, he said, often do little to help.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day yesterday, about the administrator overseeing the settlement of fraud charges against Prudential Securities, referred incompletely to the limited partnerships involved in the case.
The partnerships, which were valued at more than $8 billion, included investments in real estate and other areas, as well as in energy.


More Banks Nationwide Are Urged
The Clinton Administration favors giving banks the right to operate more freely across state lines, but has decided not to push the issue until other banking and economic legislation clears Congress, Treasury Secretary Lloyd Bentsen said today.
Current restrictions on interstate banking require banks to create separate subsidiaries to operate in more than one state, a cumbersome and costly deterrent to expansion.


SWING VOTE SEEMS TO DRIFT TO MAYOR, BUT POLL IS CLOSE
Hispanic New Yorkers, women and other vital swing voters appear to have drifted back toward Mayor David N. Dinkins in the last three weeks, but his overall support remains below 50 percent and voters continue to express enduring reservations about him in a close and unpredictable race, the latest New York Times/WCBS-TV News poll shows.
At the same time, Rudolph W. Giuliani's negative ratings on qualities like trustworthiness and leadership have crept up and his positive ratings have slipped a bit, though voters still overwhelmingly view him as the tougher candidate on crime, the No. 1 issue they say they want the next Mayor to address.


Executive Changes
AMERICAN STOCK EXCHANGE, New York, appointed Mark Klein executive director of the Emerging Company Marketplace.
IDEXX LABORATORIES, Westbrook, Me., named Erwin Workman Jr. president and a director.


Greece Losing on Policy Over 'Macedonia'
The two-year-old policy of Greece to refuse dealings with the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia because of its name is failing as more governments recognize the Government in Skopje.
Last week, Belgium, which now holds the presidency of the European Community, became the 10th community member to recognize the Macedonian Government since its acceptance into the United Nations in April.
Of the community's 12 members, only Greece and France are still holding out.


Lawsuit On Sex Bias Goes to Jury
Jurors retired yesterday to decide if Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company was guilty of sex discrimination.
Their deliberations began after they heard closing arguments and Federal District Judge Kimba M. Wood's charge.


Poughkeepsie Savings Bank (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Receptor Is Found to Help H.I.V. in Invading Immune Cells
Announcing what it believes could be a step toward developing a vaccine against the AIDS virus, France's prestigious Pasteur Institute said today that its researchers had identified a new receptor molecule that helps the virus to invade a human blood cell.
The institute said that if the activity of this receptor molecule could be inhibited, cells might be protected from attack by the virus.
It added that the receptor, labeled CD26, seemed to play the same role with different strains of H.I.V., the virus that causes AIDS.


Bozeman Makes Point, but Then Only to a Point
Todd Bozeman, head basketball coach at the University of California, supports the Black Coaches Association's cause.
But he insists he is not trying to prove anything to anybody.
"I'm not the spokesman," he said yesterday.
"I support the issues, but my greatest concern is for the kids."


Lamont Trumps Showalter
Gene Lamont, whose Chicago White Sox won their first Western Division title in 10 years, was voted American League Manager of the Year yesterday, beating out Buck Showalter, who finished second, just like his Yankees did in the Eastern Division.
In balloting by the Baseball Writers Association of America, Lamont defeated Showalter, 72 points to 63.
The voting was based on 5 points for first place, 3 for second and 1 for third.
Lamont received 8 first-place votes, 9 second-place votes and 5 third-place votes.
Showalter had 7 first-place votes, 8 seconds and 4 thirds.


World Series Provided Viewers With the Best Late Show of All
Stop with the television ratings already.
Quit telling us that World Series ratings are down and that fewer people are watching the games.
Instead, tell the people who aren't watching that they're missing terrific entertainment.
While they're watching yet another sitcom or an old movie, they're missing great theater, not to mention glorious games.
Sure, the ratings are significant because they are the basis for the prices advertisers pay for commercial time, and that revenue will determine how much the clubs get when they go into the television advertising business next year.
But the games are the product, not commercials, and this year's World Series had more terrific games than all of the Roman numeral Super Bowls combined.


In a Gritty Town, Hope Outlives the Prosperity
Against all odds, pine trees have taken root on the black mountain of coal mining waste that looms above this small city in central Pennsylvania.
The people of Shamokin have also put down deep roots, holding fast to a bleak place despite a harsh economic climate.
It is a triumph of time over adversity.
By objective measures, Shamokin (pronounced shuh-MO-kin) is a dying town.
The coal and textile industries folded up years ago, unemployment rose, and most of the young people fled.


The Family Farm Doesn't Exist Anymore
To the Editor:
After you exposed the economic and political incestuous relationship between the United States Department of Agriculture and corporate agribusiness, which has been destroying our family farm system of agriculture for decades ("Tainted Trade," front-page series, Oct. 10-12), one would have hoped for a more enlightened followup analysis in "The Politics of Food" (editorial, Oct. 16).


Jets Against the Giants: Hype Is Being Put on Hold
It was only a month ago that the Halloween date between the Jets and Giants held out the promise of a titanic clash.
The Giants were 3-0 and had regained their footing in the National Football Conference East Division.
The Jets were 2-1 and appeared on their way to a resurgence in the American Conference East.
But as the season has unfolded the two teams have gone in different directions -- the Giants are 5-1 and atop the N.F.C.
East and the Jets are 2-4 and at the bottom of the A.F.C.
East -- and Sunday's game at Giants Stadium not only lacks the expected drama but carries a different kind of urgency for the Jets and their coach, Bruce Coslet.


Ukraine's Wasting Nuclear Asset
It's two down and one to go among the republics that inherited nuclear arms when the Soviet Union broke up.
Kazakhstan is about to follow Belarus's lead and get rid of its nuclear legacy.
That leaves a lone holdout: stubborn Ukraine.
Ukraine has turned its tactical nuclear arms over to Russia for dismantling.
And it's removing the warheads from aging SS-19 missiles.
But President Leonid Kravchuk, who last year pledged to give up all of Ukraine's arms, now wants to keep some.
The ones he has in mind, 46 intercontinental-range SS-24 missiles, were designed to target the U.S., and fly too far to strike most of Russia.


Purolator Products (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Helmsley Reservation at Residential Hotel
Leona M. Helmsley wouldn't stand for a dirty bathroom and plastic plants by the front door.
But she may have to.
Mrs.
Helmsley, who used to appear in magazine advertisements touting the white-glove, hospital-corner standards of the $195-a-night hotels that she ran, is expected to be transferred today to a $54-a-night room in a Manhattan hotel that is used as a halfway house.
Mrs.
Helmsley was convicted of tax evasion and mail fraud in 1989 and has spent the last 17 months as Inmate No. 15113-054 in the Federal prison in Danbury, Conn.


Golden Poultry Co. (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 25


MTV Names Presidents
MTV named two women yesterday to be joint presidents of the cable channel.
Sara Levinson, 43, will be the MTV president and business director, and Judy McGrath, 41, will be its president and creative director.
Both women were promoted from executive vice president positions.
The promotions were announced by Tom Freston, the chairman and chief executive of MTV Networks, a division of Viacom International that owns VH-1 and Nickelodeon, in addition to MTV.
The position of MTV president has been vacant for the last few years.


Procter &amp; Gamble Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brush Wellman reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Review/Television; Shoe Pinches Other Foot In a Series
How's this for a quandary?
Your dearest friend has just moved into the White House, and here you are writing and producing a weekly series poking fun at politicians and other assorted nitwits on the Washington power circuit.
What to do?
Well, Linda Bloodworth-Thomason and Harry Thomason, top-of-the-list F.O.B.'s, don't fool around.
Their "Hearts Afire" show, shifted by CBS from Mondays to Wednesdays, has been yanked out of its now awkward Washington setting and plunked down in a small town in Middle America.
The state is not identified, but Bubbas in good standing can cast a knowing wink in the direction of Arkansas.
Tonight's special hourlong season premiere at 8 (the regular time will be 8:30) wastes no time in fleeing the District of Columbia.
John Hartman (John Ritter) and family are already on the road in a rickety van heading for the town where he grew up.
He talks rhapsodically of common sense, decency and family values.
He will soon know better.
His new wife, Georgie (Markie Post), a Peabody Award-winning journalist, warily wonders if she's going to fit in on John's version of Walton Mountain.
His two young sons from an earlier marriage are making no firm commitments.


Bernard Ross Morris TV Producer, 61
Bernard Ross Morris, a television producer for ABC, CBS and NBC who won five Emmys for public affairs documentaries, died last Thursday at his home in Short Hills, N.J.
He was 61.
The cause was cancer, said his wife, Ellen.


Process of Linking Blast Debris Begins
In a turning point in the World Trade Center bombing case, prosecutors began presenting evidence yesterday in their effort to link the four men on trial with the many bits of twisted metal that has been brought before the jury over the last two weeks.
At the end of the afternoon session, a New York City police detective, Edward Mason, who identified himself as a fingerprint specialist, told how he had taken imprints of a serial number embedded in a five-foot-long piece of metal frame that was recovered from the explosion.


Judge Bars 10 From Plumbers Union Activity
In an unusual action, a state judge temporarily barred 10 current and former leaders of a New York City plumbers union yesterday who have been indicted on extortion charges from running the union.
Acting Justice Joan B. Carey of Manhattan State Supreme Court disqualified the officials from participating in union business or activities pending a ruling on a motion by Manhattan prosecutors for the appointment of a trustee to oversee the union, Local 2 of the Plumbers Union.


Health-O-Meter reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


People
*
Peter C. Hanley was named president at Arnold Advertising, McLean, Va., the former Washington area office of DDB Needham Worldwide, New York.
He was previously an executive vice president at Young &amp; Rubicam New York.
Mr.
Hanley succeeds Joe Landy, who became a consultant to DDB Needham after it sold the office to Arnold Fortuna Lawner &amp; Cabot , Boston. *
John Margaritis, president at Ogilvy Adams &amp; Rinehart, New York, was named to the additional position of chief executive, succeeding Jonathan Rinehart, who continues as chairman.


Torchmark
Shares of the Torchmark Corporation dropped yesterday after the company announced that an Alabama state court had ordered its Liberty National Life unit to pay $1 million in punitive damages in a case involving cancer insurance policies.
Torchmark, an insurance and financial services holding company, is based in Birmingham, Ala.


COMPANY BRIEFS
CABLETRON SYSTEMS INC., Monterey, Calif., and Novell Inc., Provo, Utah, will introduce a new piece of computer networking equipment next week.
No details were provided.
STANDARD FEDERAL BANK, Troy, Mich., has signed a definitive agreement to acquire Central Holding Co., Mount Clemens, Mich., in a deal valued at $21.3 million.


Electric Rates To Be Frozen By Authority
The New York State Power Authority, trying to repair its tattered public image and fight off competition from independent energy suppliers, said yesterday that it would freeze electricity rates for the next three years for its government customers in New York City and Westchester County, which could save them as much as $110 million.
The freeze would hold down electricity rates for New York City, the city's subways, suburban commuter rail systems and a number of other government agencies.
The action would reduce their bills by roughly 4.5 percent, compared with the increases the Power Authority had previously projected.
But some local officials said they did not anticipate that their savings would be as large as the authority announced.


Rexene Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


DuPont Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Jets Against the Giants: Big Names, Big Games
The Jets and Giants have met so rarely, only six times since 1970, that their matchups are more a novelty than a rivalry.
Their seventh regular-season clash comes Sunday: The Giants, 5-1 and atop the National Football Conference East, are trying to return to the glory of just a few seasons ago.
The Jets?
They have lost three straight, their record has dropped to 2-4 and they need this game to begin to salvage the season.
Despite only a half-dozen confrontations, the teams have created an anthology of memories and names: The Sack Exchange, Joe Namath, Craig Morton, Al Woodall, Ray Perkins, Fran Tarkenton, Joe Walton, Pete Gogolak.
And the rare meetings have defined the teams' seasons and hinted at their futures.


Cairo Gunman Kills 2 Americans and Frenchman
A gunman opened fire on foreign tourists in a luxury Cairo hotel late last night, killing two American engineers and a Frenchman and injuring three other foreigners, officials from the United States Embassy and the Interior Ministry said early this morning.
It was the worst attack on foreign visitors in Egypt in recent years.


Paramount Plans a TV Network
Paramount Communications Inc. announced yesterday that it would join forces with Chris-Craft Industries to start a fifth national television network.
The proposed broadcasting network does not appear to be directly linked to the battle between Viacom Inc. and QVC Network Inc. to take over Paramount.
Still, Martin S. Davis, Paramount's chairman, said the proposed network had already been approved by Viacom, Paramount's favored merger partner.


Harassment Arrests
Two teen-agers were charged with pelting the home of Philadelphia Phillies relief pitcher MITCH WILLIAMS with eggs to show their displeasure with his performance in the World Series.
Hours after Williams gave up the Series-winning home run against Toronto on Saturday, the police said about 30 youngsters armed with cartons of eggs arrived at Williams's house.
Williams was not at the house.


International Specialty Products Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. CANCELS A PLAN TO BEGIN SANCTIONS AFTER JAPAN ACTS
The Clinton Administration today canceled plans to impose trade sanctions next Monday against Japan after Tokyo agreed to open its public sector construction market to international competition.
Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, announced this morning that the Administration would not proceed with the sanctions, at least for now, because the Japanese Government had promised to eliminate the practice of restricting the bidding on construction contracts to a few companies.
The sanctions would have barred Japanese companies from bidding on some Federal construction projects.


Vikings' Old and New Looking Similar
Robert Smith scored his first pro touchdown on Monday night on a nifty 26-yard run, and after the Vikings-Bears game he had the football, with No. 20 taped across the front, to prove it.
Roger Craig was one of the first to offer Smith congratulations.
Craig knows plenty about getting into the end zone.
In 11 pro seasons he has been there 81 times, 63 on the ground and 18 through the air.


Man in the News; Canadian With Mandate: Joseph Jacques Jean Chretien
The Conservative Party derided him as "yesterday's man" because he faithfully served Prime Ministers Lester B. Pearson, Pierre Elliott Trudeau and John N. Turner.
But by placing today's problems in the hands of Jean Chretien, who will become the country's next Prime Minister, Canada's voters said experience must count for something.
Among the nation's problems are getting people back to work, adjusting trade relationships and preserving national unity.


Pulse of Campaign: Dinkins the Survivor and Giuliani the Striver
Not so many weeks ago, the received wisdom among New York politicians was that Mayor David N. Dinkins would be on the floor by now and that Rudolph W. Giuliani would be measuring the drapes at City Hall -- and both may well prove true after next Tuesday's election, which all the polls suggest remains too close to call.
But for the moment, Mr.
Dinkins is still standing and Mr.
Giuliani still apparently striving to clinch his sale.
That is an obvious testament to a month of relentless and often hyperbolic televised attacks by the Mayor painting his challenger as a big, bad Republican.
It may also be the unintended consequence of Mr.
Giuliani's pointed counterpunches condemning the Mayor for a range of lapses dating back to his failure to file income-tax returns two decades ago.


Food Notes
Discount Bread
Eli Zabar's empire is expanding.
He has bought 433 East 91st Street, a building where a factory makes Baker's Brand vinegar and mustard.
The factory will remain, but Mr.
Zabar will use part of the building as a shop where he will sell select food, including his own breads, at discount prices.
Mr.
Zabar owns E.A.T. on Madison Avenue but is not associated with Zabar's on the West Side.
On Monday at his new location, he will begin selling bread from his wholesale bakery, also on 91st Street.
This is not day-old bread but overstock.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-10  U.S.
DEFERS TRADE ACTION  Trade sanctions on Japan were deferred after Tokyo agreed to open its public-sector construction market to foreign competition.
A1  CHALLENGE FOR CANADIAN LEADER  Canada's new Prime Minister won a clear majority in the House of Commons, but he will have to work with a Parliament fractured by regional rivalries, and he faces a strong challenge from a weak economy.
A1


Vincent Price, Noted Actor Of Dark Roles, Dies at 82
Vincent Price, the suavely menacing star of countless low-budget but often stylish Gothic horror films, died at his home in Los Angeles on Monday.
He was 82 years old and died of lung cancer, a personal assistant, Reggie Williams, said.
The flamboyant 6-foot-4-inch actor with a silken voice and mocking air helped start a major revival of horror films in 1953 with his portrayal of a cruelly scarred sculptor in "The House of Wax." He went on to play a succession of macabre characters in the director Roger Corman's film adaptations of stories by Edgar Allan Poe, including "Pit and the Pendulum" and "Masque of the Red Death."


Blackman Is Battling For Role In Reserve
Ask Rolando Blackman how he feels about his game right now and an honest answer is forthcoming.
"There's a lot of frustration, I can tell you that," Blackman said after today's Knick practice.
"I'm gritting my teeth a lot. My jaw muscles must have grown a half inch trying to bite through it. It's a frustrating thing, trying to get to a level where I can help these guys win."


Make His Day? The Modern Does Just That for Eastwood the Director
One night long ago, 17-year-old Clint Eastwood and his friends traveled from Oakland to Los Angeles to hear a jazz concert.
Along the way, they happened to see horses running wild near Sunset Boulevard.
So they helped corral the horses for the animals' owner, who thanked them and went home.
Too bad: that was Mr.
Eastwood's only meeting with Howard Hawks, one of the directors he most admires.
He cites Mr.
Hawks, along with John Ford and Anthony Mann, as an influence on his own career.
It's a long way -- and a lot of horses -- from the corner of Sunset and Sepulveda Boulevards to the Museum of Modern Art, where Mr.
Eastwood's own directorial work will be the subject of a gala tribute tonight. (In past years, similar events have honored Cary Grant, Audrey Hepburn, Gregory Peck and David Niven.)


Heat Fines Bol
The Miami Heat fined center MANUTE BOL $25,000 for missing two exhibition games to attend meetings in Washington concerning the civil war in his native Sudan.
The money will be donated to a Sudanese relief fund.
Heat officials didn't know where Bol was until he returned to practice Monday.
"The mistake I made was I didn't call, but I didn't think they would fine me that money -- $25,000," said the 7-foot-7-inch Bol, a nine-year pro who is in his first season with the Heat and has a $650,000 contract.


National Commerce Bancorp (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Campaign Casualty


Personal Health
ALL too often, women who complain of chronic debilitating symptoms for which doctors can find no physical cause or cure are dismissed as crackpots or hypochondriacs and are shunted off to psychotherapists for treatment of ailments assumed to be emotionally based.
Such has been the fate of thousands of women suffering from a miserably painful and debilitating disorder involving a part of their bodies that many hesitate to discuss even with their doctors.
That part is the vulva, the tissue that surrounds the opening to a woman's vagina and urethra, and the disorder is called vulvodynia.


Tosco Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Komag Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


United Dominion Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A Bizarre Drug Tested in the Hope of Helping Drug Addicts
DRIVEN by a deep sense of frustration that efforts to cure drug addiction are going nowhere, Federal researchers are testing a bizarre, mind- altering drug called ibogaine as a possible new treatment for cocaine and heroin addiction.
The drug, drawn from the roots of a West African shrub, has been tried on only 60 people.
But several doctors and patients say that the compound works wonders, often banishing symptoms of withdrawal and craving for months if not years.
Intrigued and at the same time skeptical, researchers have decided to see if the drug works as well as its supporters claim.


UNSL Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Compuware Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


America Service Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Johnstown America Industries Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


China Makes Trade Pact for Americas Urgent
To the Editor:
A few days ago I returned from a trip to China.
I would like to send a few select members of the House of Representatives over there to take a look at what's happening.
China's overwhelming infrastructure and industrial development ambitions are clearly beyond its pocketbook.
Vast new projects, like Shanghai's huge new city complex of Pudong stand partly developed with most of the work being done by manual labor.


A Surprise Closing Takes More Luster Off Broadway Season
The fall Broadway season absorbed another blow yesterday when the producers of "Wonderful Tennessee," the Brian Friel play that opened three days ago, announced that the show would close on Sunday, after just 9 performances and 20 previews.
The play, about three middle-aged Irish couples who spend a night on a Donegal pier waiting for a boatman, drinking and philosophizing, received respectful but disappointing reviews.
The news of the play's closing is the strongest tremor among many that have shaken the confidence of Broadway professionals in what had appeared to be the first promising autumn in many years.


Theater in Review
The Able-Bodied Seaman  Manhattan Class Company 120 West 28th Street Chelsea Through Saturday  By Alan Bowne; directed by Jimmy Bohr; sets by Rob Odorisio; lights by Howard Werner; costumes by Claudia Stephens; sound by Stuart J. Allyn; props/dressing by Jeffrey Wallach; production stage manager, Gail Eve Malatesta; production managers, Laura Kravets Gautier and Ira Mont.
Presented by Manhattan Class Company, Robert LuPone and Bernard Telsey, executive directors; W. D. Cantler, associate director.
WITH: Chelsea Altman, Larry Attile, Simon Brooking, Robert Floyd, Anita Gillette and Robert LuPone.


CTS Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


'Anything Goes' Houston May Go the Limit: Zoning
In many American cities, the mental image of the landscape is set by something the city has.
Seattle has the Space Needle, St.
Louis has the Gateway Arch.
Here in Houston, though, even with its famed Astrodome, the urban geography has long been noted for what this city does not have: any zoning regulations whatsoever.
But now Houston, the only major American city without a zoning code, is on the verge of determining whether the time has finally come to impose zoning and, perhaps, inject some modicum of order to the helter-skelter, hodgepodge way that the nation's fourth largest city has evolved and even now continues to grow.


CHRONICLE
There were so many journalists at a party for ELLEN GOODMAN, the Pulitzer Prize-winning syndicated columnist for The Boston Globe, on Monday evening that EDWIN DIAMOND, New York magazine's media critic, was moved to remark, "This is the way to have a party: a bunch of journalists standing around and talking in a bar."
At the party, given by Ms.
Goodman's longtime friend LYNN SHERR, a correspondent for the ABC News program "20/20," guests like Mike Wallace, John Chancellor, Lesley Stahl, Mort Zuckerman, Diane Sawyer, Robert Caro, Judge Kimba M. Wood, Calvin Trillin, Jeff Greenfield and Fred Friendly were standing around the Cite Grill to congratulate Ms.
Goodman on the publication of the fifth anthology of her newspaper columns.
The book, "Value Judgments," is being published this week by Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux.


RJR NABISCO HOLDINGS CORP. (N)
Intense competition in premium cigarettes continued to hold down earnings at the RJR Nabisco Holdings Corporation.
The company announced yesterday that net income for the third quarter fell 58.2 percent.
The company's tobacco division is battling other companies amid lower prices for premium brands and higher prices for private-label brands.
A 63.7 percent decline, to $201 million, in net income from domestic sales more than offset a 13.8 percent increase in net income from international tobacco sales, to $181 million.


U.S. Concludes Aristide Can't Return by Deadline
After a brief burst of optimism last weekend, the Clinton Administration has concluded that President Jean-Bertrand Aristide of Haiti cannot return to his country before Saturday, the deadline set in an agreement brokered by the United Nations, without risking his life.
Acknowledging what has seemed evident to outsiders since riots prompted the White House to recall an American troopship earlier this month, Washington insiders agreed today that Father Aristide would have to wait some more.


Sundstrand Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Anthony Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Massive Cabdriver Protest Of 35 Killings Snarls Traffic
Thousands of cabdrivers, angered and frightened by the seemingly unceasing string of killings and violent crimes against New York taxi drivers, formed a massive caravan and staged a mobile demonstration in Manhattan yesterday, bringing traffic to a standstill and creating chaos on several midtown blocks during the early evening rush hour.
The protest route started at Fourth Street and stretched up West Street before heading toward Times Square and south again on Broadway for a rally at City Hall.
Along the way, the drivers -- primarily yellow cabdrivers -- tied up intersections and frustrated commuters.
At some points, drivers abandoned their vehicles, to chant slogans and sit in the street during the protest that began at about 2 P.M. and trailed off about 7 P.M.


Police, Not Troops, in Washington
Bill Clinton was right to reject Mayor Sharon Pratt Kelly's request for the power to call out the National Guard in Washington D.C., to cope with the District's soaring murder rate.
Congress, which is considering the option, would be wise to follow the President's example.
The National Guard is trained to keep order in short-term emergencies -- including natural disasters like hurricanes and man-made disasters like riots.
It is not trained for long-term law enforcement.
Deploying the Guard in Washington would invite other crime-ridden cities to do the same.
Eventually, calling out the Guard would become a refuge for elected officials seeking to evade accountability for failed criminal justice policies.


I.B.M. Quarterly Loss Smaller Than Expected
I.B.M. reported yesterday a smaller-than-expected loss for the third quarter, prompting its new chairman, Louis V. Gerstner Jr., to declare that despite continuing troubles, the company is "on the right track."
Mr.
Gerstner pointed to "encouraging signs," including revenues that held up better than analysts expected, further progress in cost-cutting programs and a steadying of gross profit margins.


Robert Half International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Armstrong World Industries Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cirrus Logic (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Use of Pepper Spray Ruled A Factor in Man's Death
An autopsy report released today says that the use of pepper spray contributed to the death of a Mount Vernon man two weeks ago as he was being subdued by the police, but the man's heart trouble and intoxication were given more prominent blame.
Because of those other factors and the absence of evidence of excessive force, the Westchester County District Attorney's office said it had cleared four police officers of any "criminality" in their efforts to restrain the 34-year-old man, Lester Steven Yarborough.


German Ex-Police Chief Is Guilty in 1931 Murders
The longtime chief of East Germany's secret police, Erich Mielke, was convicted today of the 1931 murders of two police officers and was sentenced to six years in prison.
Several other charges, all connected to his tenure as secret police chief, are still pending against the 85-year-old Mr.
Mielke, but it is uncertain when or whether he will be brought to trial again.


Eagle Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Visa International Is Set To Replace Top Officer
The longtime chief executive of Visa International, Charles Russell, will announce today that he is resigning from the credit card organization.
He will be replaced by Edmund P. Jensen, a vice chairman of U.S.
Bancorp in Portland, Ore.
News of the change, which was not expected, was distributed by Visa by facsimile to its member banks late last night.
The board of Visa is meeting in Buhl, Germany.


Silicon Valley Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


PRESIDENT TO LIMIT FEDERAL SUBSIDIES IN HEALTH PROGRAM
To control the cost of his proposal for universal health insurance coverage, President Clinton has modified it to limit Federal spending on subsidies for low-income workers, small businesses and early retirees, Administration officials and Congressional aides said today.
The proposal, one of dozens of adjustments to the health care plan, which Mr.
Clinton intends to submit to Congress on Wednesday, seeks to balance two conflicting imperatives.
On the one hand, the President is telling Americans, as he said last month, that they have a right to "health security -- health care that can never be taken away, health care that is always there." Curbing Runaway Costs
On the other hand, he and his budget director, Leon E. Panetta, say they do not want to create a new entitlement to benefits that would impose open-ended costs on the Federal Government far into the future.


DeVry Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Sports of The Times; Jets Need Home-Field Advantage
IT'S not too late for the Jets to do something before Sunday.
Things are going badly enough for them, without their feeling like sacrificial victims when their bus inches along in that ghastly Meadowlands traffic and they notice that the color scheme is overwhelmingly blue and red.
Of course, they feel that way for their alleged home games, too.
The Jets are long-distance commuters, bridge-and-tunnel people, who never know the feeling of playing in their own stadium.
They show up for home games and they look up at the stadium and what does it say?
GIANTS STADIUM.
That's what it says.


Northeast Utilities reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


U.S. CANCELS A PLAN TO BEGIN SANCTIONS AFTER JAPAN ACTS
The Clinton Administration today canceled plans to impose trade sanctions next Monday against Japan after Tokyo agreed to open its public sector construction market to international competition.
Mickey Kantor, the United States trade representative, announced this morning that the Administration would not proceed with the sanctions, at least for now, because the Japanese Government had promised to eliminate the practice of restricting the bidding on construction contracts to a few companies.
The sanctions would have barred Japanese companies from bidding on some Federal construction projects.


Metropolitan Diary
THE scene: the Metropolitan Opera, a sold-out performance of "Tosca," starring Placido Domingo.
The players: Gloria Maruffi, who thought the performance wonderful, and a woman in the dress circle who obviously disagreed.
At its conclusion, the woman very audibly suggested certain revisions that she thought would improve the plot.


First Savings Bank (N.J.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Florio and Whitman Focus on Basic Themes
It is exactly one week before Election Day and the polls show the race for Governor could be close.
But Christine Todd Whitman and Gov.
Jim Florio could be vacationing in Hawaii for all the stress the two candidates are showing on the campaign trail.
Appearing remarkably relaxed and confident, both candidates crisscrossed the state today, returning to their core audiences to shore up support and dropping in on lunchtime crowds to lobby for last-minute votes.


Managing Award Caps Baker's Rookie Season
Hours after a second member of his starting infield declared himself a free agent, the news took a turn for the better for Dusty Baker yesterday.
The Baseball Writers Association of America announced that Baker, rookie manager of the San Francisco Giants, had been voted National League manager of the year in his first year as a manager in the major leagues.
The 44-year-old Baker, who led the Giants to their most victories (103) since 1962, received 15 of the 28 first-place votes in balloting by two writers from each National League city.
That was four more than Jim Fregosi of the N.L.
East champion Philadelphia Phillies, who got 11 first-place votes and finished second.


Aldus Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Coach Is Released
The University of Florida fired its women's coach, MITCH IVEY, after a university investigation of his relationships with his swimmers.
The investigation began after ESPN reporters showed up on campus three weeks ago to work on a story about Ivey's interaction with athletes.
Ivey denied the charges of misconduct after his firing Monday night.


RESULTS PLUS
N.H.L.
Good Night for Lindros  Eric Lindros capped a three-goal second period as the Philadelphia Flyers beat the Nordiques, 4-2, last night in Quebec.
Josef Beranek scored his league-leading 10th goal and assisted on another as the Flyers won for the seventh time in nine games.
Lindros was making his third visit to the Colisee since his trade to the Flyers, a deal prompted by his refusal to sign with the Nordiques after they selected him in the 1991 entry draft. (AP) Jets 5, Panthers 2: Nelson Emerson and Keith Tkachuk scored first-period short-handed goals to lead Winnipeg past Florida in Miami. (AP) Blackhawks 9, Blues 2: Jeremy Roenick, Kevin Todd and Joe Murphy each scored twice, and Ed Belfour stopped 24 shots as host Chicago beat St.
Louis for its third consecutive victory. (AP) TENNIS Courier Tops Wheaton  Jim Courier beat David Wheaton, 7-5, 5-7, 6-3, last night in his opening match in the $1.65 million Stockholm Open.
Michael Stich came from a set down to beat Mikael Pernfors.
Stich, a German seeded No. 4, won the second-round match, 6-7 (3-7), 7-5, 6-2, on the Globe Arena's carpet.
Third-seeded Boris Becker, who also plays well in Sweden and is a three-time Stockholm Open champion, beat Aaron Krickstein, 7-5, 6-4, in his opening match.
Becker will next play MaliVai Washington. (AP) BOXING Pazienza Wins Decision  Vinny Pazienza went to 4-0 since returning to the ring after breaking his neck when he took a unanimous decision over Robbie Sims in a 10-rounder at the Foxwoods High Stakes Bingo and Casino last night in Ledyard, Conn.
Pazienza, 30, improved his record to 35-5.
The Cranston, R.I., native broke his neck in a car accident in November 1991.
He began his comeback in December 1992 with a victory over Luis Santana of New York. (AP)


On the Trail of Voter Vindication; Florio Campaigns on the Value of Taking Tough Medicine
They have become known as the Recession Governors, the executives of big industrial states who inherited budgets and payrolls that were bloated by the boom years of the 1980's and revenues that are starved by the lean times that came with the 1990's.
And the first among them in office, and the first to face a review by the voters, is Jim Florio of New Jersey,
"We were first across the barbed wire," the Governor said recently, choosing a grim simile of trench warfare, to describe the politics of governing in a recession.


ImmuCell reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


METRO DIGEST
METRO DIGEST  NEW YORK CITY  CONTENTS OF BOMB PLOT TAPES REVEALED
The informer at the center of the Government's case in the plot to bomb New York City landmarks had a volatile relationship with his handlers, often quarreling with F.B.I. agents who used him to infiltrate a group of Muslims now charged in the plot, according to transcripts of secretly taped conversations.
Transcripts of the hundreds of hours of tapes, which were recorded without the knowledge of the F.B.I., were distributed to defense lawyers.
A1


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
Brazos River and Sabine River Authorities, Tex., have tentatively priced $158.5 million of tax-exempt collateralized pollution control revenue refunding bonds for a Texas Utilities Electric Company project through underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
For $50 million of bonds due in 2022, which are insured by Ambac Indemnity Corp., the yield is 5.50 percent, while $75 million of bonds with the same maturity date are insured by Financial Security Assurance and priced to yield 5.55 percent.
The remaining $33 million of bonds also with the same maturity are insured by Capital Market Assurance Corp. and priced to yield 5.60 percent.
All insured bonds are rated triple-A by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and Standard &amp; Poor's Corp. *
Illinois Health Facilities Authority is selling $55.1 million of tax-exempt revenue bonds for Children's Memorial Hospital initially priced to yield a maximum 5.50 percent for an issue due in 2022 through Goldman, Sachs &amp; Co.
Serial bonds with shorter maturities were priced to yield from 3.05 percent in 1994 to 5.15 percent in 2007, with another bond due in 2013 priced to yield 5.40 percent.
Because the bonds are insured by the Municipal Bond Investor's Assurance Corp., they are rated triple-A by Moody's and S.&amp; P.


Washington Post Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Stocks Stumble in Erratic Trading Session
A day after blue-chip issues roared to new highs, the stock market stumbled through an erratic session yesterday that seemed to raise a question among some analysts: Why can't investors sustain a lengthy autumn rally?
To Michael Metz, chief investment strategist at Oppenheimer &amp; Company, the declines in most stock indicators yesterday may point to renewed anxiety about the health of the economy and the strength of corporate profits.
After weeks of setting records, Wall Street may be running out of gas, he said.


Auburn Punt Issue Becomes Bag of Hot Air
Auburn punter TERRY DANIEL's season has been a gas, but not because he filled the ball with helium.
Daniel, who leads the nation with a 48.3-yard average, was cleared of any wrongdoing after the Southeastern Conference checked for helium in the footballs he was kicking.
"I heard the ball had been sent to Birmingham to test the contents of it," the junior punter said.
"I couldn't believe it. It was just a 10-mile-an-hour wind. If you hit the ball decent, it should go that far."


Betz Laboratories Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Shopping and Banking With a $200 Telephone
The telephone industry, in its fever pitch to build the information superhighway, is hoping to get more mileage from the phone itself.
Today, U S Order of Herndon, Va., in partnership with companies including the Bell Atlantic Corporation and Knight-Ridder Inc., is introducing a telephone intended to let consumers bank and shop from home.
It is a desktop set with a miniature screen, whose controls resemble those of a bank automated teller machine.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the mayoral campaign of Rudolph W. Giuliani misstated the position of the editorial page of The Staten Island Advance on his candidacy.
The page has not endorsed Mr.
Giuliani.
It will make an endorsement in the race on Friday, William A. Huus, the paper's managing editor, said yesterday.


U.S. Says Chretien Will Not Undo Nafta
President Clinton and his aides said today that they did not expect that the Liberal Party's victory in Canadian elections would hurt the prospects for approval of the North American Free Trade Agreement or lead to renegotiation of the pact.
"From my point of view, it will have no impact at all," President Clinton said this morning, discounting the Liberal Party's platform plank that called for renegotiation of the accord.
"I see no reason to renegotiate the agreement or any grounds or basis for it, and I think we should just go ahead."


Perkins Family Restaurants L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Lawrence Kuskin, 92, Children's Fever Expert
Dr.
Lawrence Kuskin, an authority on children's rheumatic fever, died on Thursday at St.
Francis Hospital in Poughkeepsie.
He was 92.
The cause was injuries sustained in a car accident on Oct. 18 near Red Hook, N.Y.


Bell Atlantic Promises $15 Billion for Advanced Networks
Seeking to defuse political opposition to his company's proposed takeover of Tele-Communications Inc., the chairman of the Bell Atlantic Corporation pledged today to spend at least $15 billion over the next five years on advanced communication networks if the deal goes through.
The pledge, made by Raymond W. Smith in a meeting with several reporters, is the biggest and most explicit financial commitment yet by a company to build the vaunted electronic highways that are to provide hundreds of channels of television as well as voice and data communications.


Medical Schools Alerted About Intern With a Prison Record
Officials of the University Hospital here are warning medical schools and teaching hospitals nationwide to be on the watch for an intern they dismissed this month after learning that he had served two years in prison for feeding ant poison to six paramedics in Illinois in 1985.
The 39-year-old intern, Michael Swango, a 1983 graduate of Southern Illinois University's medical school, lied in his application to Stony Brook, failing to disclose the time he spent in prison, said Dr.
Jordan J. Cohen, dean of the School of Medicine at the State University here.


CalMat Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


60-Minute Gourmet
I LEARNED about turkey before World War II, shortly after arriving in this country.
In France we had turkey, but it was largely a curiosity that was served on special occasions.
Even today it is not wildly popular.
It was sure popular in the United States Army, where I discovered every permutation of turkey, including some versions I haven't seen since.
Turkey was cheap, ample and versatile.
In recent years, health concerns have given turkey meat a new popularity as a substitute for veal, chicken and even beef in certain dishes.


Market Place; Morton Swirsky, financial officer, meet Morton Swirsky, the felon.
DUE diligence is one of those five-dollar Wall Street phrases that roughly translates to "we looked at this real hard." So, investors would think that with all the lawyers and investment bankers charged with doing just that for a public offering, someone would know whether or not an officer of a company is a convicted felon.
Not so with Hillside Bedding.
A purveyor of mattresses in the New York area, the company went public early this year with a senior management team that included Morton Swirsky, its chief financial officer and a director.
In the February prospectus, Mr.
Swirsky was described as a 50-year-old man who had spent much of his career with a kitchen-equipment maker.
Before that, it said, he was an accountant and had received a law degree from New York University.


Fidelity New York reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


National Health Labs Drops Tests After Medicare Dispute
National Health Laboratories Inc., which last year pleaded guilty to submitting false claims to the Government for unnecessary blood tests, said late Monday that it would remove two tests from its basic blood screen after Medicare carriers refused to pay for them.
The move, which the company said would result in substantially lower revenue and income, depressed National Health's shares, which lost $2.375 each today, closing at $13.125 on the New York Stock Exchange.
National Health of San Diego was the Big Board's leading loser for the day, declining 15.3 percent in value.


The Endless War
Bloody upheavals in Moscow and the Republic of Georgia have given outsiders a new appreciation of the lethal forces at play in the struggle to redefine the former Soviet Union.
But such insights scarcely qualify as news for the people of Nagorno-Karabakh, where thousands have died in fighting since Soviet rule there began to collapse in 1988.
Pitting a defiant Armenian enclave against ethnically Turkish Azerbaijan, which surrounds it, the Nagorno-Karabakh war has the tragic distinction of being the former Soviet Union's most prolonged and deadly internal dispute.
It has devastated major cities and displaced 500,000 people in a humanitarian disaster affecting Armenia, Azerbaijan, Russia, Turkey, Iran and Georgia.


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball  American League
CALIFORNIA ANGELS -- Placed Kurt Stillwell, infielder, on waivers for the purpose of giving him his unconditional release.


Ex-Official Is Convicted In HUD Scandal of 80's
The executive assistant to former Housing Secretary Samuel R. Pierce Jr., who found herself at the center of the influence-peddling scandal during the Reagan Administration, was convicted today of 12 felony counts of defrauding the Government, taking a bribe and lying to Congress.
For each of the 11 felony counts on which she was convicted, the aide, Deborah Gore Dean, faces a possible sentence of five years in prison and $250,000 in fines.
For a 12th count, receiving an illegal gratuity, Ms.
Dean faces a possible jail sentence of up to two years and a fine of up to $250,000.


Ranks of Forest Service Upset Over Choice for Leader
The Clinton Administration has stirred broad resentment in the ranks of the National Forest Service with a plan to name a political appointee, rather than a career forest manager, to head the agency, which is embroiled in politically sensitive disputes over the use of public woodlands.
Jack Ward Thomas, the government scientist favored for the job by the Agriculture Department, which manages the agency, has been with the forest service for 27 years.
But he is not among the ranks of senior managers from which the appointment would usually be drawn, and therefore would have to be promoted as a political appointee.


Envoy Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


2 Gang Leaders in Sarajevo Face Crackdown in Bosnia
After months of growing lawlessness and black-marketeering that had eroded morale here almost as much as Serbian bombardments, the Bosnian Government began a crackdown today on two reputed gangsters within its own armed forces, laying siege to their headquarters.
The operation paralyzed the city.
As the Government broadcast stay-at-home appeals to the city's population, now estimated by the United Nations at about 300,000, the two factions -- Government loyalists and supporters of the two renegade army commanders -- exchanged automatic rifle and mortar fire in crowded neighborhoods.


Redrawing the Map in Canada
The Liberal Party landslide in the Canadian elections was more like an avalanche.
The Progressive Conservatives, who ruled for the past nine years, took the worst pasting ever for a governing party; they lost 151 seats and will have only 2 in the new Parliament.
Meanwhile, two new regional parties scored huge gains.
It's a new political era for America's biggest trading partner and closest ally.
Jean Chretien, the Liberals' leader who now becomes prime minister, is a career politician, well known by his service in nine cabinet posts and comfortably familiar to the hierarchy of U.S. power and politics.
He's no Pierre Trudeau -- the last Liberal Prime Minister, outspoken and flamboyant.
But like Mr.
Trudeau, he hails from Quebec and is firmly opposed to Quebec separatism.


USX-MARATHON GROUP (N)
The USX-Marathon Group, the oil and gas company, reported a 25 percent increase in third-quarter net income even though sales fell by $400 million, to $3 billion.
Per-share earnings also rose 25 percent, to 10 cents from 8 cents in the corresponding period a year earlier.
Excluding the effects of inventory adjustments and a one-time charge, operating income for the Pittsburgh-based company was $131 million, up $72 million from the third quarter last year.


Four for the City Council
Unfortunately, because of the power of incumbency, few members of New York's City Council face strong challenges in next Tuesday's election.
Here are The Times's recommendations in a handful of races that are closely contested.
Manhattan, Fourth District (East Side, from Peter Cooper Village and Stuyvesant Town to Yorkville): This is a rematch between two qualified candidates, the Republican-Liberal Andrew Eristoff and Jane Crotty, a Democrat.
Mr.
Eristoff defeated Ms.
Crotty by a 57-vote margin out of 15,000 votes in February's special election, and since then he has served diligently.


U.S. Petroleum Data
In millions of barrels except refinery utilization
Oct. 22
Oct. 15
Oct. 23
1993
1993
1992
Gasoline production, daily
7.4
7.5
7.1
Distillate production, daily
3.6
3.5
3.2
Gasoline stocks
208.7
209.7
208.9
Distillate stocks
134.6
132.2
133.3
Crude imports, daily
6.7
7.5
6.3
Product imports, daily
2.0
1.9
1.8
Crude stocks
332.4
327.1
330.4
Crude production, daily
6.8
6.8
7.1
Refinery utilization (%)
91.7
93.7
89.2
Source: American Petroleum Institute


Tapes in Bombing Plot Show Informer and F.B.I. at Odds
The informer at the center of the Government's case in the plot to bomb New York City landmarks had a volatile relationship with his handlers, often quarreling with F.B.I. agents who used him to infiltrate a group of Muslim extremists who have been charged in the plot, according to transcripts of secretly taped conversations.
Transcripts of the hundreds of hours of tapes -- which were recorded by the informer, Emad A. Salem, without the knowledge of the F.B.I. -- were distributed to defense lawyers yesterday.
Although Judge Michael B. Mukasey ordered the lawyers to keep them secret, a copy of the transcripts was made available to The New York Times.


Stratus Computer Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


CLINTON SEES WAYS TO REDUCE COSTS
Reaching into a grab bag of leftover campaign promises, President Clinton today introduced legislation and signed executive orders that he said would cut the deficit, curb crime and streamline government.
Mr.
Clinton said the proposals could save $10 billion in the next fiscal year by eliminating or reducing wasteful programs while fulfilling his pledge to search for additional cuts in the budget.


Interstate/Johnson Lane reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Theater in Review
El Galan de la Telenovela (The Sexy Star of the Soap Opera)  Gramercy Arts Theater 138 East 27th Street Gramercy Park By Diana Raznovich; directed by Rene Buch; production designer, Robert Weber Federico; production supervisor, Manuel Herrera; technical director, Rigoberto Obando; assistant to the director, Rene Sanchez.
Presented by Repertorio Espanol, Gilberto Zaldivar, producer; Mr.
Buch, artistic director.
WITH: Ofelia Gonzalez, Ana Margarita Martinez-Casado and Ricardo Barber.
With the voices of Lilia Veiga, Juan Villarreal and Rene Sanchez.


Curtiss-Wright reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


French in Algeria Cautioned
The Foreign Ministry suggested today that many of the estimated 76,000 French citizens living in Algeria should consider taking the opportunity of a week's school vacation to leave the North African country after the kidnapping of three French diplomats and the killing last month of two French technicians.
Since Sept. 21, Muslim militants have begun to make foreigners a target in their violent campaign against Algeria's military-backed Government.


Capitol Hill Memo; On Liberties and Libertines: Furor Over Packwood Diary
Every Tuesday, the Senate Democrats and Republicans talk about the great issues of the day in separate private policy luncheons.
Today, they talked about sex.
More specifically, the senators discussed Senator Bob Packwood's diary and the Oregon Republican's none-too-subtle suggestion on the Senate floor on Monday that if he was forced to surrender it to the Ethics Committee it could reveal the sexual dalliances of other lawmakers.


Charlotte Is In, but Others Must Wait for Overtime
The National Football League, by unanimous vote of the owners of its 28 clubs, awarded a franchise tonight to Charlotte, N.C.
However, it put off until Nov. 30 the selection of a second expansion team.
St.
Louis and, to a lesser extent, Baltimore remain the leading candidates.
Memphis and Jacksonville, the two other bidders, are still underdogs to be voted into this exclusive fraternity.
Each new team will pay a franchise fee of $140 million and will start playing in 1995 after being stocked by an expansion draft of veteran players.


Germany Takes Steps On Neo-Nazi Hate
To the Editor:
"Germans Begin to Recognize Danger in Neo-Nazis' Surge" (front page, Oct. 21) states that Chancellor Helmut Kohl and other German leaders, after a long period of playing down neo-Nazi violence, have taken a sharper tone of condemnation.
They have also taken action.


Theater in Review
Yabba-Dabba-Q (Still Havin' a Gay Ol' Time)  Planet Q Theater  94 St.
Marks Place (near First Avenue) East Village Written and performed by Stephen Earley, Chrisanne Eastwood, Tony Javed, Veronica Mittenzwei, Eric Rockwell and Ann Stengel.
Music and lyrics written by Mr.
Rockwell and Ms.
Eastwood.
Directed by David Mowers.
Planet Q, the Queer Comedy Troupe, presented by Michael Hyman.


EASTERN COLLEGE REPORT
West Virginia
Last year's Syracuse-West Virginia game at Morgantown, W. Va., was marred by a fourth-quarter brawl among about 50 players as benches emptied.
The melee erupted after the Orange quarterback, Marvin Graves, was tackled roughly when he thought he was out of bounds.
He then threw the football at the face of the tackler, Tommy Orr.


Book Notes
A Blast From the Past
Its era has long since passed, but somewhere along the way "The Anarchist Cookbook," a step-by-step guide to making bombs at home that was written in the heat of the social upheaval of the early 1970's, became a cult classic.
Like the film "The Rocky Horror Picture Show," the "Cookbook" still has a healthy following and still sells steadily, mostly to college students and others longing for a bygone counterculture.
The book has recently passed a milestone, one all the more momentous when you consider that it took place in the relatively lawful 1990's.
Two weeks ago, its two-millionth copy was sold.


Quincy Savings Bank reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Christopher Praises Belarus on Nuclear Issue
Secretary of State Warren Christopher came to this capital of broad boulevards today and praised its leaders for taking "historic steps" to remove nuclear weapons from their territory.
His message was as much an embrace of Belarus as it was a signal to Ukraine, whose leaders told Mr.
Christopher on Monday that they were committed to making their country nuclear-free, but whose Parliament has not yet ratified the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty or agreed to adhere to the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.


Driverless Team
CAROLYN CARRIER, a spokeswoman for the BOBBY ALLISON racing team in Charlotte, N.C., said yesterday that JIMMY SPENCER, the team's only driver, had notified Allison he would depart at the end of the racing season to join JUNIOR JOHNSON's racing team.


Pamrapo Bancorp reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Core Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Kinark Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Defendant in Slaying Ruled Incompetent
More than two years after he was charged with killing a woman near her Upper West Side apartment, a mentally ill homeless man's roller-coaster ride through jails, courts and hospitals has taken another plunge, with the finding that he is not competent to stand trial.
The report by doctors at Bellevue Hospital Center, made public yesterday, means that Kevin McKiever, 36, will return to a state mental hospital, and it postpones indefinitely his trial for the June 8, 1991, slaying of Alexis Ficks Welsh.


Rollins Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


China Makes Trade Pact for Americas Urgent; Rethink the Agreement
To the Editor:
Giving in to the pie-in-sky hopes expressed by supporters of the North American Free Trade Agreement is not what I would expect of William Safire.
"Laughter After Nafta" (column, Oct. 21) is no joking matter for tens of thousands of American workers on unemployment lines today or heading toward them in the future.


Short Sales Outstanding Set a Record on Nasdaq
The bears keep betting that Nasdaq stock prices will tumble, but so far the bets are not paying off.
The National Association of Securities Dealers reported yesterday that a record 661.1 million shares of companies traded on Nasdaq had been borrowed and sold short as of Oct. 7, up 7 percent from the 618.1 million shares recorded a month earlier.
The figure was 43 percent higher than in October 1992.


Calm Over Trade Pact's Prospects
The victory of the Liberal Party in Canada's election on Monday has again put the spotlight on the future of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
The next Prime Minister, Jean Chretien, has said he wants to renegotiate the agreement to protect some Canadian exporters.
The possible objections from Canada provide an opportunity to ask what will happen in the bond market if the United States Congress rejects the agreement with Mexico.
A leading opponent of the agreement, David E. Bonior, a Democrat of Michigan, said yesterday that just 10 more votes were needed to get the 218 votes to defeat the trade pact.
Congress is scheduled to vote on it on Nov. 17.


ANB Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


A $4 Billion Supply Deal For Hospitals
American Healthcare Systems, one of the nation's largest hospital groups, and Baxter International Inc. said today that they had reached the health industry's largest supply agreement, projected to produce revenue of more than $4 billion for Baxter over the next five years.
The agreement covers medical and surgical supplies, heart and lung devices, and diagnostic instruments and chemicals, among other Baxter products.
It is a substantial pat on the back from one of Baxter's major customers at a time when Baxter, the world's largest hospital-supply company, has been financially stumbling.


Former G.O.P. Official Takes Stand to Deny Bribery Charges
Richard Foley Jr., the former Republican state chairman, took the witness stand today to deny allegations that he took $25,000 in bribes to persuade state lawmakers to shift their votes on a key piece of banking legislation.
"Never," said Mr.
Foley, a former state representative from Oxford, answering a series of questions put to him by his lawyer in Federal District Court here about allegations of bribery and filing false tax returns.


Energy Ventures Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BOK Financial Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Endless War
Bloody upheavals in Moscow and the Republic of Georgia have given outsiders a new appreciation of the lethal forces at play in the struggle to redefine the former Soviet Union.
But such insights scarcely qualify as news for the people of Nagorno-Karabakh, where thousands have died in fighting since Soviet rule there began to collapse in 1988.
Pitting a defiant Armenian enclave against ethnically Turkish Azerbaijan, which surrounds it, the Nagorno-Karabakh war has the tragic distinction of being the former Soviet Union's most prolonged and deadly internal dispute.
It has devastated major cities and displaced 500,000 people in a humanitarian disaster affecting Armenia, Azerbaijan, Russia, Turkey, Iran and Georgia.


Ameritech Picks Fallon McElligott
The Ameritech Corporation, the Midwest regional Baby Bell telephone company, said yesterday that it had selected Fallon McElligott in Minneapolis to handle its corporate advertising account.
Billings were estimated at $5 million to $10 million, but the company said that it was looking to increase spending to between $15 million to $20 million.
The account had been at Bayer Bess Vanderwarker in Chicago for the last five years until that agency was dismissed in July.
Steve Ford, an Ameritech spokesman in Chicago, said that Fallon was awarded the account after a two-month review that also included Cramer-Krasselt in Milwaukee, DDB Needham Chicago, Tatham Euro RSCG in Chicago and Wieden &amp; Kennedy in Portland, Ore.


Lintas Loses Another Client
In the third major blow in three weeks, Lintas New York yesterday was dismissed by Molson Breweries U.S.A., which moved its beer brands account to Young &amp; Rubicam Chicago.
While spending this year had been estimated at $10 million, it is expected to grow next year to exceed $40 million.
Molson began a review of its account in June, two months after the Miller Brewing Company acquired American marketing and distribution rights for the Molson and Foster's brands from the Molson Companies in Montreal; the Foster's brands continue to be handled by Riney, Angotti, Hedge in New York.


Challenge Within a Single Wire
In the public policy debate over the proposed merger of Bell Atlantic and Tele-Communications, the deal's proponents argue that the combined entity will provide robust new competition in communications markets outside Bell Atlantic's home region.
This argument seems to be based on the notion of two high-capacity wires or cables running into every home and business office, with the customer choosing which conduit to use for phone calls, electronic text, video, music or some multimedia info-marvel combining them all.


Mogadishu Tense as Rival Clan Fighting Subsides
Fierce fighting between rival clans subsided this evening, but the Somali capital remained tense after 30 hours of violence that reflected a new willingness by peacekeeping forces to let civil unrest in Somalia run its course.
The episode, in which at least 17 Somalis were killed, made clear just how limited a role the United States intends to play here before withdrawing its troops on March 31.
But it also raised questions about the usefulness of the American military mission.


In America; Violence in The State Of Denial
Altaf Quershi was a 27-year-old immigrant from Pakistan who was chasing the American dream in a yellow taxicab.
He drove the cab to hustle money for his education, carrying passengers over the pocked and rutted roads of the outer boroughs, hoping eventually to go to law school, or maybe the journalism school at Columbia.
He lived in Brooklyn and died in Queens, the victim of the flip side of the American dream, which is the American way of violence.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; Zebras and elephants and rhinoceroses, oh my! Land Rover aims at those going a bit off the road.
FORGET about the tiger that gasoline company once put in your tank.
Land Rover North America wants to fit the equivalent of a rhinoceros, elephant and herd of zebras into your garage.
In advertising that begins this week, Land Rover, Britain's purveyor of rugged, yet tony, transportation, is introducing North American consumers to the Defender 90, an open-top four-by-four vehicle meant to battle for the unofficial title of Most Virile Macho-mobile with the likes of the Chrysler Corporation's Jeep Wrangler.
The new entry, a two-door model powered by a V-8 engine, has a lower price tag -- lower for Land Rover that is -- with stickers starting at $27,900.


Lord Grimond, 80, Former Leader Of the Liberals, Is Dead in Britain
Lord Grimond, a charismatic leader of Britain's Liberal Party in the 1950's and 60's, died on Sunday in his home on the Orkney Islands, off the north coast of Scotland.
He was 80.
He died of a stroke, his family told The Associated Press.


GATX Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


The Zen of Cooking, Or Joy When Time Allows
FOR nearly a century, the food-processing industry has waged war against its bane, home cooking.
Canned goods and cake mixes, frozen foods and microwavable meals are foot soldiers in the battle against domestic drudgery, ready to break the shackles that tie Mr. and Ms.
Everyday to the home stove and to deliver everyone to a life of pleasurable leisure and ease.
With current technology, the sloppy, sometimes tedious and always time-consuming activity of cooking should be extinct.
But cooking won't go away.


U.S. HealthCare (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Amcast Industrial reports earnings for Qtr to Aug 31


Wine Talk
IT was Christmas in London a few years back.
Twenty or so Americans and a few British friends had gathered for dinner at a famous hotel.
There was splendid turkey, sparkling crystal and old English silver.
The waiters were in discreet black -- except for one fellow in powdered wig, silk knee breeches and a sky-blue tail coat.
He was the sommelier.


Sharks Are Eating Cable TV Customers
To the Editor:
The cable television industry has accomplished a remarkable feat over the last 15 years.


Proxy Fight Becomes War of Words
Forget those polite merger and takeover discussions, with only an occasional arched eyebrow or sneer disturbing the peace.
ICN Pharmaceuticals came out swinging yesterday at the California stockbroker who is trying to unseat its board.
In a full-page advertisement, the drug maker turned to language rarely seen outside of political campaigns to mount a savage attack on Rafi M. Khan, its current nemesis.


A Quarterback's Long, Winding Road
When someone asked Jake Kelchner whether he was intimidated by the prospect of playing Syracuse in the Carrier Dome on Saturday night, the West Virginia quarterback chuckled.
His mind wandered, he recalled, and his thoughts drifted back a few years to his senior year at Berwick (Pa.) High, when he saw the Dome during an unofficial visit.


Water on the Sidewalk
To the Editor:
New York City's reservoir levels are below 50 percent and below average for this time of year.
Yet early every morning millions of gallons of water are wasted as city sidewalks are hosed down by porters in front of co-ops, condominiums and storefronts.
The odd leaf is chased away by enough water for a bath; a cigarette butt with enough for a shower.
Whatever happened to brush and pan?
Let's stop, or at least restrict, this waste.
MICHAEL SINGER  New York, Oct. 20, 1993


Hurdle for Mideast Talks: The Palestinians Abroad
For many Palestinians, it is one of the more emotion-laden among the many complex issues that have landed on the Israel-P.L.O. bargaining table.
For many Israelis, it is a human time bomb waiting to blow up in their faces.
Despite these widely differing hopes and fears, Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization agree that if their month-old accord on Palestinian self-rule is to work, they must figure out what to do about the hundreds of thousands of Palestinian refugees living outside the borders of Israel and the occupied territories.


Cordis Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Going Private -- A special report; Mexico Sells Off State Companies, Reaping Trouble as Well as Profit
When Mexico first said it was going to sell off or shut down its vast network of Government-run businesses, many people were skeptical, thinking they had heard such promises before from third-world governments that ran bloated industrial bureaucracies.
A decade later, Mexico is nearing the end of one of the most sweeping sales of state companies in the world.
In all, the Government has sold or dissolved more than 80 percent of the 1,155 businesses it once ran.


Review/Dance; Waging War With Death, Loss and the Forces of Fate
The dancing was vigorous, yet the overall mood was elegiac when the Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company performed on Saturday night at the Joyce Theater.
Mr.
Jones concerned himself with mortality and loss, and showed people trying to master their fates, but finding themselves controlled by forces beyond them.
Two pieces by Mr.
Jones were new to his company's repertory.
The title of ". . . And the Maiden," a world premiere, refers to the allegorical theme of Death and the Maiden, which has inspired countless paintings, music, literary works and dances over the years.


Defendant in Slaying Ruled Incompetent
More than two years after he was charged with killing a woman near her Upper West Side apartment, a mentally ill homeless man's roller-coaster ride through jails, courts and hospitals has taken another plunge, with the finding that he is not competent to stand trial.
The report by doctors at Bellevue Hospital Center, made public yesterday, means that Kevin McKiever, 36, will return to a state mental hospital, and it postpones indefinitely his trial for the June 8, 1991, slaying of Alexis Ficks Welsh.





Longhorn Steaks (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Howard Joins Mets as Coach
The Mets completed the easiest stage of their colossal rebuilding task with the announcement yesterday of their reworked coaching staff.
Frank Howard, manager of the Mets for 116 games in 1983 and the first-base coach for the Yankees for the last three seasons, will serve as first-base coach under Dallas Green in 1994.
Greg Pavlick, the longtime organizational pitching instructor, was named to succeed Mel Stottlemyre as the club's pitching coach.
Steve Swisher, the Class AA manager at Binghamton last season, will be the bullpen coach.


Consolidated Edison Co. of New York Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Conciliatory Giuliani Asks City to 'Come Together'
Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday struck a chord of conciliation, cooperation and hope.
Moving away from the bitterness and vituperation that have dominated the mayoral race for months, he urged New Yorkers to "come together," to cast aside blind party loyalties, racial and ethnic stereotypes and labels of all kinds to usher in a "new era" in New York City politics.
"We don't want anybody to vote because of racial pride or ethnic pride or religious pride," he said.
"A long time ago we decided we want people's votes because they agree that we can do a better job."


Puerto Rico Takes Lead With School Vouchers, And Feels the Arrows
As the rest of the nation continues to debate using school vouchers, Puerto Rico is plunging ahead with a month-old experimental voucher program that has already provoked threats of an islandwide teachers' strike as early as next week.
The legislation, passed on Sept. 3, is intended to "expand the options of parents and students with regard to the selection of schools," said Education Secretary Jose Arsenio Torres, and to "offer economic incentives to public schools to improve their course offerings."


Northern Telecom Ltd.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dataflex Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


No Headline
"This move today by the Japanese Government is welcome, it is important, it is significant, and it's historic." -- MICKEY KANTOR, the United States trade representative.  [ A1:3. ]


For the Poll Watcher, How to Sift Results
According to the three latest polls David N. Dinkins: a) leads Rudolph W. Giuliani in the contest for mayor by 9 percentage points, or b) holds only the most tenuous lead of 6 points, a statistical tie, or c) is behind Mr. Giuliani by 3 percentage points, also a statistical tossup.
You can take your pick.
Or throw your hands up in understandable confusion and consternation.


Puzzle of Appointees
With a week before voters must choose between them, New York City's mayoral candidates -- Mayor David N. Dinkins and his challenger, Rudolph W. Giuliani -- steadfastly refuse to discuss appointees.


AMC Entertainment Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Mets' Path From Cellar Through Infield
The Mets enter the off season. Call it: How the bazaar looks from the basement.
"It's become somewhat fashionable to go from worst to first in baseball lately," said Joe McIlvaine, the general manager of the Mets, the club that finished with the worst record in baseball in 1993.
"But it's still a lot of work."


A New Television Series Becomes Foreman's Food for Thought
"Lunch!" says the director, and the entire set is in a footrace for finger food.
"You coming, George?"


CHRONICLE
MARIAN WRIGHT EDELMAN, founder and president of the Children's Defense Fund, could hardly have found a more articulate ally for her cause than Attorney General JANET RENO.
The two women came to town yesterday for a luncheon given by ANNE SUTHERLAND FUCHS, publisher of Vogue magazine, to acquaint the worlds of fashion, retailing and society with the Children's Defense Fund.
Mrs.
Edelman introduced the Attorney General to the crowd at the National Academy of Design in Manhattan by reeling off a list of statistics about the various ways children's lives are damaged: by abuse, neglect, dropping out, teen-age pregnancy, drugs, alcoholism and gun use.
"I can't tell you what it means to have an attorney general who's a big, big children's advocate," Mrs.
Edelman said.


New Polish Premier Assumes His Office; Walesa Has Doubts
With a warning from President Lech Walesa not to squander the past four years of movement toward a market economy, Poland's new Prime Minister, the leader of a former Communist party, was sworn in today along with a 20-member Cabinet.
The new Prime Minister, Waldemar Pawlak, 34, who was described recently by Mr.
Walesa as not being up to the job, responded to the President's admonition by saying his Government would contribute to the "growth trend."


Panel to Hear Findings on Pratt &amp; Whitney
Congressional aides said today that they would present evidence on Wednesday that the Pratt &amp; Whitney division of the United Technologies Corporation knowingly participated in a kickback scheme to sell jet engines and computer software to Israel.
An investigation by the General Accounting Office has found that from 1986 to 1991 officials of Pratt &amp; Whitney and the Israeli Ministry of Defense "facilitated" the diversion of $12.5 million of United States military funds through an overpricing scheme, the aides said.


Two Charged With Burying Newborn Alive
Two months after Urbelina Emiliano told her new husband that she was pregnant with another man's child, the couple took the newborn girl and buried her alive in a hole in their backyard, the Nassau County police said today.
Ms.
Emiliano, 23, and her husband, Fortino Perez, 28, both of Hempstead, were arraigned this afternoon on charges of second-degree murder, after the police exhumed an infant's body outside the couple's former home.
They are being held without bail.


Books of The Times; The Minstrel Tradition: Not Just a Racist Relic
Love and Theft  Blackface Minstrelsy and The American Working Class  By Eric Lott  314 pages.
Oxford University Press. $24.95.
Of course the recent blackface colboration between Ted Danson and Whoopi Goldberg at the Friars Club knocked Somalia off the front page: culture wars on the home front leave no civilians untouched.
Entertainment and politics are both about power, and entertainment is a lot more fun.
All of which is at the heart of Eric Lott's terrifically smart and unexpectedly timely study of blackface minstrelsy.
Rightly, he sees it as a crucial source for, and form of, popular culture.
It was big business.
It was a riot of ethnic and regional styles.
And it was a psychic map that traced and exposed its fans' curiosity about the boundaries between races, classes and sexes.


JSB Financial Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Harold Rome, 85, Writer of Socially Pointed Songs
Harold J. Rome, who wrote witty, often socially pointed songs for Broadway shows that included "Pins and Needles," "Wish You Were Here," "Fanny," "Destry Rides Again" and "I Can Get It for You Wholesale," died yesterday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 85.
The cause was complications from a stroke, said his son, Joshua.


Consumer Confidence Drops
The widely followed Conference Board consumer confidence index fell sharply this month, declining to 59.4 points in October from 63.8 in September.
Although the business research group's survey rattled stock investors and knocked the dollar down, economists do not see it as a persuasive sign that consumers are about to retrench.
For one thing, two other respected confidence surveys suggest that consumer spirits -- though far from buoyant -- are rising a bit, not declining.
The University of Michigan's index, regarded as a somewhat less volatile gauge than the Conference Board's, perked up in the first half of this month, jumping to 83.1 from 77.9.


James Collins, 45, Christian Brother And Administrator
Brother James X. Collins, director of development and former professor of anthropology at Manhattan College, died on Saturday at Lenox Hill Hospital.
He was 45 and lived in a Christian Brothers' residence in Riverdale.
The cause was complications from lymphoma, the college said.


U.S. IN QUIET TALKS WITH NORTH KOREA
In unpublicized talks aimed at ending an impasse over international supervision of North Korea's nuclear program, United States and North Korean officials meeting in New York have discussed steps toward cancellation of war games conducted by United States and South Korean forces and the possibility of eventual American diplomatic recognition of the North, Government officials and private citizens say.
The discussions, a new channel of communication between Washington and the Communist Government in Pyongyang, were joined two weeks ago by North Korea's principal arms control negotiator, Choi U Jin, the officials and citizens said.


Greyhound Lines Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
A picture caption yesterday about a visit to a housing project in Queens by Mayor David N. Dinkins and Senator Edward M. Kennedy misstated the first name of Mr.
Kennedy's wife in some copies.
She is Victoria Reggie Kennedy.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.94
3.17
2.91
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.07
3.08
2.93
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.17
3.19
3.18
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.95
4.99
6.31
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.98
6.00
7.61
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.02
7.03
8.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.43
5.43
6.71
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Varian Associates reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 1


Audio King reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Edward Joseph Maude; Banker, 69
Edward Joseph Maude, a former chairman and chief executive of the United Mutual Savings Bank in Manhattan, died on Oct. 13 at his home in New Bern, N.C.
He was 69 and had lived in Montclair, N.J., until 1987.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Looking Ahead at Dinkins Cabinet
As he campaigns for a second term, Mayor David N. Dinkins steadfastly refuses to talk about what his second administration would look like, though it is clear at City Hall that he would, if re-elected, probably have to find successors for his two most important aides as well as improve the overall management of his government.
Some senior advisers say Mr.
Dinkins thinks that some commissioners may need to be replaced, or, as one put it, that "he's got to tighten up the bolts in some places." Whether Mr.
Dinkins, who has long shown a reluctance to dismiss people, would ask for the resignation of some of his less-than-stellar commissioners is a matter of debate within the administration.


Islanders End Slump With a Scoring Flurry
The Islanders burst out of their slump tonight and ended a five-game streak without winning with an impressive 7-0 thumping of the Los Angeles Kings at the Coliseum.
The Kings, a Stanley Cup finalist last spring, put on a lethargic display, losing for the third consecutive time on a grueling road trip.
Ron Hextall, the Islander goalie who has been off to a slow start, stopped 38 Los Angeles shots and got support from the 11,417 fans, a stark difference from the booing and sarcastic cheering he has heard in recent weeks.
Derek King and Steve Thomas each scored twice, and the power-play unit scored four times.


Review/Rock; A Reviving of Psychedelia, With a Purist's Approach
Even the most dedicated observers have probably lost count of rock's psychedelic revivals.
Since the punk-rock revolution, psychedelia has kept reappearing.
Over the last decade it has taken forms from the whimsical rock songs of Julian Cope and Robyn Hitchcock to the long-winded jams of Blues Traveler and the Spin Doctors to the synthetic soundscapes of the Orb.
Now the music provides a double escape: into druggy altered perceptions and often back to the fondly remembered 1960's.
Verve, an English band that performed on Friday night at Irving Plaza, makes its acid-rock revival an exercise in purism, harking back to Pink Floyd circa 1968.
Nick McCabe played his guitar through reverb and echo devices that made the songs toll and ripple and ooze; the tempos were slow and somber.
And Richard Ashcroft, looking every bit the psychedelic poster icon with his center-parted shoulder-length hair and rail-thin body, danced with bursts of manic energy and sang lines like, "Hello, it's me, crying out, crying out, are you there?" or "No one cares, no one sees me." Now and then he allowed himself a falsetto whoop that suggested Led Zeppelin's Robert Plant.
Behind the band, screens showed slides of things like faces, pyramids and handwritten lyrics.


Patrick's Name Is Engraved on the Bench
Brian Leetch has been benched on several occasions, Mike Richter was replaced in goal six minutes into a game, and many other Rangers have been criticized for underachieving by their new coach, Mike Keenan.
But for all Keenan's pep talks, tirades and disciplinary tactics, no player on the Rangers has drawn his wrath more than veteran defenseman James Patrick.
He is buried so deep in Keenan's doghouse that he has already been scratched from the lineup in four of New York's first 10 games.


Dr. Kevin D. Dowling, Surgery Professor, 61
Dr.
Kevin D. Dowling, former chairman of the department of orthopedic surgery at St.
Francis Hospital in Hartford, and a clinical professor of surgery at the University of Connecticut, died on Monday at his home in West Hartford.
He was 61.
The cause was cancer, according to a spokesman for the university.


Term-Limit Foes Counterattack
As supporters of the referendum that would limit New York City's elected officials to two four-year terms continued an expensive television blitz, opponents began their counterattack yesterday with a rally of union and civic leaders on the steps of City Hall.
And with only a week before the referendum, Proposal 4, goes before voters, the organizers of the opposition acknowledged that, short of time and money, they would not be able to do much more to spread their message.


Ogilvy &amp; Mather Wins Echo Awards
Ogilvy &amp; Mather Direct in New York took top honors, winning six awards, at the 64th annual International Echo Awards competition sponsored by the Direct Marketing Association.
At a ceremony this week in Toronto, during the association's annual conference, Ogilvy won one silver and five bronze awards.
Orsatti &amp; Parrish in Boston followed with three awards: one silver and two bronze.


Review/Music; Students and Stars With Joint Impact
The finale of the Fiddlefest concert at Carnegie Hall on Monday evening was a reminder that the professional music world, the parade of stars and contenders who tread the boards night after night, is only part of the picture.
After two hours of performances by famous classical, jazz and country fiddlers, 14 students from East Harlem public schools shared music stands with their starry elders and collaborated on a heartwarming performance of a Bach concerto movement.
The students study with Roberta Guaspari-Tzavaras, a violinist whose public-school music program was canceled in a round of budget cuts but who persuaded her school board to let her continue to teach as long as she found her salary elsewhere.
Her solution was to solicit corporate and private donations to start the Opus 118 Music Center, through which she teaches 130 students ages 6 to 13.


United Illuminating reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Hadareni Journal; Death Is a Neighbor, and the Gypsies Are Terrified
Charred remains of houses burned to the ground line the Transylvanian road between Tirgu Mures and Cluj, which passes through this village.
They are visible reminders of the violence that ravaged it one month ago.
Less noticeable are other dwellings that at a glance look like the ordinary peasant homes of this impoverished country -- windows broken, doors awry, dilapidated but habitable.
Their real devastation is apparent only to those who stop and look.


Worthen Banking reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Administration Backs Race-Based Scholarships
The Clinton Administration has filed a legal brief supporting a race-based scholarship program at the University of Maryland, a departure from the Reagan and Bush Administrations' caution about such aid.
The case was brought in 1990 by a student who was told he could not apply for a full, four-year scholarship under the university's Banneker Program because he is not black.
The student, Daniel Podberesky, who is Hispanic, argued that he qualified in every way but color and that the restrictive policy was unconstitutional.


L.S.B. Bancshares (S.C.) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Kerr-McGee Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


United Air Plans For 2-Tier Wages
The low-fare carrier proposed by United Airlines carries the code-name Friendship Express and would be run by unionized workers paid lower wages than other United employees, according to a confidential company document.
The two-tier wage system is a key factor in the carrier's effort to reverse losses on many short-haul routes where it competes against Southwest Airlines, which has lower operating costs.


Juror in Denny Case Recounts Stress and an Obsession With Detail
Feeling the weight of a city's fears and tensions, jurors in the case of two men who beat a truck driver during last year's riots focused obsessively on minute details, spending hours dissecting the meanings of words and points of law and sometimes losing sight of a larger picture.
This sense of the three weeks of intense deliberations emerged from a late-night interview on Monday with the youngest of the jurors, a 22-year-old white woman whose mother said she had never before been forced to make difficult decisions like this.


WMS Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Greiner Engineering reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Brooklyn Students Have Breakfast, and a Special Guest


Interactive TV Pact for Sony
Interactive Network Inc. said today that it had named the Sony Pictures Entertainment TV Group as the first Hollywood producer for its subscription-based interactive television service.
Interactive Network, based in Los Angeles, is the only interactive television system now operating in the United States.
The subscription-based system allows television viewers to interact directly with television game shows and with sports, news, talk, prime-time and educational programs.
The service is available in Chicago; Sacramento, Calif., and the San Francisco Bay area.


Chemed Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bell Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge BYL&gt;By Alan Truscott; A less than perfect defense is unraveled much as the lowly winkle is untwisted.
A humble shellfish much favored by London cockneys is the winkle, which can be coaxed from its convoluted home with the aid of a pin.
The bridge winkle is an equally convoluted creature that can be brought into the daylight by a skillful declarer without a pin.
An example, with slightly imperfect defense, is the diagramed deal from a Stratified Mixed Pairs Championship at the Summer Nationals in Washington in July.
North and South were Mary and David Price of Toronto, who reached three no-trump with a brisk auction.
West had to guess which red suit to lead, and guessed wrong by leading a diamond.


Peter Schifter Memorial
A memorial service for Peter Mark Schifter, the theater, opera and television director, who died at 44 on Sept. 10, will be held on Friday at 3:30 P.M. at the Helen Hayes Theater at 240 West 44th Street in Manhattan.


USX-U.S. Steel Group reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Assignments for 3 Times Critics
Three critics at The New York Times were appointed to new positions yesterday by Max Frankel, the executive editor.
David Richards was named the chief theater critic, Janet Maslin the chief film critic and Vincent Canby the Sunday theater critic.
The appointments will take effect on Dec. 1.


Hogan Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Executive Changes
NEUTROGENA CORP., Los Angeles, a manufacturer of skin care and hair care products, promoted Sheldon L. Zimbler, its executive vice president, to president of the United States division.
PROXYMED PHARMACY INC., Pembroke Pines, Fla., appointed Bennett Marks executive vice president for finance and chief financial officer.


INSIDE
Charlotte Gets N.F.L. Team
The National Football League awarded an expansion team to Charlotte, N.C., but put off until Nov. 30 a decision on a second team.
Page B9. 5th TV Network Planned
Paramount and Chris-Craft will jointly start a fifth broadcast television network.
The first program will be a new "Star Trek" series.
Page D1.
Gunman Kills 3 in Egypt
Two employees of the Brooklyn Union Gas Company were among three people killed by a man shooting at tourists in a hotel in cairo.
Page A3.


Another Big Block by Roy: The Devils' Unbeaten Streak
The first loss for the Devils came tonight.
It came after seven victories to open the season.
It came in a 2-0 shutout.
Worse, it came at the artful hands of the Montreal Canadiens, the team the Devils so desperately wanted to beat for several reasons.
The foremost reason was that Coach Jacques Lemaire and his assistant, Larry Robinson, are two Canadien legends who are in their first season with the Devils.
Then there was the fact that Montreal is the defending Stanley Cup champion and had last spring's most valuable player in the playoffs, Patrick Roy, in goal tonight at the Byrne Meadowlands Arena.


Debut of Railroad's Shares Roils Tokyo Stock Market
After months of careful planning by the Government, the stock market debut on Tuesday of JR East, the huge Government-controlled railroad, set off a speculative frenzy that nearly paralyzed the Tokyo Stock Exchange on Tuesday and again on Wednesday morning, while sending the overall market tumbling.
On Tuesday investors sold off other shares to purchase the newly listed JR East, pushing the Nikkei 225-stock market index down 285.73 points, or 1.4 percent, to 20,023.60.
The turmoil grew worse early Wednesday, with the surge of buy orders for JR East disrupting the Tokyo Stock Exchange's computers.


Community Health Systems Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


I Dreamed of Rats Alley And Found Collectibles
THIS is for the microfilm, for posterity, for future generations of anthropologists and social historians who may want to take note that in the last decade of the 20th century at least two stores in New York City were selling human skeletons and bones, apparently for decorative purposes, not just in this Halloween season, but year round.
At Evolution, a store at 120 Spring Street in SoHo, there is one skeleton near the door with a sign that says "Homo Sapiens, Provenance: India $3,700." The proprietor, Bill Stevens, said the specimen died in the last 20 years.
A second human skeleton, dating back to Victorian times, bore a price tag of $2,800.
It's provenance is given as China.


G.M. Tells Plant It Will Delay Date Of Closing
General Motors gave its car assembly plant in North Tarrytown, N.Y., a brief reprieve yesterday, saying it would continue operating as much as a year beyond its scheduled 1995 closing date.
But G.M. said that it still planned to close the plant as soon as full production of a 1996 mini-van model began elsewhere, and that employment at North Tarrytown until then would depend on sales of the Chevrolet Lumina, Oldsmobile Silhouette and Pontiac Transport mini-vans assembled there.


BUSINESS DIGEST
International
Trade sanctions were deferred by the United States after Japan agreed to open its public construction market.  [ Page A1. ]


Greyhound Canada reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Graham Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Boston Globe Places Account in Review
The Boston Globe and its agency, Hill, Holliday, Connors, Cosmopulos in Boston, said yesterday that after 15 years, they had mutually decided to part ways.
As a result, the newspaper's account, with billings estimated at $4 million, has been placed in review.


R.H. Park, 83, Media Executive And Promoter of Duncan Hines
Roy Hampton Park, who built a media empire from a fortune he made in the food business, died on Monday night at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center.
He was 83 and lived in Ithaca, N.Y., the base of his enterprise.
The cause was cardiac arrest, said Jack Claiborne of Park Communications Inc., of which Mr.
Park was the chairman, chief executive and 90-percent owner.


Puerto Rico Takes Lead With School Vouchers, And Feels the Arrows
As the rest of the nation continues to debate using school vouchers, Puerto Rico is plunging ahead with a month-old experimental voucher program that has already provoked threats of an islandwide teachers' strike as early as next week.
The legislation, passed on Sept. 3, is intended to "expand the options of parents and students with regard to the selection of schools," said Education Secretary Jose Arsenio Torres, and to "offer economic incentives to public schools to improve their course offerings."


Review/Film; East Berlin in Gloom-Tinted Glasses
Some of the most telling moments in Peter Kahane's film "The Architects," a somber, finely drawn portrait of life in East Berlin in the final days of the Communist regime, are long panning shots of the city's ugly, factorylike public housing.
Shot from moving cars, these views of block after block of anonymous rectangular buildings evoke a joyless environment in which the imagination is systematically stifled and where people live in a state of chronic, low-grade depression.
The film depicts this society's grinding down of Daniel Brenner (Kurt Naumann), an idealistic architect in his late 30's.
Daniel, like many others of his generation, is deeply frustrated by life under the Communists but somehow tolerates it.
Hired to design a miniature city on the fringe of Berlin, he fools himself into thinking that he can counteract the prevailing gloom with a cheerier, more innovative approach.
Working with a hand-picked team of friends who were classmates in architecture school, he comes up with a design that incorporates rooftop gardens and modern sculptures and that has architectural variety and generous breathing space.


Texas Utilities reports earnings for 12mos to Sept 30


Leona Helmsley Continues Her Sentence in Manhattan Halfway House


Two Charged With Burying Newborn Alive
Two months after Urbelina Emiliano told her new husband that she was pregnant with another man's child, the couple took the newborn girl and buried her alive in a hole in their backyard, the Nassau County police said today.
Ms.
Emiliano, 23, and her husband, Fortino Perez, 28, both of Hempstead, were arraigned this afternoon on charges of second-degree murder, after the police exhumed an infant's body outside the couple's former home.
They are being held without bail.


Amtrol Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


P. S.A.T. Jitters
To the Editor:
Educators are exasperated that students seem to be under pressure to prepare for the Preliminary Scholastic Assessment Test.
But one must remember that National Merit Scholarships are awarded to students who achieve the highest scores on the P.S.A.T., and this is what prompts so many -- especially those who expect to do well -- to prepare for it so assiduously, and for their parents to pay for courses, videos or whatever might help.
SHEILA RIZZO  Tenafly, N.J., Oct. 20, 1993


Williams Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Commerical Bank of New York reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Seaboard Corp.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 11


Wolverine Tube reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Buffets Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 6


Chevron Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


First Financial Bancorp Fla. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Taxi Drivers Stage Protest Against Violent Crime


McDermott International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Chicago &amp; North Western Holdings Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cliffs Drilling (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Auto Plant Closings in Japan
The Mazda Motor Corporation and the Nissan Motor Company said today that they would shut all or part of their operations for two days next month to reduce inventories and save money.
Workers, however, will still get 90 percent of their pay for days they are idled.
In Japan, where the lifetime employment tradition means full-time workers are rarely dismissed, even a two-day shutdown attests to the problems of Japan's auto industry.
Mazda and Nissan have had particularly heavy losses.


AT WORK WITH: Trip Hawkins; A Visionary On the Border Of Movies And Microchips
ON the day word got out that the Bell Atlantic phone company would buy the cable giant Tele-Communications Inc., offering a grand vista of a data superhighway coming to town around the turn of the century, a glimpse into that future was on display in a meeting room in a San Francisco hotel.
Trip Hawkins, founder and president of the 3DO Company, a Silicon Valley start-up, was demonstrating a piece of hardware that he hopes is the forerunner of the "smart box" that will be in homes in the coming interactive age.
That is, the day when we will all talk back to our televisions, renting movies by remote control, grazing news broadcasts and, should we admire Connie Chung's zircon earrings, buying a pair after pressing the "shop" button.


Premier Anesthesia (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Senate Bill to Extend Jobless Aid Is Defeated as the G.O.P. Prevails
The Senate voted unexpectedly today to kill an emergency program that gives unemployed Americans an extra 7 to 13 weeks of benefits when their normal six months of checks run out.
Legislators later said, however, that they hoped the measure could be reconsidered and passed this week.
Democrats said they planned to negotiate with Republican opponents over the issue that killed the measure: how to find the $1.1 billion needed to pay for the program.


Devon Group (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Invacare Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Crowded Court Calendar Drives New York County Jury System
To the Editor:
Those of us who supervise the jury system in New York County are sensitive to complaints about jury service and have inaugurated measures to accommodate the time burdens affecting a large segment of citizens called for jury service.


Idea of Using National Guard to Help Police Draws Disdain
Mayor Sharon Pratt Kelly's notion of using National Guard troops to help combat the escalating crime in the nation's capital is drawing little support and some ridicule from mayors, police chiefs and Guard commanders around the country.
Most say they have never given serious thought to using Guard troops in a police capacity, no matter how bad crime rates were, because of both practical and political reasons.


ServiceMaster L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Phillips Petroleum Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Vanguard Cellular Systems (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Corrections
An obituary on Sunday about Frank J. Del Giudice, an industrial designer who died on Oct. 17, omitted a surviving son.
He is Peter of Plains, Mont.


For Giuliani, an Unusual Opportunity to Change the Whole Face of City Hall
When Rudolph W. Giuliani speaks of how he would govern, he often refers to Fiorello H. La Guardia, the Depression-era fusion Republican who threw out the Democratic clubhouse and brought in as advisers an eclectic mix of Republicans, Socialists, New Dealers and even a vice president of Macy's.
And in many ways Mr.
Giuliani could be just as free to cast a broad net as Mr.
La Guardia was half a century ago.
For if the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor surges to victory on Nov. 2, his election would mark the first time in two decades that Democrats had lost control of City Hall, giving Mr.
Giuliani a rare opportunity to change the face of city government radically and to bring new people to the 1,500 jobs under the control of the Mayor.


Alliance by Anti-Aristide Forces and Flight by Fearful Lawmakers May Doom Pact
A proposal by Haitian legislators to settle this country's political stalement appeared close to collapse today when gunmen staked out Parliament and many deputies, fearing for their lives, refused to enter the building.
The proposal, which includes the simultaneous passage of two bills to implement the political settlement negotiated in July, was further undermined when the conservative legislators who sponsored the bills joined the Army in denouncing the United Nations.


Nalco Chemical reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Tops Appliance City Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Review/Music; Mystical, Minimal And Now Onstage
The most famous piece of art music in the world today is probably Henryk Gorecki's Symphony No. 3.
It has been recorded at least three times, and on Elektra/Nonesuch the 17-year-old, hourlong work for soprano and orchestra has been the No. 1 classical album for much of this year, on British and American charts.
It has also made its way onto the pop charts, and has sold over half a million copies.
But this piece and others by this Polish composer have not been a major presence on the concert scene until now.
On Sunday night at Merkin Concert Hall, the pianist David Arden presented the American premiere of Mr.
Gorecki's First Piano Sonata along with his Four Preludes (Op. 1), which were written in the mid-1950's and are startlingly unmystical, containing robust toccatalike passages that recall Chopin's Scherzos or the music of Szymanowski.


CHRONICLE
LEONARD STABB, the soap opera actor who was severely injured in a hang-gliding accident last summer, loves his dog, Girl, the taste of brownies and the Spin Doctors.
So for a party to help pay his long-term expenses, his friends have put a picture of the dog on the invitation, plan to serve brownies and will play the Spin Doctors' music.
Mr.
Stabb, 29, who played Hart Jessup in "The Guiding Light," was hang gliding in Ellenville, N.Y., on July 31 when he hit a tree.
He suffered traumatic brain injury and remained in a coma for about six weeks at the Westchester County Medical Center in Valhalla, N.Y., said a friend, GRACE PHILLIPS.
He is now in a long-term rehabilitation center in Connecticut.


AMP Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


John W. Moxon, 87, Steel Company Head
John W. Moxon, the former president of the Carpenter Steel Corporation of Reading, Pa., who was active in philanthropy, local government and community agencies, died on Sunday at his home in Oley, Pa.
He was 87.
His family said his death followed a stroke.


Motorola's Chairman Will Head Kodak; Sudden Departure Comes as a Shock
George M. C. Fisher's decision today to take on the challenge of running Eastman Kodak sent shock waves today through Motorola Inc., the company Mr.
Fisher has led through a period of explosive growth and record profitability.
"I just read about it on our E-mail," said one Motorola corporate officer, referring to the electronic mail message that alerted him to the news late this afternoon.
"I was stunned." So, he said, was the senior Motorola official he was talking to on the telephone when he read the message.


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Costa Upsets Sampras in Sweden  Carlos Costa upset Pete Sampras, the world's No. 1 player, last night, 7-6 (7-1), 2-6, 6-1, in the second round of the $1.65 million Stockholm Open.
Sampras had seven double faults against Costa, a Spaniard ranked 30th in the world, who pounded 11 aces.
In other matches, Stefan Edberg beat Swedish countryman Henrik Holm, 7-5, 6-1, in a serve-and-volley duel; Anders Jarryd dropped No. 7 Andrei Medvedev of Ukraine, 6-1, 4-6, 6-0. (AP) HOCKEY  Drake Leads Detroit Past Los Angeles  Detroit snapped the Los Angeles Kings' four-game winning streak at Joe Louis Arena as Dallas Drake had two goals and an assist in the Red Wings' 8-3 home victory last night.
Drake's goals sparked a four-goal outburst in the second period for the Red Wings, who fought back from a 2-0 deficit. (AP)


Banta Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


French Air Strike Challenges Travelers


The Jets' High-Octane Offense Is Hearing Knocks and Pings
Bills linebacker Darryl Talley, playing the percentages last Sunday, stepped in front of a pass that Jets quarterback Boomer Esiason threw to tight end James Thornton and the linebacker returned the interception 61 yards for a game-breaking touchdown.
After the game, Talley said he figured the Jets were going to run the play because he had seen it quite a bit during film study the week before and he hadn't seen it yet that day.


A Singular Victorian House With at Least Eight Views
BUILT in 1872, the 6,000-square-foot octagonal house in Irvington, N.Y., looks like something out of a Victorian fairy tale.
Among its features are a two-story dome topped with an observatory, two curvilinear staircases and a cast-iron railing, an etched-glass solarium, a three-room master suite and seven additional bedrooms.
Now it and its three acres can be yours for $2.8 million.


7 Cases: What the White House Says
President Clinton yesterday submitted his health care legislation to Congress, accompanied by a report to the country summarizing the proposal.
A series of hypothetical examples outline the current and projected costs of insurance coverage for a number of families or individuals in varying circumstances.
Here are excerpts from the report, with White House's description and cost estimates.
TWO-PARENT FAMILY YEARLY COST TO FAMILY NOW: Mary Sampson manages a small law office in San Jose, California.
She makes $35,000 a year.
Her husband, a minister, makes $30,000 a year.
Today, they get their coverage through Mary's employer, who pays half their premium.
They pay $2,940 a year, 8 percent of her salary, for their health care premiums alone, not including co-payments and deductibles.
CLINTON PLAN: Assuming they choose an average-priced plan, the premium for Mary Sampson and her husband will be around $872 a year, or $73 a month.
They could choose a higher cost plan, which would cost them more, or a 1ower cost plan, which would cost them less.
COUPLE WITH PRE-EXISTING CONDITIONS NOW: Dennis and Barbara Rutherford, who live in Hannibal, Missouri have a combined income of $21,200.
Dennis was laid off from his high paying job with a large manufacturing firm in late 1990.
At that time, both Rutherfords lost their health care coverage.
They have been turned down for other coverage because of preexisting conditions -- Dennis' high blood pressure and Barbara's history of breast cancer.
Since then, they have been unable to afford the $9,000 a year ($750 a month) premium offered by the only plan that will accept
them.
CLINTON PLAN: If Dennis and Barbara enrolled in an average priced plan, they would pay 20 percent of the $3,865 annual premium for a couple -- $773 a year, or $64 a month.
SINGLE PARENT WITH SICK CHILD NOW: Sara Bender, a 28-year-old broadcast journalist, lives in Columbus, Ohio, and makes $34,000 a year.
Because she works for a firm which gets a lower cost premium for its healthy workers, she has been paying only $300 a year, or $25 a month for her health care coverage.
CLINTON PLAN: If Sara enrolled in an average cost plan she would pay 20% of the $1,932 annual premium for a single policy -- $386 a year, or $32 a month.
SINGLE PARENT WITH SICK CHILD NOW: Susan Addington is a single parent living in Virginia.
She is self-employed with an income of $40,000 a year.
Because her son has a serious chronic illness, she paid $3,000 in out-of-pocket costs and $5,000 in insurance premiums in just one year.
Because she is selfemployed, she was only able to deduct 25% of her $5,000 premium or $1,250 of these costs.
CLINTON PLAN: For the family share of her premium, for an average-priced plan, Susan will pay 20% of the $3,893 annual premium for a single parent family-- $779 a year.
She will also pay the employer share for a single parent -- $2,479, for a total of $3,258-a-year or $272 a month.
And she will be able to deduct 100 percent of the premium.
PROFESSIONAL COUPLE NOW: Michael and Elizabeth Sands work and live in Memphis, Tennessee, and together earn almost $90,000 a year.
Elizabeth is a graphic artist, making $40,000.
Although Elizabeth's firm offers her health insurance, the couple chooses to receive their coverage through the architectural firm where Michael works, because it provides a more generous, comprehensive benefits package.
Today the Sands pay $720 a year, or $60 a month, for this coverage.
The total premium costs $4,400 a year, and the architecture firm pays the rest.
CLINTON PLAN: The Sands want to stay with their current plan.
Under reform, this plan will cost less than it does today because it wiII no longer pay for the uncompensated care delivered to the uninsured, saving 10 percent of the current premium cost.
The average cost of a couple premium in the Sands' alliance is $3,865 but the Sands pick a plan that will cost $4,000.
They will pay the dffference between 80 percent of the average cost plan, which is $3092, and $4,000, or $908 a year, $75 a month.
LOW INCOME FAMILY NOW: Lars and Brenda Gustafson recently had a new baby, and Brenda resigned from her job shortly before the baby was born.
Lars works for a messenger service in Minneapolis, Minnesota and takes home about $250 a week, or $13,000 a year.
His employer does not offer him health insurance.
As a result, he and his family have been uninsured for two years.
CLINTON PLAN: Provided Lars and Brenda choose an average price plan, they will pay 20 percent of $4,360 or $872 for a two-parent family policy.
But because Lars is in a two-parent family with income less than $14,781 a year, he is eligible for a discount, reducing his premium to $384 a year.
FARMERS NOW: James Huggins, a self-employed family farmer in Kansas, makes $25,000 a year and has struggled to pay for health care coverage for himself, his wife and his 10-year-old son.
He is only able to deduct one fourth of the $4,000 he pays in premiums each year.
CLINTON PLAN: If James enrolls in an average cost plan, he will pay 20 percent of the $4,360 annual family premium or $872 a year.
Like a business, James will also pay the employer share of his premium, which would normally be $2,479.
However, that amount would exceed 7.9 percent of James' income, the limit on what employers are required to pay.
Instead James will pay 7.9 percent of $25,000 or $1,975 for his employer share.
James will pay a total of $2,847 a year, or $237 a month.
For the first time, James Huggins will be also be able to deduct from taxable income the full cost of his health care premiums. -- Excerpts from HEALTH SECURITY: THE PRESIDENT'S REPORT TO THE AMERICAN PEOPLE


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
AIM Management Group Inc., Houston, the mutual fund investment company, is selling $110 million of 9 percent senior unsecured notes due in 2003 at 100 through Merrill Lynch and Citicorp Securities.
The debt is redeemable in five years and is rated Ba2 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and BB by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.
*
Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corp., Jersey City, is selling $2.255 billion of bonds in three parts through various securities dealers.
All the bonds are priced at 100 and yield 3.21 percent for $1.16 billion of bonds due Feb. 1, 1994, 3.31 percent for $680 million due May 2, 1994, and 3.48 percent for $415 million due Nov. 11, 1994.


Arcadian Partners L.P.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bell Sports Corp.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


CRSS Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Bridge; In the production of books on championship matches, quality is up and speed down.
In one area of bridge, quality has gone way up and speed has gone way down.
That area is the production of championship books.
Six decades ago, Ely Culbertson published a book on an international match in England within a few days of its conclusion.
He dictated notes on some of the deals between sessions, but his efforts were brief and often inaccurate.
Nowadays it takes a year and a great deal of effort to produce a world championship book.
For the 1992 Team Olympiad in Salsomaggiore, Italy, the efforts were largely by Eric Kokish of Canada and Brian Senior of England and were fully up to the standard of earlier years.
The book, consisting of 176 pages and many photographs, is obtainable from The Bridge World, 39 West 94th Street, New York N.Y. 10025 for $28.70.


Thompson Gets Campaign for Milk
The American Dairy Association of Rosemont, Ill., and the National Dairy Research and Promotion Board of Arlington, Va., selected J. Walter Thompson Chicago to handle a newly combined $50 million account to advertise milk, advertising executives who spoke on the condition of anonymity said yesterday.
The final creative presentations in a review that began in July were made earlier this week.
The other contenders were Leo Burnett U.S.A. of Chicago, DDB Needham Chicago, D'Arcy Masius Benton &amp; Bowles of Chicago and McCann-Erickson San Francisco.


Super Bowl Set For '97 and '98
The National Football League's club owners ended a two-day meeting today by awarding the 1997 Super Bowl game to New Orleans and the 1998 Super Bowl to San Diego.
The beaten finalists were Los Angeles and Tampa, Fla.
Super Bowl games will be played in Atlanta in January, in Miami in 1995 and in Phoenix in 1996.


Beryl E. Menon, 50, Journalist and Traveler
Beryl Emmer Menon, a journalist who edited the staff newspaper of Unicef, the United Nations relief organization, and who traveled and wrote widely in India and the Himalayas, died on Oct. 19 at her home in Manhattan.
She was 50.
She had decided to discontinue kidney dialysis after 19 years of treatment, friends said.


Suspect Killed And 3 Officers Are Wounded
A 63-year-old man shot and wounded two police detectives who came to his home in Queens yesterday, then hid with a neighbor whom he took hostage for four hours, and finally shot a third officer who tried to block his escape.
The officer returned fire, the police said, and shot the man to death.
Each of the police officers survived.
The hostage was released unhurt.
But the afternoon drama -- with the hard-to-understand actions of a man with a gun -- horrified residents in Forest Hills, Queens, where it occurred.


Red Skies, Then Blackened Homes
Cinders shot across the Pacific Coast Highway in this exclusive beach town, and black smoke roiled across the surf as a fast-moving brush fire consumed more than 150 homes, along with their broad patios, swimming pools and tennis courts.
Though the 24,500 residents of Laguna Beach, 40 miles south of downtown Los Angeles, were ordered to evacuate, some refused to abandon their homes.
They stood on their roofs with garden hoses, wetting down shingles and surrounding palms as the firefighters shouted at them with bullhorns to retreat and the houses around them exploded in flames driven by the fast moving wind.


Dorothy Borg, 91, East Asia Scholar At Columbia, Dies
Dr.
Dorothy Borg, a Columbia University historian of United States-East Asian relations, died last Thursday at her home in Manhattan.
She was 91.
Her family said she had had a brief illness.


U.S. Returns 15 Refugees
A United States Coast Guard cutter docked here today and unloaded 15 Haitian refugees in front of a crowd of armed civilians similar to the one that confronted an American military vessel two weeks ago.
The director of the United States Information Services here, Stanley Schrager, said at a briefing that the 13 men and 2 women had fled Haiti on Monday from the northwestern coast aboard a rickety boat and had been picked up 30 miles offshore.


Everett's Starting String Will End at 87
T.
J.
RUBLEY will start at quarterback Sunday for the Los Angeles Rams at San Francisco, ending a string of 87 consecutive starts by JIM EVERETT.


A Tricky Business, but Often a Treat
Marc Beige has circles under his eyes this time of year, and he doesn't bother wearing a tie.
Running a hand through his rumpled hair, he misses a strand of yellow thread caught there.
As if he didn't have enough to worry about, he just got a last-minute order for 500 Arabian princess costumes.
Every day seems like Halloween for Mr.
Beige, president of Rubie's Costume Company in Richland Park, Queens.
But even in October, he doesn't tire of the macabre.
Sitting at a desk strewn with leering skulls and clown wigs, Mr.
Beige is eager to discuss his company's spooky, kooky creations.


4 Win Columbia Prizes In Latin America News
Two journalists from the United States, one from Chile and a Caribbean news service have won the 1993 Maria Moors Cabot Prizes from Columbia University for contributions to inter-American understanding and the freedom of information.
The prizes are to be awarded tonight.
The three journalists each receive $1,000 and a gold medal; the news service gets a plaque.


William Kochiyama, Japanese Advocate, 72
William Kochiyama, a founder of the Asian Community Center and an advocate of reparations for American citizens of Japanese descent who were interned in World War II, died on Monday at St.
Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center of heart failure.
He was 72 and lived in Manhattan.
Mr.
Kochiyama, who was born in Washington, was interned himself until he joined the all-Japanese 442d Regimental Combat Team, which fought with distinction in Europe and became the most decorated unit in United States military history.


Meanwhile in Serbia, a Quiet Genocide Goes On; Attacks by Muslims
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis castigates the Serbs in " 'The Siege Is Over' " (column, Oct. 18) for "a devastating artillery barrage" on Sarajevo on Oct. 16.
Also, he calls Radovan Karadzic, the Serbian leader in Bosnia, a "mass murderer" and accuses him of new lies for recently stating that the Serbs would not renew attacks on the Muslims.


Clinton for New Station
President Clinton is to announce today that he supports a proposal to transform the General Post Office at 33d Street and Eighth Avenue into a new Amtrak railroad hub for New York City, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan said last night.
The President's announcement, scheduled to be made while he is campaigning with Mayor David N. Dinkins, will mark a milestone in the effort by Amtrak and its supporters, including Mr.
Moynihan and Mr.
Dinkins, to create a new intercity station intended to recapture the grandeur of the old Pennsylvania Station.


Corrections
A front-page picture caption on Oct. 18, about Rudolph W. Giuliani's visit with the leader of the Bobover Hasidic sect, misspelled the Grand Rabbi's name in some copies.
He is Solomon Halberstam.


Pop and Jazz in Review
Leslie Uggams  Rainbow and Stars 30 Rockefeller Plaza, 65th floor Through Nov. 20
Near the end of her exuberant new cabaret act, Leslie Uggams reminisces about her early days in show business, when she was a regular, featured performer on Mitch Miller's television sing-along program.
The 50-year-old singer, then still in her teens, recalls adoring rock-and-roll, a style that Mr.
Miller, an outspoken disparager of rock, forbade on his show.


U.S. Asks Favoritism in Cars Despite Accord With Japan
In its new proposals to pry open automobile trade with Japan, the United States Government is seeking especially to promote sales to Japan of American-built cars and trucks.
The effort is being made despite wording in the recent trade framework with Japan that any steps to open the market must benefit other countries as well.
In the proposals, which were presented last week, the United States called for "prompt, substantial and sustained" increases in sales not only of foreign automobiles generally but also specifically of American vehicles.
Also, the United States wants to promote exports of cars made by the Big Three -- not those made on Japanese assembly lines in the United States.


Families Mourning 2 Victims in Cairo Attack
Coby M. Hoffman and Robert L. Guidi were slain during a business dinner in a luxury Cairo hotel, apparently as they discussed construction of a natural gas pipeline from Egypt to Israel.
Hours before a gunman popped up from a table in a coffee shop in the Semiramis Inter-Continental Hotel and sprayed the room with gunfire Tuesday night, Mr.
Hoffman and Mr.
Guidi had met with Egypt's Minister of Energy, visited the Pyramids, and were preparing for a trip today from Cairo to Tel Aviv, said Mr.
Guidi's sister-in-law, Jennifer Leitner.


Fear of Immigrants Sounds an Old Theme
To the Editor:
I read with interest "Immigration Hurting City, New Yorkers Say in Survey" (news article, Oct. 18).
Those of today's New Yorkers who worry about the foreign-born 28 percent of their neighbors might gain some perspective by comparing the present to the first great wave of immigration.


The Past Gets in the Way of Big East's Future
Uh-oh. A new logo. You know what that means.
Approaching the age of 15, the Big East Conference has undergone a marketing makeover.
You can hear the presentation as the logo was placed on the easel.


Hopes Fade For Debate In Big Race
Five days before the election, a standoff between Mayor David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani is making it increasingly likely that for the first time in at least 32 years there will be no televised debates between the principal contenders for mayor of New York City, only sound bites passing in the air.
The stalemate is the result of polls showing the contest too close to call, so neither is willing to budge on his conditions for an unscripted encounter that could be especially influential in swaying undecided voters.
Mr.
Dinkins refuses to debate without the Conservative and Right to Life candidate, George J. Marlin, and Mr.
Giuliani insists on a face-to-face encounter with the Mayor since Mr.
Marlin would presumably only siphon conservative support from Mr.
Giuliani.


In Itty-Bitty Toys, Mega-Mega-Profits
WHAT a guy Mighty Max is.
He slays the awesome Doom Dragon, melts the evil Ice Alien and thwarts the Mad Nuke Ranger's plan to blow up the world.
All of this from a pencil-thin hero who, in his T-shirt and baseball cap, stands less than one inch tall.
Mighty Max is one of the stars of the toy industry for 1993, the year they shrank the toys.


Meanwhile in Serbia, a Quiet Genocide Goes On
To the Editor:
Anthony Lewis, in " 'The Siege Is Over' " (column, Oct. 18) feels sorry for the 300,000 Sarajevo civilians who have to endure a new outbreak of fighting.
And who wouldn't?
But he shows no empathy for the far greater suffering that United Nations sanctions are causing in Serbia.


A Race of TV Images: Framing the Debate
Perhaps the most interesting television advertisement in New Jersey's crowded political season has little to do with the main attraction, the race for governor.
It is a spot that urges the re-election of William L. Gormley, a Republican State Senator from Atlantic City, and it is almost entirely devoted to a visual of him paddling about in the rough ocean surf in a kayak.
The last image shows the 46-year old candidate on the beach in his bathing suit, looking, from what might be interpreted as a deliberate backside angle, like something of a hunk.


Not Ready for Prime Time
Five days before New York votes, it seems increasingly likely there will be no televised debates between the two top rivals for mayor.
Page B9.


Dinkins Seeks Hispanic Forgiveness
In a close mayoral election in which the Hispanic vote is considered crucial, David N. Dinkins is trying to mend fences after four years in which many of his Hispanic supporters say they felt undervalued and ignored.
In public forums and meetings with Hispanic elected officials, Mr.
Dinkins says he has learned from his mistakes and is promising to be more accessible and responsive to the concerns of an electorate that voted for him overwhelmingly in 1989.
He calls himself "David Martinez Dinkins" before Hispanic audiences and laces speeches with snippets of tortured Spanish.


Classical Music in Review
New Music Consort  Manhattan School of Music
The New Music Consort gave an unusually large audience a choice of occasions to celebrate on Tuesday evening.
The ensemble's concert opened both its own season and the second Sonic Boom festival, a contemporary-music series that runs through Nov. 20.
It also commemorated the 75th anniversary of its home, the Manhattan School of Music, and the 85th birthday of Elliott Carter (on Dec. 11).
Mr.
Carter's Double Concerto for Harpsichord and Piano With Two Chamber Orchestras (1961) was the centerpiece of the varied program.
Its two ensembles are built around the keyboard instruments, and each group speaks in a distinct musical dialect.
The work's structure plays on the ensembles' increasing differentiation and eventual reconciliation, with results that alternately suggest sophisticated debate and gang warfare.


Lou Miller, 78, Dies; Sportswriter and Racer
Lou Miller, a former sportswriter whose penchant for practicing the sports he covered peaked when he became an accomplished harness driver in the 1950's, died on Monday at Winthrop-University Hospital in Mineola, L.I.
He was 78.
His family said he died of cardiac arrest.


Regional Configuration Gets Pro Football Team
The Carolina Panthers will do, but if the owners of the National Football League's newest franchise really want to get the name right, they might try something more descriptive, like the Carolina Post-Urban Regional Configuration.
To be sure, urban policy was not exactly Topic A today in this town.
From the exultant "TOUCHDOWN!" across the top of The Charlotte Observer, to James Laughlin's hawking cassettes of his "Carolina Rally Song," to the hand-scrawled "Carolina Panthers -- A Reality" triumphantly tacked to Uptown Donnie's hot dog stand, the only subject was the N.F.L.'s anointing of Charlotte on Tuesday as the home of the league's 29th franchise.


Clinton's Health Plan: News Analysis Political Shoals Ahead; Clinton's Health Plan Goes From Concept To Clauses, Every One a Potential Target
President Clinton's struggle to overhaul the health care system entered a new and treacherous phase today.
Act I could be summarized by the images and ideas of a red, white and blue health security card, an impassioned First Lady and the generally accepted notion that the country needs a better health care system.


Bosnian Forces Kill Reputed Gang Chief In Sarajevo Gunfight
A Bosnian Government crackdown on alleged racketeers within the Bosnian forces in Sarajevo ended with a gun battle on Tuesday night in which the man reputed to be the most powerful gang leader in this besieged city was killed along with 17 others, 8 of them civilians caught in crossfire.
After 24 hours in which the city's 300,000 residents were ordered to stay off the streets, the Bosnian forces opened barricades and allowed normal traffic to resume.
At a news conference, army and police commanders declared the crackdown a success, but the casualties, including two policemen who were said to have been killed by the dead gang leader before he was shot, shocked many in the city.


U.N.'s Grim Documentation At a Massacre Site in Bosnia
Until about 3 P.M. on Saturday, this village in the mountains of central Bosnia was a haven from the war that has engulfed much of this former Yugoslav republic, a cluster of houses high in a valley where the immediate concern of the Muslim inhabitants was gathering in beets, potatoes and squashes before the snows begin.
Then the brutality came up the winding dirt road from the town on the valley floor, in cars and trucks that arrived so suddenly that some of the 250 villagers had time only to pull on one sleeve of their winter jackets before rushing for the safety of the woodlands above the village.
As they fled, they dropped a trail of shoes, gloves and half-emptied cigarette packs along the muddy paths.


Sports of The Times; The N.F.L. Should Go To 32 Now
ONE of football's oldest jokes involves the new coach who growls that his players are returning to fundamentals.
"This," the coach explains, "is a football."


Events: Crafts, Tiny Trees
Crafts on Park Ave.
Seventh Regiment Armory, 643 Park Avenue (66th Street); (800) 649-0279.
A crafts show and sale featuring 175 artists starts tomorrow, from 3 to 9 P.M.
Also open Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Sunday, noon to 5 P.M.
Admission is $7; children 16 and under, no charge.


U.S. MAY TIGHTEN EMBARGO ON HAITI
WASHINGTON, Oct. 27 --
With efforts to restore Haiti's elected President stymied, President Clinton's top foreign policy advisers met today to consider a complete economic embargo against the poor Caribbean nation.
But they took no action, and it was not clear when they would meet again.


Islanders Will Lose Krupp for 4 Weeks
When the Islanders left for Florida yesterday, they were without Uwe Krupp, one of their regular defensemen, who will miss about four weeks with a fractured sinus bone.
Krupp was injured when he was hit in the face by a puck Tuesday night during a 7-0 victory over the Los Angeles Kings at the Coliseum that ended the Islanders' five-game winless streak.


Richter Earns a Shot at Canadiens
This is what Mike Keenan expects of his goaltenders: Play as well or better as the man in the opposite net, and then let your teammates take care of the rest.
It appears, then, that Mike Richter is in for a big test.


Small Effect Anticipated In Altered Shelter Rules
Dinkins administration officials said yesterday that they believed their new policy of turning away families who seek shelter but do not really need it would affect only a small number of people.
The city's top official for homeless policy estimated that the new rules, announced in August, might screen out about 40 to 60 of the 2,800 families seeking emergency housing each month, though he added that the number could turn out to be higher when the new plan actually took effect.


If Not Heavy Reading, It's Heavy Lifting
Copies of the Health Security Plan went on sale at noon yesterday, as President Clinton concluded his 19-minute summary of its contents to Congress.
The 1,342-page book, which is selling for $45 a copy, is more than four inches thick, weighs five and three-quarters pounds and is printed on 8-by-10-inch pages.


Polish Farmer Takes Power, Taciturn as Ever
The contrast was striking as the polished but battle-weary Prime Minister handed power to a fresh-faced, reserved young man who struggled to find the right words.
On Tuesday, Waldemar Pawlak, the 34-year-old son of a farming family, became Poland's sixth Prime Minister since the fall of Communism; he was briefly the fourth, for a month last year.
During his encounter with the departing Prime Minister, Hanna Suchocka, he managed a smile, and later he used the words "natural and calm" to describe the ceremony.


Catholic Bishops Proposing Active U.S. Policy Abroad
The nation's Roman Catholic bishops have drafted a statement calling for a more active American role on the world stage, including supporting the United Nations, expanding foreign aid and, when necessary, using military force for interventions intended to rescue people from hunger or mass violence.
Now in draft form, the statement is meant to commemorate the 10th anniversary of the bishops' 1983 pastoral letter on nuclear arms, which stirred intense public debate because it ran counter to the Reagan Administration's emphasis on a build-up of nuclear weapons.


C-MAC Industries reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 3


Earl D. Hanson, 66, Wesleyan Professor And Science Leader
Earl D. Hanson, the Fisk Professor of Natural Sciences at Wesleyan University and an academic leader who emphasized the role of ethics in science, died on Tuesday after he had a heart attack in his campus office in Middletown, Conn.
He was 66.
In an academic career that spanned nearly 40 years, Professor Hanson was one of the first to advocate ethical training of young scientists.
He also urged improved development of scientific teaching for nonscientists, with an emphasis on how genetic engineering could affect society.
Toward that end, he founded and was the chairman of the Science in Society program at Wesleyan.


Louisville Accepts Bid to Liberty Bowl
Louisville, which has a 7-1 record but limited access to bowl games because it is not part of a coalition that guarantees its members a New Year's Day game, accepted a bid yesterday to be the home team in this year's Liberty Bowl in Memphis.
The Cardinals, who are guaranteed $700,000 plus 37 1/2 percent of the game's net gate receipts, will play the fifth-place team from the Big Ten on the night of Dec. 28.
The game will be carried live by ESPN.


Dudley's Blazer Contract Gets Final Approval
It took a favorable ruling by an arbitrator, three favorable rulings by a special master and one very favorable 30-page opinion by a Federal judge, but Chris Dudley has finally been cleared to pursue his potentially highly lucrative career with the Portland Trail Blazers.
The final victory came yesterday when District Judge Dickinson R. Debevoise handed down a decision in Federal Court in Newark rejecting the contention of the National Basketball Association that a clause of Dudley's multiyear contract with the Trail Blazers violated the salary cap provisions of the collectivebargaining agreement between the league and the N.B.A.
Players Association.


ANHEUSER-BUSCH COS. (N)
Despite increases in sales and market share for its beer products, the Anheuser-Busch Companies said yesterday that it lost $75 million in the third quarter after a restructuring charge of $565 million.
The charge was part of a previously announced program intended to save the company more than $400 million a year by 1997.
The earnings for the quarter also reflected two charges, $33 million and $8 million, to account for changes in the Federal corporate income tax rate.


Earl Banks, 69, Dies; Coach at Morgan State
Earl Banks, who turned Morgan State University into a small-college football power during his 13 years as coach in the 1960's and 1970's, died yesterday after his car struck a brick wall, according to the police in Baltimore.
He was 69.
A Morgan State spokesman said that Mr.
Banks, who served as athletic director from 1970 to 1983, was returning home from his job as manager of a local lounge when he suffered a heart attack and lost control of his car.


J.C. Penney Push Features New Slogan
The J. C. Penney Company is getting ready for holiday shopping by introducing a $60 million marketing push featuring a new slogan, "J. C. Penney. Doing it right."
The campaign is the second major effort created by Temerlin McClain of Dallas since it won the Penney account from Ayer Inc. in 1991.
It is Temerlin's first Penney's campaign with a slogan; Temerlin had dropped the Ayer theme "Fashion comes to life" when it assumed the account.


In British Hong Kong, Memorable Monikers
Britain's most indelible influence on the Chinese who populate this colony may be in name only.
From the Hong Kong bank clerk with Canine on her name tag to the insurance broker who calls herself Neon, many Hong Kong Chinese choose English names.
Tens of thousands of young Chinese are taking English language names each year.
It is not uncommon to encounter sophisticated Chinese here with names like Sherlock, Lenin, Apple, Psyche, Creamy or Cinderella.


ELECTRONIC DATA SYSTEMS CORP. (N)
The Electronic Data Systems Corporation said yesterday that the 14.5 percent gain in its third-quarter net income, to $191.6 million, was the result of slightly higher revenue and cost reductions.
The information technology company, which is based in Dallas and is a unit of the General Motors Corporation, said its third-quarter revenue rose to $2.08 billion from $2 billion in the comparable quarter last year.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 21 about the Federal Government's decision to withdraw Pell grant assistance from 20 religious schools in New York State misstated the affiliations of some of the schools.
While many are associated with the Satmar and Lubavitch Hasidic groups, some are associated with other Hasidic and Orthodox Jewish organizations.


Trading in New Japanese Rail Stock is Halted on Deluge of Sell Orders
A day after a buying frenzy for the newly listed shares of the East Japan Railway Company created turmoil on the Tokyo Stock Exchange, investors reversed course and thrashed the stock with waves of selling today that choked the exchange's computers and left the overall market depressed.
In a desperate effort to end the tumult, the exchange suspended trading in the stock of the huge Government-controlled railway this morning, just the second day the company's shares have been for sale on the market.
But while that move rescued overloaded computers, it deprived thousands of anxious investors of the means to take profits on their holdings and created a major embarrassment for the Government's ambitious privatization program.


Andrea Electronics Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BCE Mobile reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Gunman Mentally Ill, Egypt Says
Egyptian Interior Ministry officials said today that the man who shot and killed two American engineers and a French jurist here Tuesday night was mentally ill and that they had no evidence linking him to any Muslim militant groups.
The ministry officials said the gunman, Saber Abu al-Ila, a 28-year-old musician, had been expelled from Egypt's military service in 1989 for medical reasons and that he had received psychiatric care in a military hospital.
The authorities are investigating the possibility that the attack was politically motivated, they said.


Back Bay Restaurant Group Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 26


General Is Said to Take Blame for Raid in Somalia
The commander of the failed Oct. 3 Ranger raid in Somalia has sent a letter to President Clinton taking responsibility for the mission, Administration officials said today.
The letter by Maj.
Gen.
William Garrison, the commander of the Joint Special Operations Command, is likely to blunt criticism of the Administration's handling of the Somalia operation.


Only Two Shall Make A Passage to America
For those who made the long trek here expecting political strife and diplomatic incidents, it has been, thus far, an anticlimactic two weeks.
For those who came in search of a competitive soccer tournament, Doha has delivered as promised.


Julio F. Sorzano, 96, Wartime Entertainer
Julio Francisco Sorzano, a retired businessman who helped provide entertainment for American troops in World War II, died on Sunday at his home in Water Mill, L.I.
He was 96.
He had had a brief illness, his family said.


In Their Own Words
GIULIANI
The two mayoral candidates disagree over the format for a debate, so no face-to-face meeting has been scheduled.
Rudolph W. Giuliani, at his campaign headquarters yesterday, again said he would not debate if the Conservative Party candidate, George J. Marlin, is included.
"In Presidential campaigns 1- and 2-percent candidates are not allowed in the debates for the very simple reason that there is a precious little amount of time that you have for people to absorb issues. If you take one hour and you divide it by three, there is considerably less substance than if you divide it by two. And if you are going to start dividing precious air time, then you are going to have debates with five, six and seven people.
. . .


Majors Is Marching In, Minus His Old Horses
The last time Johnny Majors brought a team into Giants Stadium was Aug. 30, 1987, for the Kickoff Classic against Iowa.
Majors was riding high as the head coach at Tennessee, his alma mater, and the Volunteers were going to bowl games almost every season.
They beat the Hawkeyes, 23-22, that night in one of the better Kickoff Classics.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLIED SIGNAL INC., Morristown, N.J., and the Dutch chemical concern Akzo have combined their European nylon carpet fiber businesses into one company that will be managed by Allied Signal.
ESKIMO PIE CORP., Richmond, signed a letter of intent to acquire a privately held manufacturer of frozen dairy dessert products.
It did not disclose the identity of the other company or the proposed purchase price.


American Safety Razor (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Ecolab Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Reservations About Iraq's Making Cup Reservations
Even if Iraq qualifies today for the World Cup finals, it is not certain whether Iraqi soccer players will qualify for visas to enter the United States, according to a State Department official.
If Iraq loses to Japan in the Asian qualifying tournament in Doha, Qatar today, the question will be moot.
If Iraq wins, and other circumstances play out, the Iraqis would qualify for the 24-team field next summer in the United States.


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: The Scene; At Capitol, Selling Health Proposals as Cure-Alls
It was a battle of medicine shows, Democratic and Republican, each led by cane-brandishing barkers of surpassing skill, each hawking competing cure-alls to crowds that, at least today, were in thrall.
The argot of health-care reform is often stupefying, but if President Clinton and his opponents maintain today's oratorical pace, managed care and preferred provider organizations and health alliances may even become fascinating, if not understandable.


Dole Food Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 9


Books of The Times; Why Bush Bombed (in the Election, Not the War)
Hell of a Ride  Backstage at the White House Follies, 1989-1993 By John Podhoretz 249 pages.
Simon &amp; Schuster. $21.
How did George W. Bush go from being one of the most popular Presidents in modern history in March 1991 to being voted out of office 18 months later?
In "Hell of a Ride: Backstage at the White House Follies, 1989-1993," John Podhoretz, a professional speechwriter, has written a shrewdly plausible analysis with a wit (verging on occasional silliness) that makes you wish all political studies could be this lighthearted and succinct.


Aristide Has Long Posed Problem for Vatican
While Vatican officials have not publicly gone as far as the C.I.A. in trying to brand the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide as mentally unstable, the deposed Haitian leader has long been seen by Roman Catholic leaders as an advocate of political violence, a charge also leveled against him by the C.I.A. in Washington.
The rift between the Vatican and Father Aristide dates to his 1988 expulsion from his order, the Salesians, and a church decision to bar him from publicly carrying out the duties of a priest.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-21  ATROCITIES IN A BOSNIAN VILLAGE  Until Saturday, the quiet mountain village of Stupni Do had escaped the horrors of the Bosnian war.
Now, many of its Muslim inhabitants have been slaughtered and the village has become a symbol of the nation's madness.
A1


Review/Pop; Earthy Epiphanies On Love, Love, Love, By Luther Vandross
A recurrent tableau in Luther Vandross's new show has him alone on the stage, singing nearly unaccompanied.
He's a solitary figure talking about transcendental love, the sort of love that saves lives, at least in songs.
These are pure Vandross moments.
His voice quivers in the silence.
Everything he does signifies passion.
He sings of lost love so plaintively that one wants to help the poor guy.
Then the audience goes crazy: the process of empathy banishes loss completely, and love returns, made as real as a stolen kiss.
Mr.
Vandross, who is one of pop music's finest virtuosos, may also be one of its greatest actors, and at Madison Square Garden on Tuesday night, where he did the first of four sold-out shows ending Saturday, he was in full command of his powers.
On "Here and Now" he started with "I'm so glad," all gospel emotion.
"I'm so glad," he continued, full of sadness, ending the mini-skit with "I won a Grammy!" an old gag of his which exposed the manipulative, dramatic aspects of his craft and made the adoring audience laugh.
Even his asides were sung ("I'm sweaty already"), and they soared and glided on his pure vocal virtuosity.


At First, Frank Thomas Keeps On Succeeding
A day after he agreed to a four-year contract extension worth a guaranteed $29 million, Frank Thomas of the Chicago White Sox yesterday received the best average ranking at any position in baseball's ranking statistics.
Thomas, who is the heavy favorite to win the American League Most Valuable Player award, emerged with an average rank of 1.600 among the league's first basemen, eighth-lowest among all players in the 13 years the ranking statistics have been computed.
The best possible average rank is 1.000, a level attained only by Don Mattingly in 1987 and Cal Ripken Jr. in 1991.


CHRONICLE
Eleven years ago, TREVOR NUNN was handed a Tony Award by GEORGE ABBOTT.
Little did Mr.
Nunn know that one day he would be honored with an award bearing the centenarian producer-playwright's name.
On Nov. 8, Mr.
Nunn, who won that Tony for his direction of "The Life and Adventures of Nicholas Nickleby," is to receive the Mr.
Abbott Award for lifetime achievement from the Stage Directors and Choreographers Foundation at a ceremony in the Roundabout Theater in Manhattan.
Mr.
Nunn has also directed dozens of other plays, including "Les Miserables" and "Cats."


Piazza Chosen N.L. Rookie of Year
He was chosen in the 62d round of the 1988 amateur draft, after 1,388 players were picked ahead of him.
But yesterday Mike Piazza was way ahead of the field after being chosen unanimously as the National League rookie of the year by the Baseball Writers Association of America.
Piazza, who won the Los Angeles catching job in spring training, hit .318 with 35 home runs and 112 runs batted in for the Dodgers and threw out 35 percent of the runners who attempted to steal on him, third best in the league.


Communications Systems Inc.(NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


New Haiti Road Could Be Anti-Embargo Lifeline
If most of Haiti lies almost dormant under the squeeze of international sanctions, the heavily laden trucks lumbering through this little border town make it a bustling exception.
With the United Nations drafting measures to widen an embargo on oil and arms to cover almost all trade with Haiti, the Haitian military authorities seem to be rushing to prepare what could soon be their only economic lifeline to the outside world.


Westchester County Elections
The two most powerful positions in Westchester County are hotly contested this year.
Here are The Times's endorsements.
County Executive: In this rematch between Andrew O'Rourke and Assemblyman Richard Brodsky, we support Mr.
Brodsky.
Mr.
O'Rourke, the Republican-Conservative incumbent, remains a popular official.
He has helped preserve the county's high credit rating in hard times.
But after 11 years, he seems to have lost focus.


Artists' Gardens: See the Book, Read the Show
A MANHATTAN exhibition of more than 55 photographs by Erica Lennard adds another dimension to the new book "Artists' Gardens: From Claude Monet to Jennifer Bartlett" (Harry N. Abrams: $49.50), by Ms.
Lennard and Madison Cox, a garden designer and writer.
"The show was conceived as a complement to the book," said Ms.
Lennard, an American photographer who is based in Paris.


Durable-Goods Orders Up for a Second Month
More evidence that the economy is shifting into higher gear emerged today as orders for long-lived factory goods posted a second straight increase in September, the first back-to-back advance in nearly a year.
While the September rise for durable goods was just seven-tenths of 1 percent, after a revised 2.6 percent gain in August, analysts said the Commerce Department report reflected surprisingly strong performance.
The orders total was held down by plunging military and aviation business, but, because of the long time between placing orders and actually producing such goods, that category has relatively little bearing on immediate economic prospects.


Cash American International reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Expert Tells Of Markings On Van Parts At Blast Trial
There was an insurance company expert on automobile theft, experts on Michelin tires, and another expert on Bridgestone tires as prosecutors in the World Trade Center trial inched ever closer yesterday to identifying the van that they say was used in the Feb. 26 bomb attack.
The day of testimony sometimes had the aura of a technology and crime lab seminar, as the witnesses detailed how vehicles can be traced from their identification numbers or how the tread patterns of tires can be read.


Cilcorp Inc. reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


'Paradise Lost' Inspires Meditation on Vampires
Whenever a film maker has a huge hit to his credit, plotting the next step calls for special care.
So Neil Jordan, the writer and director of "The Crying Game," is making his next move under the influence of the poet John Milton and the mogul David Geffen, though not necessarily in that order.
It was Mr.
Geffen who suggested Mr.
Jordan take on "Interview With the Vampire," the enormously popular novel by Anne Rice that introduced the worldly vampire Lestat and his protege and victim, Louis, in antebellum New Orleans.
"I knew exactly what to do when I read it," Mr.
Jordan said of the novel.


Bottle Redemption Center Needs More Support
To the Editor:
As an early and continuing supporter of We Can, I think concern over financial problems slights the achievements of the nonprofit group, which aids the homeless in New York City by redeeming returnable bottles and cans.
Nonprofit beverage container redemption centers were an inspired idea by Guy Polhemus.
The results have been nothing short of miraculous.
When resolve in dealing with homelessness and poverty is waning, We Can has quietly provided the poor and homeless with $11 million in income earned by removing cans and bottles from the garbage stream.
This did not result from bad management decisions.


Motorola's Chairman Will Head Kodak
The Eastman Kodak Company surprised Wall Street yesterday by naming George M. C. Fisher, the chairman of Motorola Inc., as its chairman, president and chief executive.
Mr.
Fisher, who is 52 and has headed Motorola since 1990, succeeds Kay R. Whitmore.
Mr.
Whitmore was dismissed by Kodak's board in August because of the company's lackluster financial performance and his reluctance to radically change the tradition-bound photographic company.
Mr.
Whitmore had agreed to stay on until a successor was chosen.


Utility Bonds Hit by Rating Threat
Utility bonds took a beating yesterday after the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation announced that several companies were facing a credit rating downgrading and that the outlook for a third of the industry was being switched from stable to negative.
The announcement by S.&amp; P. threatened to push the bonds of some electric companies from investment grade status into noninvestment grade, or junk bond, status.
And the selling was especially focused on companies that are already at the bottom of the investment grade rankings.


Haig Scorns U.S. for Its Tough China Policy
Sitting in one of the skyscraper hotels that signifies China's economic ascent, former Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. was seething about American policy toward China.
Visiting Beijing early this month to introduce the new president of the United Technologies Corporation to the Chinese leadership, Mr.
Haig argued that Washington was about to lose China again by driving the next generation of Chinese leaders toward "jingoism" and "anti-Americanism."


Meanwhile in Serbia, a Quiet Genocide Goes On; What Croatians Fear
To the Editor:
On a recent monthlong visit to Croatia, I found that anger at the United Nations force is shared even by those unhappy with the Croatian Government's policies, and the leaders of Croatia have no need to whip it up artificially.
The greatest fear of the Croats is to become the newest Cyprus, divided and host to a United Nations force for decades.
With the lack of progress on the limited measures of the Vance plan and the intransigence of the Serbian leadership, that fear is reasonable.


Next Mayor Faces Expensive Challenges on Basic Services and Repairs
The Series So Far
Previous stories in the Mayoral Agenda series focused on the city budget, Sept. 27; social services, Oct. 2; crime, Oct. 11, and the economy, Oct. 18.
Whoever is elected mayor on Tuesday will face expensive problems that have yet to surface as major campaign issues.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  AGENTS HAD PLAN TO THWART BOMBING Law-enforcement officials were told that terrorists were building a bomb that was eventually used to blow up the World Trade Center, and they planned to thwart the plotters by secretly substituting harmless powder for the explosives, an informer said after the blast.
A1.
THE WAR OF IMAGES The television advertisements of Mayor Dinkins and his opponent, Rudolph W. Giuliani, represent a clash between styles of political advertising, that favored by Mr.
Dinkins's consultants, David Doak and Bob Shrum, and that favored by Mr.
Giuliani's consultant, David Garth.
A1.


Chretien Says He Wants Changes in Trade Accord
Fresh from the stunning triumph of his Liberal party in Canada's general elections, Prime Minister-designate Jean Chretien said today that he wants changes in the North American Free Trade Agreement and may not implement the pact without them.
Although he insisted at a news conference in Ottawa that Canada did not want to intervene in the debate over trade legislation in the United States, his comments complicated the task of passage and appeared to put him into conflict with President Clinton.


Boston Scientific Corp. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pisa Journal; The Leaning Tower Loses a Tiny Bit of Its Tilt
It might be termed a triumph of physics and engineering over time and gravity.
It might also be called something of an eyesore.
But, however it is appraised, the gray 400-ton mass of lead ingots stacked at the base of the leaning tower of Pisa has achieved its goal: the tower has not, so far, toppled over.
What's more, reversing 800 years of the tower's slow tilting, the ingots have begun to pull the 187-foot pillar of white marble back toward the vertical.


Viking Has a New Plan For the Booker Winner
Viking said yesterday that it would accelerate its publication of Roddy Doyle's novel "Paddy Clarke Ha Ha Ha," which won the prestigious Booker Prize in London on Tuesday.


A New York Olympics? Talk Is Cheap But Plentiful
A successful staging of the 1998 Goodwill Games could lead to serious discussions about a bid by the New York metropolitan area for the 2008 or 2012 Summer Olympics, officials connected with the Goodwill Games said yesterday.
The talk yesterday was just that.
Talk.
More like a Christmas wish list for the next decade.
Or a pipe dream.
With the 1996 Summer Olympics to be held in Atlanta and with Salt Lake City considered a strong candidate to play host to the 2002 Winter Olympics, the United States may have played out its Olympic hand for years to come.


Whitman's Tactics Could Still Decide Race in New Jersey
Christine Todd Whitman is getting lots of advice these days.
Whether she will take it is another question; the candidate has ignored plenty of back-seat driving so far this year.
Then there is the question of which advice to take: Should she "go negative" and tear down Jim Florio, as some people urge, or "go positive" and sing the praises of Christie Whitman?
Perhaps the most important questions of all are these: Could anything make a difference so late in the game for a candidate who trails by double digits in most independent polls?
Could something still happen to destroy Mr.
Florio's apparently comfortable lead?


Borden Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


BUSINESS DIGEST
Companies
Kodak surprised Wall Street by naming Motorola's chairman George M. C. Fisher its chairman, president and chief executive.
He will replace Kay R. Whitmore, who was dismissed in August for the company's lackluster financial performance.  [ Page D1. ]  Shock waves reverberated through Motorola, which Mr.
Fisher led through a period of explosive growth and record profitability.  [ D1. ]
QVC's partnership with Saks Fifth Avenue, which gave the shopping network greater legitimacy, is showing signs of some strain.  [ D1. ]  QVC began its tender offer for Paramount.  [ D22. ]


Bolt Technology reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Saks Link To QVC Seen As Strained
A partnership between Saks Fifth Avenue and QVC Network Inc., which gave the television retailer greater legitimacy, is showing some signs of strain.
Although Saks plans to uphold commitments to take part in two more hourlong programs on the network, it will not schedule any more shows unless QVC offers more favorable terms.


Review/Dance; Solitude and Memory by a Brooding Sea
It's Paul Taylor time again, and modern dance's most unpredictable master choreographer returned on Tuesday night with a gala benefit for his company that featured Mikhail Baryshnikov as a guest artist.
The news, however, was not Mr.
Baryshnikov's sincere A-for-effort performance in an excerpted Taylor solo (from "Aureole"), for which he was utterly miscast.
The fact that modern-dance companies look to the superstar presence of ballet stars to sell high-priced benefits is part of an established practice. (Mr. Taylor, in return, has reportedly agreed to choreograph a work for Mr. Baryshnikov's White Oak Dance Project.)


PARENT &amp; CHILD
ABOUT a month ago, Keira Walsh, 11, was stopped by a classmate on her way to school in Madison, Wis.
"He grabbed my bike so that I couldn't move," she recalled.
"He cursed at me. He kept yelling in my ear. Someone had said something that he didn't like, and he was taking it out on other people."
Most classrooms include at least one highly aggressive child who tries to have his way by bullying.
While adults realize that such children are seldom as threatening as they try to make themselves out to be, their peers see them quite differently.
A 10-year-old who is extorting milk money or threatening to chase a child home after school can loom large in the fears of an 8-year-old.
Handing over a quarter a day to avoid possibly being beaten up seems a small price to pay.


INSIDE
Gun Measure Stands Alone
Passage of the Brady Bill, which would enhance handgun control, became more likely when a key lawmaker agreed to strip it from a long-stalled crime bill.
Page A23.
Canadian Seeks to Alter Pact
Canada's Prime Minister-designate said he wants changes in the North American trade accord and may not implement it without them.
Page A20.
Saving Central Park's Water
The Dinkins administration has decided what it wants to do with the soon-to-close Central Park Reservoir: nothing.
Page B1.
New Kodak Chief a Surprise
Eastman Kodak surprised Wall Street by naming Motorola's chairman as its chairman, president and chief executive.
Page D1.


Review/Dance; Sculptured Delicacy Of Indonesian Scenes
The Sardono Dance Theater, which made its New York debut on Thursday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, does more than preserve traditional dances of Indonesia.
Sardono Waluyu Kusumo, its director, also creates his own contemporary choreography in an Indonesian style.
Therefore his "Passage Through the Gong" is an appropriate as well as an unusual attraction for the academy's innovative Next Wave series.
The production, which lasted about 75 minutes, began and ended serenely.
Although the calm was broken several times, harmony was always restored, and dance and music were revealed to be forces that could both intoxicate and heal.


We Waste Half of Our Street Lighting
To the Editor:
San Diego has made a lamentable decision to replace good, effective street lighting with poor, energy-wasteful light fixtures.
The controversy pits astronomers at Mount Palomar against City Council members who want to feel safer, even if that feeling has no justification.


Cuomo Is Questioning Dismissal Of Head of Staten Island College
Gov.
Mario M. Cuomo said yesterday that he had intervened in an effort to end the dispute over the dismissal of Dr.
Edmond L. Volpe, the president of the College of Staten Island, by the trustees of the City University of New York.
Dr.
Volpe was abruptly dismissed Monday evening by the trustees on the recommendation of the university's chancellor, Dr.
W.
Ann Reynolds.
University officials assert that Dr.
Volpe, 71 years old, was dismissed because he had reneged on earlier pledges to retire this academic year.
But Dr.
Volpe and his supporters say the real reason was the president's vocal opposition over the last few months to plans by Chancellor Reynolds to streamline academic programs across the 21-campus university system.


Sensible Changes in the Health Plan
The health care bill that President Clinton delivered to Capitol Hill yesterday preserves the major features, good and bad, of the plan leaked to the press last month.
The modifications are mostly minor, generally for the good and almost always designed to mollify a boisterous constituency.
The release of the 1,300-page legislation is less important for its new details than for the fact that Congress can finally begin serious debate.
Under the bill, most Americans would choose a health plan, providing generous benefits, from among those offered through a regional purchasing cooperative.
The plans would include managed-care coverage with limited choice of doctors and fee-for-service coverage with a wide choice of providers.
Individuals would buy policies with the help of contributions from their employers and, if needed, subsidies from Washington.


Steuben? Is That You?
THEY are the parallel to what the fashion industry calls "bridge lines" -- more functional and affordable wares, often designed with a twist to appeal to a younger audience.
And the new products prove that even Steuben, the venerable 90-year-old glass company best known for its status-conscious bowls ($310 to $12,000), crystal snails ($210) and apples ($340), is looking in a different direction.
"I wanted to go back to the origins of Steuben," Massimo Vignelli, the New York-based designer, said in describing the new "Whirlwind Series," the first in


Pony Dies of Rabies and Warning Is Issued
A 6-month old pony has died of rabies at a farm in the Hartford suburb of Windsor, and state and local health officials say the animal may have been infectious, but without symptoms, for perhaps two weeks while people visited the farm to pick pumpkins.
The Windsor Health Department has urged anyone who visited the River Street Farm on or after Oct. 10, and who came in contact with any of the three horses there, to call Windsor health officials or a physician immediately to determine whether a rabies vaccination program is needed.


No Headline
"From the time an official car drove by 20 minutes ago to tell us to leave, the fire went from a visible column of flames in the distance to engulfing clouds of smoke coming over the hill." -- MARIE HOLLAND, a resident of southern California.  [ B12:4. ]


Play Down Differences
To The Home Section:
I was pleased to read Lawrence Kutner's article about teaching racial and ethnic differences (Parent and Child, Oct. 7).
It's a shame that young children qualify people by their color, sex, etc.
But I think the media are in a large way responsible for our paying attention to people's differences.


Researchers Admit Study With Drugs Had No O.K.
Prominent cancer researchers in New York have confessed to doing what many researchers have often wanted to do -- skip the Government paperwork needed to carry out drug experiments on human beings and go ahead without telling the Government or getting any of the necessary medical approvals.
Four researchers who were at the Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx admitted in statements given to the United States Attorney that they siphoned off a drug called IL-2 from one experiment, in which it was being used to treat kidney cancer, and injected it into the brain tumors of dying patients to see if it would help them.


What's Wrong With Free Credit Reports
To the Editor:
"Policing Credit Reports" (editorial, Oct. 23) considers two proposals to amend the Fair Credit Reporting Act of 1970 as it relates to the computer files that credit-reporting companies keep on 170 million Americans.
You support the House of Representatives proposal.


Defying Injunction, Boston Teachers Strike


Pop and Jazz in Review
Vienna Art Orchestra  The Five Spot
Since it was founded in 1977, the Vienna Art Orchestra has usually played music by its conductor, Mathias Ruegg.
But for a rare United States engagement, four nights that ended on Sunday, the 19-member band offered jazz repertory: music associated with Charles Mingus and Duke Ellington.
It was both a homage to American jazz and a European challenge, because the band wasn't shy about putting its own personality into the pieces.


Raymond Kravis, 92, Oil and Gas Consultant
Raymond Field Kravis, a philanthropist and oil and gas consultant whose clients included Joseph P. Kennedy and Chase Bank, died on Monday at his home in West Palm Beach, Fla.
He was 92 and lived in Tulsa, Okla., and West Palm Beach.
He died of natural causes, his family said.


Essay; Ally for Sale
She's intelligent, personable and articulate.
Turkey's new Prime Minister, Tansu Ciller, an economist trained in the United States, wowed 'em on television and in private meetings here on her recent visit to America.
Unfortunately, the central message that she and her advisers brought to the White House was unworthy of the proud Turkish people.


Christopher, in Latvia, Presses for Russian Pullout
Secretary of State Warren Christopher used a visit to this medieval port city today to press Moscow to withdraw its Soviet-era troops.
After meetings with Latvian leaders and the Foreign Ministers of Estonia and Lithuania, Mr.
Christopher said at a news conference that the United States wanted an "early, unconditional and rapid withdrawal" of all Russian troops from Latvian and Estonian soil.


Frank Gehry's Courage
To The Home Section:
Herbert Muschamp's article "The Gehry House: A Brash Landmark Grows Up" (Oct. 7) states that a ripple of dissatisfaction went through the community of architects deeply influenced by Frank Gehry when Mr.
Gehry remodeled his house.
Well, they missed the point.


Now Hear This: More Free Software
Computer Associates, which created a marketing stir in June with its offer of free personal finance software, is back for an encore.
This time it's free tax software.
The Islandia, L.I., company announced yesterday that within three weeks it would ship a free copy of its CA Simply Tax to everyone who requests one by calling 800-7-FREETAX, or 800-737-3382.
The tax software comes in early and final versions because 1993 forms are not yet available from the Internal Revenue Service.
The rates and rules are known, however, so early programs using last year's forms can be useful in doing year-end tax planning.


GARDEN Q. &amp; A.
Autumn Crafts
This time of year, my mailbox is filled with questions on using the gleanings from gardens for seasonal decorations.
Autumn is harvest time for the flowers, herbs, berries, seedpods and ornamental grasses that can be dried and used for filling a barren window box or decorating a holiday table or a Christmas tree.


Thanks to an odd pitch, the Craftsman hammer can join Lenny (Nails) Dykstra in card collections.
"TRADE ya two Lenny Dykstras and a Joe Carter for a Sears Craftsman screwdriver and two Coca-Cola Santa Clauses!"
Cries like that have not yet begun to echo across the nation's schoolyards.
But they may someday, heralding an unusual promotional ploy: series of trading cards sponsored by major marketers who seek to augment their advertising pitches with colorful cardboard images of their products and services.


Ford Reports a $463 Million Profit for 3d Quarter
With profits in the United States at their highest level for the period since 1988, the Ford Motor Company today posted third-quarter earnings of $463 million, in contrast to a loss of $272 million during the quarter last year.
While Ford's stock surged immediately after the announcement, it receded a bit after Wall Street analysts looked more closely at the numbers.
In addition to a one-time favorable tax adjustment of $140 million, Ford's profits were buoyed by sales in Latin America, a market that some analysts consider too volatile to support investors' hopes for future prosperity.
Other analysts worried that Ford was continuing to cut the profit margins on its vehicles too fine.


New St. Louis Ownership Group Is the Subject of Expansion Intrigue
The ownership group from Charlotte, N.C., the only winner so far in the National Football League's expansion derby, went home happy today.
The losers also went home, unsure whether they still have a chance for the remaining new franchise, unsure whether the owners of the N.F.L.'s 28 clubs have already settled on St.
Louis.
J.
Wayne Weaver, who heads the Jacksonville, Fla., group, angrily demanded a meeting with Commissioner Paul Tagliabue.
After the meeting here this morning, Weaver and his partners decided against dropping out of the bidding race.
Then they flew home, and at an afternoon news conference in Jacksonville, Weaver said: "We don't want to keep getting jerked around. It's unfair to change the rules at the 11th hour."


Classical Music in Review
Ned Rorem  New York Virtuoso Singers St. Peter's Lutheran Church
Between works at a concert celebrating his 70th birthday on Saturday evening, Ned Rorem reflected on his music in the impishly articulate way that has been his literary trademark ever since he published his first diaries.
Because the program was devoted to his choral music rather than to the art songs for which he is most renowned, he noted that about half his works were for chorus and that half of those were sacred settings.
What makes this peculiar, he added, is that he does not believe in God.
But he said that he did believe in belief and that he admired the poetry of believers.


Clear Channel Communications Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Yeltsin Moves to Give Farm Lands to the Farmers
President Boris N. Yeltsin signed a decree today to allow farm workers to own and dispose of land freely.
Thus he lowered a major hurdle to reforming the Soviet system of large state or collective farms.
The move has been widely debated in the press as a compromise between conservatives' efforts to prevent the parceling out of the state-controlled farms and progressives' demands for a totally free market in land.


Lawyer Ties Man's Coma to Intern Stony Brook Dismissed
A 60-year-old man lapsed into a coma this month after he was sedated by an intern who was convicted of poisoning six people in 1985, the patient's lawyer said today.
The account came just one day after hospital officials asserted that no harm had come to any of the 147 patients treated by the intern, Michael Swango, before he was dismissed on Oct. 13.


Bonnett to Announce Another Comeback
NEIL BONNETT, who suffered a serious head injury in a 1990 wreck and then crashed again in a comeback bid this year, plans to drive in five races during the 1994 Nascar Winston Cup season.
Bonnett said he would announce his plans today at Phoenix International Raceway, where qualifying for the Slick 50 500 begins tomorrow.


AT HOME WITH: John Gielgud; His Own Brideshead, His Fifth 'Lear'
SIR JOHN GIELGUD is surrounded by echoes and reverberations from his past.
A long afternoon's conversation in his baronial home flows from Kenneth Branagh to Sarah Bernhardt, doubling around two world wars and crisscrossing a lifetime in the theater.
With his precise, vivid memory, he carries with him the history of the English theater in the 20th century.
The actor's fifth "King Lear," in a radio production directed by Kenneth Branagh, is scheduled to be broadcast by the BBC on April 14, Sir John's 90th birthday.
Other plans are afoot to honor him that day, including a tribute at the Haymarket Theater in London, all of which he has actively discouraged: "I said, don't celebrate. If I can manage to go on working, it's much more interesting. One of the things one does enjoy in old age is being able to make excuses not to do things you don't want to do."


Daily News Backs Giuliani
Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday won the endorsement of the editorial page of The Daily News, his first from a major daily newspaper.
Mayor David N. Dinkins got the support of the editorial page of the city's leading Spanish-language newspaper, El Diario-La Prensa.
The Daily News said that Mr. Dinkins has not earned four more years in office.


Associates Corp. of North America reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Book on Nazi Murder Industry Stirs French Storm
Jean-Claude Pressac, the local pharmacist in this village near Paris, is a singular man.
Contrarian by nature, he is as obsessed by the technical specifications of Nazi gas chambers as others are by the human suffering that took place within them.
Now Mr.
Pressac's intense interest in the industrial aspects of the Holocaust has placed him at the center of a storm.
His recently published book, "The Auschwitz Crematoria: The Machinery of Mass Slaughter," has been alternately hailed in France as the definitive account of how the Nazis installed and operated their instruments of murder, and vilified as the barren ruminations of a man with a twisted need to prove the massacre of Jews that he once doubted.


N.H.L. Pumps All-Star Game
In an effort to improve the intensity of competition in the annual All-Star game, the National Hockey League announced yesterday a winner-take-all format for prize money in this season's game, to be played at Madison Square Garden on Saturday, Jan. 22.
Each player on the winning side will get $5,000, according to Commissioner Gary Bettman, who appeared at a Garden news conference to open the fan balloting officially.


No Rain to Soak Them, So They Soaked Up the Sun


Corrections
An obituary yesterday about Dr.
Kevin Dowling, a clinical professor of surgery at the University of Connecticut who died on Monday, misstated his middle initial.
It was V.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
2.75
3.03
3.06
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.06
3.07
2.92
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.17
3.17
3.16
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.00
4.95
6.28
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
6.00
5.98
7.60
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.08
7.02
8.67
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.47
5.43
6.71
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


BMC Software (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Santa Anas: Weather Worthy of Satan
Some people think the Santa Ana winds are named for Satan, from the Spanish word 'satanas.' They are not, but as millions of Southern Californians know, they easily could be.
Named for Santa Ana Canyon south of Los Angeles, where early settlers first observed them, the winds are most common in the fall.


America West Airlines (NSC) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: Financing the Plan; The Difference 6 Weeks Make: Revisions in Costs
The biggest differences between the health care plan President Clinton invited Congress to ponder six weeks ago and the bill he offered today are financial, reflecting an effort to avoid a repetition of the huge cost increases that have characterized Medicare since its was enacted in 1965.
The changes were meant to reassure likely supporters of the bill who were suspicious of the plan's financial underpinnings, and they brought one quick and important change of tune.
Daniel Patrick Moynihan, the New York Democrat who heads the Senate Finance Committee and who called the first version of the proposal "fantasy," said today, "I'm much more satisfied."


Tapes Depict Proposal to Thwart Bomb Used in Trade Center Blast
Law-enforcement officials were told that terrorists were building a bomb that was eventually used to blow up the World Trade Center, and they planned to thwart the plotters by secretly substituting harmless powder for the explosives, an informer said after the blast.
The informer was to have helped the plotters build the bomb and supply the fake powder, but the plan was called off by an F.B.I. supervisor who had other ideas about how the informer, Emad A. Salem, should be used, the informer said.


Belfast Observes a Day of Funerals and Fear
A solitary bagpiper marched ahead of a hearse, playing an Irish lament.
The coffin inside was draped with the Irish tricolor, topped with gloves and a black beret, signifying that the deceased was a member of the banned Irish Republican Army.
Not that anyone in Belfast didn't already know.
Thomas Begley, a 22-year-old I.R.A. volunteer and a Roman Catholic, was buried today amid a panoply of honors and under heavy security.
So were five other people, all Protestants, who were in a fish shop on Shankill Road on Saturday when Mr.
Begley entered disguised as a delivery boy, carrying a bomb.
So was a 72-year-old man, shot in his home by Protestant gunmen on a retaliatory murder spree that has taken four victims over the last 72 hours.


Emcon (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Aflac Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Postmaster, Beware, A Revolt Is Brewing
To the Editor:
A new streamlined eagle logo for the United States Postal Service with a price tag of $6.7 million fails to excite my imagination or give me confidence that the post office has service or its customers on its agenda.
To a Postal Service counting a deficit of $500 million, $6.7 million may not be a lot of money, but it could buy a lot of 29 cent stamps or pay the salaries of perhaps 15,000 more postal workers.


Paramount Suitor Blasts Bell Atlantic's Cable Bid
Even for Washington, it was an unlikely alliance.
One of the Senate's fiercest critics of big business, the Ohio Democrat Howard M. Metzenbaum, teamed with the man seeking to acquire Paramount Communications in order to warn about "mega-mergers" in the communications industry.
Leading a hearing of the Senate Judiciary subcommittee on anti-trust issues, Senator Metzenbaum charged that Bell Atlantic Corporation's $32 billion deal to buy Tele-Communications Inc. would create a "colossus" and a "mega-monster" that would stifle competition in the industry.


The Simple Logic of School Choice
Next Tuesday, voters in California will express their opinions on the most important public policy issue since the Voting Rights Act.
The issue is school choice.
The California Teachers Association has spent more than $12 million on political advertising to defeat Proposition 174, an initiative that would enable parents to receive financial help from the government if they chose to send their children to nonpublic schools.


Calendar: Discussions On Design and Books
Architects' Designs  Architectural League of New York, the Urban Center, 457 Madison Avenue (51st Street); (212) 753-1722.
Raimund Abraham, an architect, will discuss his design of the Austrian Cultural Institute, to be built on East 52d Street, tonight at 6:30 P.M.
Admission is $7.
An exhibition of his designs and others that were submitted in an international competition starts on Nov. 5 and continues through Dec. 1.
Open Monday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 5 P.M. (closed Thursdays).
No charge.


Nassau Candidates Dispute County's Present and Future
In a debate that presented two starkly different visions of Nassau County, the Democratic and Republican candidates for county executive clashed today over the state of the county's economy and who should be blamed for high taxes.
Throughout the two-hour debate, Thomas S. Gulotta, the incumbent Republican, maintained that Nassau had the region's lowest unemployment rate and one of the lowest crime rates in the nation.
He said high property taxes were largely the fault of the school districts and the state government's failure to give Long Island its fair share of education money.


A Heroine for the Arts?
To the Editor:
Maybe the actress and leading lady Jane Alexander, in her new role as chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Arts, will be a heroine for the arts, a Leonora to the rescue, like the heroine of Beethoven's "Fidelio," who freed her husband from a dungeon. (Trumpet, please.) Here in Buffalo, where our symphony orchestra is playing, but fighting for its life (and there are other American orchestras in intensive-care wards), it somehow is small comfort that Ms.
Alexander's idea of arts education for schoolchildren goes beyond carving pumpkins for Halloween and dressing up as Easter bunnies.
What are the arts, anyway?
THOMAS PUTNAM  Buffalo, Oct. 21, 1993


Block Cutler's Role in a Retrial, U.S. Urges
Federal prosecutors have moved to prevent Bruce Cutler, who used to be John Gotti's lawyer, from representing an accused Gambino crime family member on drug smuggling and racketeering charges.
The case against Thomas Gambino; his brother, Joseph, and three associates went to trial once before in Federal District Court in Manhattan, with Mr.
Cutler representing Joseph Gambino, and prosecutors want to keep him from taking part in a retrial.
In the first trial, which ended last June, the jury found the Gambinos guilty of bail-jumping, but it deadlocked on the most serious charges.


Bangles for Bowser
IN 1970, the jewelry designer Robert Lee Morris took a leather collar made for a calf and adapted it to fit his Great Dane.
More recently, his boxer, Pinky (below), and his Boston terrier, Chet, inspired a new collection of collars and leashes.
"Maybe the dog collars are the reason I got into jewelry in the first place," Mr.
Morris said.


Stand Up to Senator Packwood
Nearly a year after publicly confessing to wrongful sexual conduct over many years, Senator Bob Packwood clings to his office and party position, forcing a laborious ethics investigation.
Now, in a new display of shamelessness, he has brought the Senate Ethics Committee to an impasse, insisting on his right to define and contain the committee's inquiry.
The Ethics Committee, showing unusual bipartisan vigor, voted 6 to 0 last week to subpoena contested volumes of personal diaries -- which the Oregon Republican first brought to the committee's attention -- and he has refused to comply.
But the full Senate hesitates to act on the committee's reasonable request to authorize court enforcement of its subpoena.
Apparently many senators fear, thanks to threatening and unseemly comments by Mr.
Packwood, that the diaries implicate other members in indiscretions.


Walter F. Sheehan, 83, A Retired Headmaster
Walter F. Sheehan, headmaster for 25 years of the Canterbury School in New Milford, Conn., died on Saturday at the Candlewood Valley Care Center in New Milford.
He was 83.
He had had a long illness, the school said.


Centerior Energy reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


Christiana Cos.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Public &amp; Private; TV Guide
Austin was 5 and Jessica was 2, and by the time Austin had finished with the lighter he took from atop their mother's dresser, Jessica was trapped inside a burning house.
And Beavis and Butt-head were in big, big trouble.
Since the morning early this month when Austin Messner set the fire that killed his little sister, his actions apparently inspired by cartoon characters, several things have happened.


Review/Dance; Movement and Sound In Fluid Collaboration
The works that Wichern/Wolfson Dance and Music offered on Sunday night at the Merce Cunningham Studio occasionally went awry.
That didn't seriously matter.
The group remained worth watching and listening to because of the close collaborative harmony between its directors, Lynn Wichern, a choreographer, and David Wolfson, a composer.
Ms.
Wichern was at her best in evocative small-scale dances.
And Mr.
Wolfson's scores both intensified the choreographic moods and sounded musically inventive in their own right.


Meyer Halperin, 91; Aided Jewish Causes
Meyer Halperin, a lawyer who was active in many Jewish causes, including the Jewish National Fund and Brandeis University, died at Lenox Hill Hospital on Friday.
He would have been 91 on Saturday.
His family attributed his death to natural causes.


Central Park Reservoir to Stay as Is; New York Is to Leave It Undeveloped, Home to Waterfowl
The Dinkins administration has come up with a plan for the soon-to-close Central Park Reservoir, which holds one billion gallons of water, cools Manhattan's muggy core on superheated days and has invisibly fed the island's thirst for 131 years.
The city has decided to do nothing. And apparently parkgoers like it that way.
Last May, the city announced that it would stop pumping drinking water from the 106-acre reservoir this year because it was no longer needed and because of growing concerns by Federal environmental officials about the potential for contamination.
Since then, the city Department of Parks and Recreation has received a flood of letters urging that it not fill in the reservoir for more ball fields, meadows or paths.
Decision Made With Little Debate
Today, officials from various city agencies are scheduled to gather at the reservoir's sylvan shore to sign an agreement to preserve the park's largest body of water basically as it is: as a home to cormorants and ducks that is encircled with a 1.58-mile path for jogging and walking.


CLINTON'S HEALTH PLAN: The Overview; CONGRESS IS GIVEN CLINTON PROPOSAL FOR HEALTH CARE
After nine months of brainstorming and politicking, President Clinton delivered to Congress today a 240,000-word proposal for universal health insurance.
It represents the most complex, detailed legislative blueprint devised by any President.
The document provides scores of details that were not available in White House documents or speeches by Administration officials over the last nine months.


Eastern Utilities Associates reports earnings for 12mo to Sept 30


Ailing Coleman Returns, but Only for a Seat on Bench
Derrick Coleman came home tonight, but he didn't get a chance to eat any home cooking or to play any basketball at the Palace.
Instead, he remained in street clothes on the Nets' bench and watched his New Jersey teammates even their preseason record at 3-3 with a 90-84 victory over the Detroit Pistons.
"I'm O.K. now and I'll be back with the team for practice on Friday," said Coleman, who grew up in Detroit and who has missed the Nets' last four preseason games with a wisdom tooth problem that resulted in an extraction three days ago.


Giants' Revived Defense Catches Carolina's Eye
Although former Washington Coach Joe Gibbs seems to be the leading candidate to coach the Carolina Panthers, the expansion team is covering all the bases during its search.
And one person who appears to be under consideration for the job is Mike Nolan, the Giants' defensive coordinator.
"From what I've heard and seen I think Mike Nolan is an excellent coach," Mike McCormack, Carolina's general manager, said today in a telephone interview.
"I think he could be a good coach for us, but it's too early to tell now. We have a lot of time to make decisions about these things."


Mason Makes Haste After Slow Start in Knick Preseason
During training camp, Pat Riley said a few players did not report in the shape that he expected.
Anthony Mason admitted he was one of those players.
"I didn't come back in the best shape that I could've come back in," Mason said before the Knicks' 76-75 loss to the San Antonio Spurs tonight.
"I got complacent, enjoyed life for a minute, did some things I hadn't been able to do before. Thanks to the Knicks, I could do them. It was a learning experience.


Transactions
Baseball  American League
NEW YORK YANKEES -- Exercised their 1994 option on Paul Gibson, pitcher.
National League
CHICAGO CUBS -- Declined to exercise their 1994 option on Glenallen Hill, outfielder.
California League
MODESTO ATHLETICS -- Announced the resignation of Charlie Leone, director of operations, to become the business manager of New Haven of the Eastern League.
Football  National Football League
CLEVELAND BROWNS -- Signed Brad Goebel, quarterback, and Thomas McLemore, tight end.
Cut Everson Walls, cornerback, and David Brandon, linebacker.
GREEN BAY PACKERS -- Signed Tony Bennett, linebacker.
INDIANAPOLIS COLTS -- Signed Robert O'Neal, defensive back.
NEW ENGLAND PATRIOTS -- Signed Mark Staten, offensive lineman, from the Cincinnati Bengals practice squad.
Placed Adrian White, safety, on injured reserve.
Waived Steve Gordon and Chris Perez, offensive linemen, from practice squad.
NEW ORLEANS SAINTS -- Signed Jeff Faulkner, defensive end.
Signed Doug Skene, guard, to the practice squad.
Waived Tommie Stowers, tight end.
SAN FRANCISCO 49ERS -- Signed Sanjay Beach, wide receiver, and John Brandes, tight end.
Placed Keith DeLong, linebacker, and Wesley Walls, tight end, on injured reserve.
SEATTLE SEAHAWKS -- Placed Grant Feasel, center, on injured reserve.
Canadian Football League
OTTAWA ROUGH RIDERS -- Signed Tim Piper, kicker. Hockey  National Hockey League
BUFFALO SABRES -- Traded Keith Carney, defenseman, to the Chicago Blackhawks for Craig Muni, defenseman.
DALLAS STARS -- Assigned Jarkko Varvio, left wing, to Kalamazoo of the International Hockey League.
East Coast Hockey League
DAYTON BOMBERS -- Waived Jon Grandbois, left wing.
Usa hockey  Soccer  American Professional Soccer League
LOS ANGELES SALSA -- Loaned Paul Wright, forward, to Baltimore of the National Professional Soccer League; Dale Ervine, midfielder, to Wichita of the NPSL; and Richard Ryerson, defender, to Cleveland of the NPSL.
College
CLEVELAND STATE -- Named Jim Harrison men's assistant soccer coach.
INDIANA, Pa. -- Named Kevin Reynolds men's assistant basketball coach.
TENNESSEE-MARTIN -- Extended the contract of Don McLeary, football coach, through June 1996.
WOFFORD -- Named John Akers women's soccer coach.


NEW CANADA PARTY SURGES IN ELECTION
A new political party has come storming out of the Canadian west, riding some of the same gusts that Ross Perot rode as an independent candidate in last year's American Presidential election.
The Reform Party, building on anti-tax sentiment, strong feelings against immigrants and traditional opposition to Ottawa-based politicians, virtually swept Canada's two most western provinces, taking 46 of 58 Parliamentary seats in British Columbia and Alberta on Monday.


Dinkins Uplift, Giuliani Grit: 2 Advertising Schools Battle
David N. Dinkins opened his television advertising campaign with a "Heartbeat of America"-style commercial complete with rousing music.
Rudolph W. Giuliani began with a grainy, low-key ad that looked as if it had absorbed its grittiness from the streets of New York.
Next, the Dinkins campaign broadcast advertisements extolling the Mayor's accomplishments in warm, lofty images.
The Giuliani campaign came back with ads featuring ordinary people.
Clash Between Ad Styles
Then Mr.
Dinkins attacked with negative ads, accusing Mr.
Giuliani of fighting against "everything we stand for." The Giuliani campaign countered with the candidate's wife charging the Mayor with race-baiting.


QVC Is Considering Its Next Move
The QVC Network took its fight for Paramount Communications Inc. directly to shareholders yesterday, but almost as soon as it did, it was considering replacing its $9.6 billion bid with a better one.
People close to the QVC camp say the company is assessing its options.
But several merger experts said if QVC increased its offer, the company would probably not do so for at least nine business days for tactical reasons.
That might force Viacom, the competing bidder, into a position of having to extend its own tender offer and postpone completing the deal if it chose to match a higher offer.
Viacom also has a nearly $10 billion offer on the table.
Both bids are valued at $80 a share.


Care Enterprises Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Dataware Technologies (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Du Pont (E.I.) de Nemours &amp; Co. (N) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Cablevision To Purchase TV Systems
Cablevision Systems Corporation, which is considered a prime target in the takeover wave sweeping the communications industry, turned the tables on speculators yesterday and announced that it would buy an additional three cable television systems for $463 million.
By acquiring the three systems from Sutton Capital Associates Inc., Cablevision will pick up an additional 176,000 subscribers in areas adjacent to the systems it already operates.


Alberto-Culver Co.  reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Allied Signal Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Giuliani Says He'd Fill Posts on Basis of Merit
Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday accused Mayor David N. Dinkins of making appointments based primarily on race and ethnicity, and said that as mayor, he would make all appointments based on merit, "irrespective of race, religion, ethnic background and sexual orientation."
At a news conference at his headquarters at 415 Madison Avenue, near 50th Street, he suggested that the Mayor was preoccupied with diversity and had made decisions at the expense of general competence.


Thousands Flee As Brush Fires Rake California
Driven by hot gusty winds from the desert, at least a dozen brush fires roared out of control today across Southern California, damaging or destroying hundreds of homes and forcing tens of thousands of people to evacuate.
The fires spread ominously all day, leaping canyons and brush-covered hills, consuming expensive homes and trailer parks alike in six counties from Ventura to the Mexican border.
A smoky pall wafted over downtown Los Angeles, where ashes fell like snow all day.


Gun Bill Is Unsnagged, Making Passage More Likely
A pivotal House chairman who opposes a bill that would enhance controls on the sale of handguns has nonetheless made its enactment far more likely by agreeing to strip it from a much larger anticrime package that has been stalled in Congress for almost two years.
The lawmaker, Representative Jack Brooks, the Texas Democrat who heads the House Judiciary Committee, relented late Tuesday to the intense pressure of Democratic colleagues who favor the gun-control legislation, known as the Brady bill.


Corrections
An article in Business Day on Oct. 20, about plans by Pfizer Inc., the American Cyanamid Company and the Upjohn Company to eliminate a total of 7,000 jobs, misstated the number of manufacturing jobs lost in New York City since 1987.
It is about 94,000, not 270,000.


Economic Scene; The earnings gap grows, within professions and among them.
IN 1990 the average take-home of the partners in the law firm of Cravath, Swaine &amp; Moore exceeded the total salaries of all nine members of the Supreme Court.
Chief executives of the Fortune 500 did pretty well that year, too, netting an average of $1.4 million -- roughly 40 times the average for public school teachers.
O.K., O.K, it is getting harder to work up a lather over such familiar outrages.
But the source of these numbers, Derek Bok's new book, "The Cost of Talent," (The Free Press) offers more than a rehash of the old stuff.


Bethlehem Steel reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Datascope (NMS) reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Key Part Of B.C.C.I. Plan Is Rejected
An appeals court in Luxembourg rejected a key part of the liquidation plan for the failed Bank of Credit and Commerce International today, throwing into disarray efforts to compensate the institution's 550,000 depositors and other creditors worldwide.
The ruling came as a shock to depositors and to the bank's court-appointed liquidators, Touche Ross &amp; Company, which had previously won approval for the plan from regulators and courts in Britain and the Cayman Islands, where portions of the fraud-ridden institution were based.


Badger Paper Mills Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Sept 30


Pop and Jazz in Review
Jimmie Dale Gilmore The Ballroom 247 West 28th Street Chelsea Through tonight
Jimmie Dale Gilmore's voice sounds diffident at first.
Thin and reedy, with a quaver that comes and goes, it seems uncertain and fragile, likely to blow away in a light breeze.
But that's an illusion.
Mr.
Gilmore's voice perfectly fits his serene, otherworldly songs, in which love and betrayal, loss and redemption are all contemplated with plaintive, kindly intelligence.


Market Place; ICN Pharmaceuticals offers a double bet for investors.
INVESTING in ICN Pharmaceuticals Inc., currently the object of a proxy struggle between its incumbent management and Rafi M. Khan, a California stockbroker, is sort of like betting the daily double at the local race track.
As where horses (or dogs) are concerned, the gamble does not pay off unless the bettor correctly picks the winners of two consecutive races.
In the first half of this particular double, investors are being asked to bet that bullets and bombs will give way to partnership and that United Nations sanctions will turn into trade alliances.
The second half is a bet that the Food and Drug Administration will approve ICN's antiviral drug, ribavirin, as a treatment for hepatitis C.


Merck Plans Stock-Option Gift for Staff
Merck &amp; Company, the world's largest drug maker, said yesterday that it would give each of its 37,000 employees an option to buy 300 shares of Merck's common stock at $32.50 a share.
The stock could not be purchased until Oct. 20, 1998.
Nearly all large companies give stock options to executives, but Merck, based in Whitehouse Station, N.J., is one of only about 30 large companies that give options to all employees.


Connecticut Biotech Concern Names Chief
The Neurogen Corporation said yesterday that it was naming Harry H. Penner Jr., an experienced pharmaceutical deal maker, as president and chief executive, effective Dec. 1.
He will replace Philip J. Whitcome, who is leaving because of a family health problem, the biotechnology start-up company said.


Making Car Theft More Difficult
THE purpose of technology is usually to make life easier.
In the case of car security, the opposite is true; the purpose is to make life more difficult -- for car thieves.
What used to be merely a matter of placing a siren under the hood has become a high-tech game of cat-and-mouse between a car thief and a car owner.
There are security systems as simple as the Club, a steering wheel locking device that sells for about $40, and as complex as systems that track a stolen car and call the police, which can sell for as much as $2,000.


Classical Music in Review
John Browning  Alice Tully Hall
Beginning his 60th-birthday celebration at Alice Tully Hall, John Browning played on Monday night with and without the accompaniment of the Juilliard Orchestra under the direction of Leonard Slatkin.
It was a curious program that did not show the pianist's gifts to best advantage.
But the playing was impressive throughout, at times quite masterly.


Candidates Debate Budget in Battle for Westchester Executive
As the race for Westchester County Executive enters its final days, even a strictly controlled League of Women Voters forum can turn into a rough-and-tumble debate, the incumbent, Andrew P. O'Rourke, and his challenger, state Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky, showed here tonight.
Given no time for opening statements and restricted to answering issue-oriented questions posed by the League and members of the audience, Mr.
Brodsky, a Democrat from Greenburgh, quickly turned his comments on his opponent, suggesting that the solution to nearly every problem in Westchester lay in replacing its chief executive.


Schiller Interviewed for Commissioner
HARVEY SCHILLER, executive director of the United States Olympic Committee since 1990, has been interviewed for the vacant job of commissioner, a person familiar with the search process said last night.
Schiller, 53, a Brooklyn native who worked as a vendor at Ebbet's Field as a teen-ager, did not seek the job, but was approached by the owners' search committee, the person said.


Corrections
A picture caption with the television listings yesterday referred incorrectly in some copies to the actor shown in "South of Sunset." He was Glenn Frey, not Aries Spears.


Hasbro to Sponsor A Cartoon Marathon
Turner Entertainment Networks said yesterday that Hasbro Inc. had agreed to become the sole sponsor of an international cartoon marathon -- 84 hours of programming -- on six Turner cable television networks, including WTBS, the Cartoon Network and TNT.
Last year, Hasbro sponsored a marathon, "The Great American Toon-In," on Turner networks in the United States on the day after Thanksgiving.
This year, on Nov. 26, Hasbro will sponsor "The Great International Toon-In" in more than 55 countries in North America, Latin America and Europe.


Control Data Systems Inc. reports earnings for Qtr to Oct 2


Critic's Notebook; Up-to-Date Promotion For the Biblical 'Cave'
"The Cave" has come and gone at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, but rest assured: music lovers have not seen the last of it.
This merger of video and music by Beryl Korot and Steve Reich has already cut its swath through one American city and four in Europe.
Brussels is coming up, and hotly in pursuit are Lisbon, Rome, Turin, Hong Kong, again London and various points in Japan.
The composer and image maker have explained the moment and the meaning of "The Cave" at the Whitney Museum and will do the same on Nov. 9 at the Jewish Museum.
A recording will be released next year on Nonesuch, and a single-channel video is being vigorously pursued despite the costs.
Included in all this activity is not only an event but also a new set of ideas.
Indeed, "The Cave" has been described as "one of the most radical redefinitions of opera the waning century has witnessed." Having seen it in Brooklyn and read a lot about its past and future, I find it hard to disagree, although at moments I wish I could.


Packers' Bennett Signs After Holdout
Linebacker TONY BENNETT signed with the Green Bay Packers yesterday, ending a 103-day holdout.
Details of the pact were not available.


Dow Drops 7.83 Points, Closing at 3,664.66
The economic news was encouraging yesterday, but investors apparently needed a little more convincing.
They sent confused signals in a fragmented stock market, bidding up small companies while shunning some industrial powerhouses that might be expected to profit from a spurt in the recovery.
Despite the Government's announcement that September durable- goods orders rose, blue-chip stocks in the Dow Jones industrial average gave up more of the gains of Monday, when the index hit a new high.
Other indexes were only slightly stronger, though the Nasdaq composite rose sharply, lifted by technology issues.


Bombay Co.
Shares of the Bombay Company, a furniture retailer based in Fort Worth, rebounded yesterday after slumping in recent weeks.
Analysts attributed the earlier decline to investors' cashing in on gains in the stock, which had been performing well because of the company's strong earnings.


3 Artists Who Left A Fainter Impression
More than a century after Impressionism revolutionized painting, the names that still personify that movement -- Monet, Manet, Pissarro, Sisley, Degas, Renoir and others -- are without exception those of men.
At best, it seems, the role of women was merely to pose for them.
Yet, while overshadowed by these modern masters in both their lifetimes and in the history of art, a handful of women in late-19th-century Paris refused to be just domestic or studio accessories.
They too wanted to paint, and did so successfully.
Posterity, though, has barely recognized them.


Senate Approves Jobless Aid But Attaches Two Conditions
The Senate voted today to renew a two-year-old program that grants up to 13 extra weeks of checks to jobless workers who exhaust their normal unemployment benefits.
But the Senate did so only after tacking conditions to the renewal that confounded its prospects in the House.
The measure now goes to a House-Senate conference, where lawmakers from both chambers will try to agree on a version of the bill that each side can pass and send to the White House.


On Stage, and Off
The Mystery of Staying Power
Anyone looking at the raw figures might be puzzled as to why "Wonderful Tennessee," which earned $161,423 at the box office last week, filling 73 percent of the available seats at the Plymouth Theater, is closing on Sunday while "The Twilight of the Golds," which earned only $96,092 and filled 68 percent of the seats at the Booth, is, for the time being anyway, hanging on.
The explanation is that although potential audiences for "Tennessee" were eager enough to supply the play with a substantial advance sale, the drop at the box office when the reviews came out -- they weren't terrible, just reserved -- was immediate and huge.
Fans of the Irish playwright Brian Friel and his lyrical, understated, obliquely emotional dramas, the theory goes, had already bought their tickets; his reputation had carried the play as far as it was going to, and the show needed the buzz of critical rapture to assume the burden, as it had with Mr.
Friel's previous Broadway offering, "Dancing at Lughnasa." On Monday, however, the day after "Tennessee" opened, less than $8,000 worth of tickets was sold, a dooming total for a show with weekly operating costs of more than $135,000.
Neither the producer, Noel Pearson, nor the general manager, Joseph Harris, responded to repeated phone messages, but Mr.
Pearson acknowledged to Variety early in the week that after the reviews, "it was deader than a dodo."


RESULTS PLUS
TENNIS  Courier and Becker Fall  Marc Rosset, ranked 21st in the world, used a powerful serve-and-volley game to upset No. 2-seeded Jim Courier by 6-7 (5-7), 6-3, 7-6 (7-3) yesterday in the $1.65 million Stockholm Open.
No. 3 Boris Becker, a three-time champion here, and No. 5 Sergi Bruguera were also eliminated in the third round.
Carlos Costa of Spain, ranked 30th in the world, knocked off No. 1 Pete Sampras in three sets in a second-round match that ended just before midnight Wednesday.
MaliVai Washington beat Becker by 6-1, 6-3 to join Rosset in the quarterfinals.
Becker, who won the Stockholm Open in 1988 and 1990-91, dropped his serve twice in each set against Washington.
Bruguera, the French Open champion from Spain, lost by 3-6, 6-3, 6-2 to Jonas Svensson of Sweden.
For Becker, it was the fourth consecutive time that he made an early exit in an ATP tournament.


On My Mind; How Dare We?
How dare the United States do this thing?
Alexander M. Haig Jr. wants to know.
How dare the U.S.
"go around telling the rest of the world" that it must live up to American human rights standards?
He has China in mind.


Let Cambodians Have Justice at Last
To the Editor:
The United Nations has held elections in Cambodia.
Sihanouk is king again, and the United Nations is leaving.
But the Khmer Rouge, led by Pol Pot, who oversaw 1.5 million deaths from 1975 to 1979, still poses a threat.


Last Chance
Here is a sampling of shows in New York City that are to close soon: Closing This Weekend  "WONDERFUL TENNESSEE," Plymouth Theater, 45th Street, west of Broadway.
The drama by Brian Friel, directed by Patrick Mason.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today at 8 P.M.; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $37.50 to $47.50.
Information: (212) 239-6200.
"THE MAIDS," Classic Stage Company, 136 East 13th Street, East Village.
Jean Genet's drama, set in a warehouse basement.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Today and tomorrow at 8 P.M.; Sunday at 3 P.M.
Tickets: $25 to $27.
Information: (212) 677-4210.
BILL T. JONES/ARNIE ZANE DANCE COMPANY, Joyce Theater, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea.
Through Sunday.
Performances: Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 P.M.; Sunday at 2 and 7:30 P.M.
Tickets: $28.
Information: (212) 242-0800.
"COMIC POWER: INDEPENDENT/UNDERGROUND COMIX, U.S.A," Exit Art, 548 Broadway, at Prince Street, SoHo.
Some 100 artists are represented by more than 200 original drawings from the last 30 years.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: Today, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.; tomorrow, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Suggested admission: $2.
Information: (212) 966-7745.
"NEW YORK SCHOOL," Long Fine Art Gallery, 24 West 57th Street, Manhattan.
Drawings and paintings by Robert Motherwell, Jackson Pollock, Helen Frankenthaler and others.
Through tomorrow.
Hours: Today and tomorrow, 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 397-2001.
Closing Next Weekend  "THE NEW BAUHAUS/SCHOOL OF DESIGN IN CHICAGO, 1937-44," Banning &amp; Associates, 138 West 18th Street, Chelsea.
Through Nov. 5.
Hours: Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.; Sunday, 1 to 5 P.M.
Information: (212) 206-0438.
"WOMEN OF THE 1920's AND 30's" and "MESDAMES MORTER: STRIKING POSES-SELF PORTRAITS, 1918-28," Houk Friedman, 851 Madison Avenue, at 70th Street.
Through Nov. 6.
Hours: Tuesday through Saturday, 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Information: (212) 628-5300.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about infrastructure issues and the New York City mayoral race omitted the first name of Rudolph W. Giuliani's issues director, who discussed recycling and the management of the Sanitation Department.
He is Richard J. Schwartz. (A former city transportation official who was quoted earlier in the article, about infrastructure maintenance, was Samuel I. Schwartz.)


QVC Asks Court to Block Paramount-Viacom Merger
QVC Network Inc. asked the Delaware courts yesterday to block Paramount Communications Inc. from completing its friendly merger with Viacom Inc.
In yesterday's action, which had been widely expected in the battle for Paramount, the Delaware Chancery Court was asked for a preliminary injunction that would stop Viacom's proposed $10 billion tender offer for Paramount and remove what QVC sees as serious barriers to an open bidding contest.


Triborough Bonds' Top Yield 5.293%
The Triborough Bridge and Tunnel Authority of New York sold $173.1 million of general purpose tax-exempt revenue bonds with a maximum yield of about 5.293 percent for an issue due in 2020 through underwriters led by CS First Boston.
For investors in a 31-percent tax bracket the bond equivalent yield is about 7.67 percent.
Investor demand for the issue allowed the underwriters to lower yields on some short maturities by about 10 basis points, while shortening the maturity on one long-term issue and adding another long maturity.
A basis point is a hundredth of a percentage point.


Americans Would Hail Laws on Movie Violence; Glorified Mayhem
To the Editor:
Re "Janet Reno's Heavy Hand" (editorial, Oct. 22):
In denouncing the prospect of censorship, you state there was violence on the screen in the Keystone Kops, so why be concerned about televised violence today?
I never knew anyone who aspired to be a Keystone Kop.


Weekend Starts Now for Big East Laggards
Almost from the day this game was scheduled, Pittsburgh Coach Johnny Majors complained.
He complained that a Thursday night game came too quickly on the heels of a grueling game against West Virginia.
And Majors felt a midweek night game would throw the Panthers out of their rhythm.
Well, the Panthers were definitely out of sync this evening -- and for Pitt fans, it was a welcome change of pace.
Pittsburgh broke a six-game losing streak and captured its first Big East victory by shellacking Rutgers, 21-10, before a crowd of 20,130 at Giants Stadium.


Pianist in Debut
The pianist Myron Silberstein is to make his New York debut tomorrow at 8:30 P.M. at Weill Recital Hall.
The 19-year-old native of New York City was a gold-medal winner at the 1991 International Piano Competition of the Giornate Musicali Festival in Italy.
On his program are Paderewski's Theme With Variations, Lowell Liebermann's "Gargoyles," Chopin's Nocturne (Op. 62, No. 1) and Fantaisie, Bloch's Sonata and three works by Liszt: the "Mephisto" Waltz No. 3, Piano Piece in F sharp and Hungarian Rhapsody No. 15.
Tickets are $15.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


COLLEGE FOOTBALL
Dartmouth
Harvard comes to Hanover, N.H., tomorrow in the 97th meeting of an Ivy League rivalry that began in 1882.
Two of the league's best quarterbacks, Jay Fiedler of the Green and Mike Giardi of the Crimson, will duel for the third and last time.
Two years ago, the two teams played to a 31-31 tie and last season the Green won, 31-7.
Fiedler, armed with stronger supporting casts, has played on teams that have won 14 Ivy League games, lost two and tied one plus two championships.
The Giardi-Harvard teams are 8-8-1 in Ivy play over three seasons.


In Praise of the Tuba
The Cuervo Oct-Tuba Fest, a monthlong festival of events celebrating the tuba, closes today with a free concert at noon on the main concourse of Grand Central Station.
For the event, 150 tubas, led by Harvey Phillips, will perform a wide variety of music, including an audience sing-along for which buttons and kazoos will be distributed.


London Journal; f Churchill Could Hear, Would He Shed a Tear?
Here in the land of Shakespeare and Churchill, where even the boys in the cheap seats can spot the difference between your well-oiled peroration and just so much rodomontade, the question of the moment is wholly rhetorical: Has Britain's vaunted tradition of oratory gone the way of Empire?
Or, in a manner of speaking, does it just sound that way?
In letters to the editor, in newspaper columns and in broadcast interviews, pundits and earnest listeners have rushed to the ramparts.
They were goaded by what they heard and saw during Britain's annual political conference season, three weeks of nearly nonstop oratory -- much of its televised -- delivered by the greater and lesser lights of the nation's three major parties.
A Common Lament
Now that it is over, the questions hang thickly in the word-fogged air: whatever became of the blood, toil, tears and sweat of the past?
Was this really their finest hour?


Fairchild Plans to Convert Plant Into a Shopping Mall
The Fairchild Corporation announced plans today to redevelop the abandoned 80-acre aircraft plant from which thousands of fighter planes rolled off the assembly line during World War II.
The company described it as one of the largest military conversion projects on Long Island.
The cavernous hangars, loading docks and graffiti-covered office complex will be torn down and replaced by a shopping mall with three major retailers and scores of specialty stores.


Couple Races the Inferno, and Wins
Lorine Cecere was married just last month, and the wedding pictures and honeymoon postcards from Tahiti still lie scattered on the kitchen counter of her mother's sprawling three-story house in the exclusive Emerald Bay enclave here.
She moved from the house so recently that the 28-year-old Mrs.
Cecere still thinks of it as home.
And so when fire roared through the canyon here on Wednesday, gobbling wooded acres and million-dollar houses, she and her husband, Vince, decided that they would do everything in their power to save it, no matter how foolhardy.


Two Top Manhattan Galleries Merge
In a merger that many in the art world will view as a marriage between an aristocrat and a brash upstart, Wildenstein &amp; Company has purchased 49 percent of the Pace Gallery.
The deal combines a 118-year-old international art gallery known for its exceptional inventory of blue-chip Old Master and Impressionist paintings with a 32-year-old gallery that has become a powerhouse in modern and contemporary art.
Mergers are highly unusual in the art world, especially ones that join two leading galleries run as family businesses and that cover totally different periods of art.
The new entity will be known as Pace/Wildenstein and it will be based at Pace's present gallery, 32 East 57th Street in Manhattan, said Arne Glimcher, the founder and president of Pace.
The exact terms of the financial agreement were not disclosed by either gallery.


Dinkins Retains Financing From Groups of 4 Years Ago
Although Mayor David N. Dinkins has spent much of his re-election campaign trying to hold together the fragile coalition of voters that elected him in 1989, he seems to have had little trouble retaining the financial support of the alliance of Manhattan liberals, real-estate developers, Wall Street executives and black business leaders who bankrolled him four years ago.
Despite polls hinting that the Mayor has lost some support among liberals, including Jewish liberals, campaign finance records show among his major fund-raisers many prominent Jewish residents of Manhattan, including Edgar Bronfman Jr., Bruce Ratner, Jack Rudin, Felix G. Rohatyn, Carl Spielvogel, Jonathan Tisch, Howard Rubenstein and Arthur Levitt.


Review/Theater; Shakespeare for These Times, With No Political Errors
In the Hartford Stage Company's reflective, politically circumspect production of "The Merchant of Venice," directed by Mark Lamos, the very mention of the word Jew can cause characters to cross themselves like Transylvanian peasants in the presence of a vampire.
Indeed, by the play's end, the cross itself has become a shiny symbol of Christian oppression and superstition.
It seems appropriate, therefore, that the play's most voluble exponent for Jews converting to Christianity, the servant Launcelot Gobbo, should be portrayed (by David Manis) as a lout in circus-clown makeup.
And the usurious Shylock, played with contained dignity and unexpected flashes of sentimentality by Mike Nussbaum, is clearly accorded the position of a man more sinned against than sinning.


For Children
'The Witch Who Was Afraid of Witches'
One Dream Theater  232 West Broadway (at North Moore Street)  TriBeCa  (212) 274-1450  Recommended ages: 4 to 10  Through Sunday
Wendy is the youngest of three sisters.
They and their parents are witches (well, Dad is technically a warlock).
This unusual family -- Mom wears a funereal veil, Dad is monklike in a hooded gown -- is dysfunctional at best.
This musical pits the older sisters against Wendy, who fights with all her might to get more witch power.
Only that will save her.


Haiti's Premier Says He Will Stay at His Post
Few people in Haiti were more attentive to the speech before the United Nations today by Haiti's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, than the Prime Minister appointed by Father Aristide one month ago, Robert Malval.
Squared off in a tense stalemate with Haiti's military leaders, who have refused to resign despite their pledges to do so, Mr.
Malval had suggested that this week would be his last as Prime Minister.


Westchester County Budget Unveiled and Assailed
Andrew P. O'Rourke, the Westchester County Executive, today presented a $1.25 billion budget proposal for next year that he said would hold taxes steady.
But his Democratic opponent, Richard L. Brodsky, promptly branded the document a "campaign press release" that in fact raised taxes.
Mr.
O'Rourke has always disclosed budget proposals on Nov. 15, but this year he unveiled a summary two weeks earlier in the hope that news of stable property taxes might sway voters in a a hard-fought contest.


Aristide Asks U.N. to Place A Total Embargo on Haiti
The deposed President of Haiti called on the United Nations today to impose a total trade embargo on his country to force its military rulers to resign.
He also said he would not return there or ask Parliament to approve an amnesty for his opponents until they surrendered power.
But at the urging of the United States, the Security Council is expected to move cautiously toward new sanctions, both to allow more time for a negotiated settlement and to try to avoid the devastating effect a complete economic blockade could have on what is already one of the world's poorest countries, diplomats said.


Ex-Florio Foe Claims Slander by Whitman
John Budzash, the former postal worker who gained prominence as a leader of the public uprising against Gov.
Jim Florio's $2.8 billion tax increase, couldn't get on the ballot this year but he is tangled up in the race for governor, nonetheless.
On Wednesday, Mr.
Budzash endorsed Mr.
Florio, the candidate he once tried to chase from office.
Today he filed a $1 million lawsuit against Christine Todd Whitman, alleging that she had slandered him in questioning his motivation for backing Mr.
Florio.


Review/Film; A Lust for the (Supposedly) Lifeless
Q.
When your girlfriend develops long metal claws, glass spikes sticking out of her shoulders and a craving for human flesh, what time is it?
A.
Time to get a new girlfriend.
Or at least it ought to be for Curt Reynolds (J. Trevor Edmond) once his beloved Julie (Mindy Clarke) begins exhibiting these and other telltale signs of trouble.
But "Return of the Living Dead 3" is an "I'm O.K., You're Undead" love story in which Curt and Julie just can't quit.
Not even after Julie is killed in a motorcycle crash, which would seem like a natural time to say goodbye.


Specialist Keeps Hearth A Safe, Cozy Retreat
AUTUMN returns, and so, too, must Fred Heinrich.
Mr.
Heinrich has come to inspect your firebox, ash pit, damper, smoke chamber, flue tiles, mortar, flashing and spark arrester, if there is one.
He will remove unwanted raccoons from the smoke shelf, and remind you not to chuck apple cores or decorative plastic mistletoe into the family hearth.
He can be in and out in an hour, leaving not one sooty fingerprint.
And when, in his pleasant baritone, he speaks those reassuring words, "see you next year," you feel a surge of pride and security in home ownership, as if the Marcus Welby of chimney sweeps had pronounced you cured of hazardous creosote buildup.


Wingtip 'Cowboys' in Last Stand To Hold On to Low Grazing Fees
For more than a week, the Senate has been tied up in a filibuster led by Westerners opposed to President Clinton's plan to raise grazing fees on public land.
What is at stake, some senators say, is the very survival of a vanishing way of life.
As Senator Alan K. Simpson of Wyoming said, higher prices would "do those old cowboys in."
But a review of the top 500 holders of grazing permits on Federal land shows that many of those "old cowboys" are more likely to wear wingtips than boots.
They include the Metropolitan Life Insurance Company, with 800,000 acres under its control; the Mormon Church; a Japanese conglomerate; the Nature Conservancy, and some of the wealthiest families in the nation.
The top 10 percent of the permit holders, not all of which oppose fee increases, control about half of the nation's public grazing land, according to Interior Department figures.
Only 12 percent of the permit holders are listed by the Government as small operators.
Baucus Has Interest
Also, the beneficiaries of the low grazing fees include families of at least one of the senators now tying up the Senate -- Max Baucus, Democrat of Montana.
Mr.
Baucus said he has "a very small financial interest" in the ranch run by his brother John on Federal land near Helena, and that it should not disqualify him from the debate.


Review/Art; High-Tech Razzle-Dazzle And State-of-the-Art Art
For many artists, the idea of applying advanced technology to the task of making art, whether to throw light on the workings of industrial society or simply to open up new esthetic territory, continues to exert a strong imaginative pull.
The latest evidence of this is offered by "Iterations," an ambitious if ultimately disappointing show now at the midtown branch of the International Center of Photography.
Made with computers, video and other electronic equipment, the works here offer tantalizing hints of the impact that machines of this sort may have on art.
But for all the electronic razzle-dazzle on display, the most successful pieces here tend to take a somewhat jaundiced view of the technology on which they are based.


Giuliani on Education: Back to Basics
ON THE SCREEN: Rudolph W. Giuliani talking into the camera, wearing a green windbreaker at John Jay Park on the Upper East Side as children play in the background.
As he talks, footage of him with interracial group of teenagers at his alma mater, Bishop Loughlin Memorial High School in Brooklyn, then more footage listening to mothers and children in the park.
Various titles appear on the screen: "High educational standards for all public schools," "Budget reform so more money goes to classrooms." "Crime and drug free zones to make schools safer." At end, Mr.
Giuliani's face is inset in bright blue field, above the tagline "Rudy Giuliani, The Best Hope for New York," one of several slogans his campaign has used.
PRODUCER: The Garth Group of New York


Small Firms Flock to Big-Time Street
Call them the little law firms that could.
They could move to lustrous Manhattan addresses like Park Avenue when large firms, seeking larger spaces, moved out and commercial real estate rents moved down.
"There is no question regarding the allure of a Park Avenue location," said Robert S. Churchill, a managing partner at Gerstein &amp; Churchill, whose five lawyers and six staff members moved from 342 Madison Avenue to 300 Park, between 49th and 50th Streets, in 4,649 square feet of what used to be Proskauer Rose Goetz &amp; Mendelsohn space.
"It is less congested than most midtown streets. There is ample access to Grand Central Station for commuters; it's convenient for our clients, and it feels safe."


Doris Duke, 80, Heiress Whose Great Wealth Couldn't Buy Happiness, Is Dead
Doris Duke, the tobacco heiress and philanthropist whose bittersweet life was woven of luxury, disputes and interludes of deep unhappiness, died yesterday at her house in Beverly Hills, Calif.
She was 80 and had her main residence in Somerset County, N.J.
She also had homes on Park Avenue in midtown Manhattan, in Newport, R.I., and Hawaii.
The cause was progressive pulmonary edema resulting in cardiac arrest, said Howard J. Rubenstein, a spokesman for Bernard Lafferty, a friend and adviser to Miss Duke who was with her at her death.


Brooklyn Court Experiment Putting Cases on Fast Track
In the New York City criminal courts, delay is a hallowed tactic.
Witnesses disappear, memories fade, as prosecutors and, particularly, defense lawyers try to wear one another down.
Judges grimace but grant new dates.
A murder case often takes 35 court appearances and a year and a half to resolve.
But last week Judge Neil Jon Firetog of State Supreme Court in Brooklyn had what he thinks is the most extraordinary day of his 10 years on the bench: of the nine felony cases before him, eight defendants accepted the plea agreements offered by prosecutors and a firm trial date was set for the ninth.
"I never had such a day," said the judge, who is still incredulous.
"All day long it was like a nonstop Honda commercial: 'We'll take it, we'll take it!' "


Race for Public Advocate Viewed for Mayoral Effect
The race for Public Advocate is not considered much of a contest -- the polls put the Democrat Mark J. Green far ahead of the Republican-Liberal candidate, Councilwoman Susan D. Alter -- but it is being viewed with interest because of its possible impact on the mayoral race.
Mr.
Green, the city's former consumer affairs commissioner, has had overwhelming leads in every poll, and his election is considered a foregone conclusion by most politicians and analysts.
But his whirlwind campaign, in which he travels the city in a blue van, could have additional impact because Mr.
Green, a Jewish resident of the Upper East Side, could persuade a number of voters disenchanted with Mayor David N. Dinkins -- particularly liberal Jewish ones -- to vote for Mr.
Dinkins.


Slain Hasid's Brother Says Reno Lags on Crown Hts.
The brother of the Hasidic scholar slain in the 1991 racial violence in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, met Attorney General Janet Reno today to press his demand for a Federal inquiry into the disturbance, but said afterward that he had received only "bland and noncommittal" assurances on the matter.
The brother, Norman Rosenbaum, said at a news conference in the Capitol that the brief meeting left him with "no real indication of the direction of any investigation." The Republican Senator from New York, Alfonse M. D'Amato, who appeared with him before reporters, urged Ms.
Reno to name a special prosecutor to investigate the conduct of law-enforcement officials before and after the disturbances.


No Headline
"While reviewing the diaries, the committee counsel came across information indicating possible misconduct by Senator Packwood unrelated to the current inquiry. This information raised questions about a possible violation of one or more laws, including criminal laws." RICHARD H. BRYAN, Chairman of the Senate Ethics Committee.  [ A1:4. ]


Art in Review
Loren MacIver
Terry Dintenfass Gallery  50 West 57th Street  Manhattan  Through Nov. 6
This lovely show encompasses nearly 50 years of work by the 84-year-old Loren MacIver.
The earliest painting, "My House" (1936), is characteristic of much that follows.
Oil paint is handled with the discretion usually applied to pastel, and everyday life is transmuted into the emblematic.
The house in her painting, for example, is a fantastic Klee-like interior of ramparts, pillars and arches, in which individual details -- a lamp, a mouse, a handful of candies, a window bright with daylight, another with the moon showing through -- float in a burnished, honey-colored glow.


Reviews/Film; Mix at Will: Basic, Fatal, Instinct and Attraction
"Fatal Instinct" is Carl Reiner's hit-or-miss film noir parody, a collection of gags that vary much too wildly in terms of timing and wit.
All that hold this comedy together are a playful outlook and a conviction that detective stories are intrinsically funny, especially if the detective is as much of a blockhead as Ned Ravine.
As played by Armand Assante, Ned is a bit too convincingly dense, but he does make a useful fall guy.
Even if Mr.
Assante doesn't approach the level of Leslie Nielsen's inspired obliviousness in the "Naked Gun" comedies, he can sound suitably solemn when delivering lines like: "Women are an open book. You know how to read 'em, you can always tell the apples from the peaches." The absurdity is heightened by the fact that Ned happens to be both a policeman and a lawyer (a situation that eventually yields the newspaper headline "Cop Arrests Wife in Murder -- Will Defend Her in Court").
He also happens to need cue cards to read suspects their Miranda rights when he arrests them.


Attempted Murder
To the Editor:
Re "Mayhem in Los Angeles" (editorial, Oct. 22): As I understand it, your defense of the ridiculously lenient verdict against Damian Williams in the Reginald Denny case centers on agreement with the defense argument that if Mr.
Williams had really wanted to kill Mr.
Denny, "he could have finished the job."
Think about this for a second.
The implications argue against virtually anyone's being charged with attempted murder because most perpetrators charged with this offense certainly have a chance to finish the job.
I'd also be willing to bet that Damian Williams thought the chances of Reginald Denny's surviving his vicious attack were little to none.
The liberal, left-wing bent of The Times editorial board gets more divorced from reality and more offensive daily.
TIMOTHY SCHILT  New York, Oct. 22, 1993


AMERICAN INTERNATIONAL GROUP INC. (N)
American International Group reported yesterday that its third-quarter net income rose 33 percent from a year earlier.
The worldwide insurer and financial services company earned $451 million, compared with $339 million in the quarter the previous year.
The company reported strong performance in its overseas general insurance business and its life insurance business, which includes a growing presence in China and Latin America.


COMPANY NEWS: Court Corks Saint Laurent; Champagne Makers Get No Kick From Perfume
After a bitter legal battle between the Champagne industry and a top name in French fashion, a court ruled here today that Champagne is Champagne and Yves Saint Laurent has no right to use the name for perfume.
The ruling, which ordered the confiscation and destruction of publicity and packaging for Yves Saint Laurent's new perfume, "Champagne," ended a court fight that began when the association of Champagne wine growers and three individual producers filed suit over use of the name.


Walter J. Gill; Real-Estate Broker, 81
Walter J. Gill, who spent more than four decades in the New Jersey real-estate business, died on Saturday at his home in Avon, N.J.
He was 81.
A native of Newark, Mr.
Gill retired in 1974 as director and president of the Alexander Summer Mortgage Company of Newark and Teaneck.
He was associated with the firm since its founding in 1947.


The Case of Game Balls That Angered a Coach
Mississippi State Coach JACKIE SHERRILL has confirmed that he complained about footballs used in the Bulldogs' game at Auburn on Oct. 9, but said he never accused the Tigers of using helium.
"I never asked the officials to check Auburn's ball for helium," Sherrill said Wednesday.
"The only thing I asked the officials to check is that the balls were not legally inflated. The facts are the balls were not legal balls. The facts are the balls were taken out of the game."


A Sex-Bias Case Is Lost By Goldman
A Federal jury yesterday found Goldman, Sachs &amp; Company guilty of sex discrimination for blocking the promotion of a female executive and then dismissing her after she dismissed a male subordinate.
But the status of the civil suit brought by the former executive, Joanne Flynn, was unclear after the verdict, because Kimba M. Wood, the presiding United States District Judge in Manhattan, was considering a defense motion to dismiss the case.
The motion was filed before the case went to the jury.


Another New Jersey Option: Throwing Them Out Sooner
Voters who are dissatisfied with their choices for governor this year have a safety valve on Tuesday's ballot, a measure that could enable them to change their minds down the road.
The measure, the only statewide referendum on the ballot this year, asks this question: Should the State Constitution be amended to allow the recall of all elected officials after at least a year in office?


ISRAEL SEEKS DEAL WITH QATAR ON GAS
Israeli officials say they have held secret negotiations with the tiny Persian Gulf emirate of Qatar on a multibillion-dollar project to bring natural gas to Israel and then export it across the Mediterranean to Europe.
The officials say they could sign an agreement by early December.
But Qatar's Oil Minister denied today that a deal was in the making, calling reports of an imminent breakthrough "unrealistic and based on illogical assumption." The Qatari news agency quoted him as saying economic relations are not possible while the Arab boycott against Israel remains intact.


Art in Review
Reinhard Mucha 'Collected Recollected'
Luhring Augustine  130 Prince Street  SoHo  Through Nov. 20
For much of the last decade, the sculptor Reinhard Mucha has been the great German hope, the artist deemed most likely to succeed Joseph Beuys and Anselm Kiefer in maintaining an appropriately dour, heavy German art.
He has also been notorious for playing hard to get, choosing his group exhibitions carefully and largely shunning New York galleries.


Review/Opera; Philip Glass Looks Back at Cocteau's 'Orphee'
"Orphee," Philip Glass's new chamber opera based on the film by Jean Cocteau, arrived at the Majestic Theater of the Brooklyn Academy of Music on Wednesday night.
On the face of it, Mr.
Glass's two-act piece is an interpretation of an interpretation, a gloss on a gloss.
And indeed, there are places in it -- Orphee's pursuit of the Princess on the streets of Paris is one -- that mean little without the corresponding images created on film 43 years ago.
Condensing here, implying there, "Orphee" the opera follows the train of Cocteau's thoughts on a very ancient myth.
It uses much of his dialogue verbatim.
Yet in another sense, Mr.
Glass's piece is closer to Gluck than to Cocteau.
Gluck's "Orfeo ed Euridice," written in 1762, is opera's most prominent hommage to the Orpheus myth.
Although the new opera's reference to an old one is brief and fleeting, the flute solo with orchestra that announces the Princess's entrance from the Underworld seems, intentionally or not, more a comment on the music around it then a passing bow to history.


FINANCE BRIEFS
Debt  *
International Paper Co., Purchase, N.Y., is selling $200 million of 6 7/8 percent debentures due in 2023 at a price of 98.588 to yield 6.988 percent through Kidder, Peabody &amp; Co.
The noncallable debentures are rated A3 by Moody's Investors Service Inc. and A- by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corp.


A Verdict on Kevorkian: Their Kind of Neighbor
Most everyone here in his hometown seems to like the man they call Dr.
Death, Jack Kevorkian, the thoughtful, neighborly retired pathologist.
He got the nickname decades ago as an iconoclastic medical resident interested in unusual experimentation.
But its current connotation of necromantic celebrity is rooted in his more recent mercy-suicide crusade, which, his neighbors are noting, he dared to bring right into his own small walk-up apartment last week in helping a sick and agonized woman from Ann Arbor kill herself right there, next to Mr.
B's Pub on South Main Street.


Dow Touches 3,700 During Record Day
Gobbling up the news of a jump in the nation's economic growth and strong corporate earnings, investors unleashed a broad rally in stocks yesterday that drove all the major indexes higher.
The Dow Jones industrial average closed with a gain of 23.20 points, to 3687.86, a record high for the second time this week.
It had crossed the psychological barrier of 3,700 around noon before settling back late in the afternoon.


Sounds Around Town
Ft. Apache, the Village
Ft.
Apache Band, Zanzibar, 73 Eighth Avenue, between 14th and 13th Streets, Greenwich Village, (212) 924-9755.
The Ft.
Apache Band, run by the Gonzales brothers, might just be the best Latin jazz group working.
Andy Gonzales is one of salsa's greatest bassists, and his brother Jerry works as both a percussionist and trumpeter.
It's exciting music that moves easily between Miles Davis, Thelonious Monk, Wayne Shorter and the world of Afro-Cuban percussion.
Shows tonight and tomorrow night are at 10 and 12.
There is a $10 cover and an $8 minimum.
PETER WATROUS Chestnut in the Village
Cyrus Chestnut, Bradley's, 70 University Place, Greenwich Village, (212) 228-6440.
Mr.
Chestnut, who recently left the employ of Betty Carter, swings as hard as any young pianist around.
He's florid in all the right places; his solos brim with ideas and quotes, from gospel to stride to McCoy Tyner and Red Garland.
Here he's joined by the bassist Chris Thomas and the young drummer Brian Blade, who has a smooth way with brushes.
Shows tonight and tomorrow night are at 10, midnight and 2 A.M.
There's a $15 cover and an $8 minimum for the first set; the cover for the second and third sets is $12.
P.
W.
Cecil Brooks, et al.
Cecil Brooks 3d, Visiones, 125 MacDougal Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 673-5576.
It's a tough little band Mr.
Brooks brings in for the weekend: it includes the gifted and funny trumpeter Jack Walrath, who's best known for his work with Charles Mingus's music, along with the talented tenor saxophonist Don Braden and others.
Mr.
Brooks himself is a swinging young drummer who doesn't get around enough.
Shows tonight and tomorrow night are at 9, 11 and 1.
There is a $7 cover and a $10 minimum.
P.
W.


Selig Still Doesn't Want To Be the Commissioner
With the names of supposedly prospective candidates beginning to surface, the man most baseball club owners want as their next commissioner reiterated yesterday that he does not want the job.
Despite reports to the contrary, Bud Selig said he has not changed his mind.
"That is absolutely not correct," said Selig, the acting commissioner, when told that people close to the owners said he was prepared to take the job.
"My position has not changed. I don't know why anyone would say it has, certainly not by anything I've said or done."


Firefighters Gain Footholds Amid Ashes
With a merciful slackening of winds and cooler air, fire crews began to gain some advantage today over 17 ruinous wildfires across Southern California.
But they were in a desperate race against time before the hot Santa Ana winds pick up again this weekend.
By this evening, the fires had consumed 135,000 acres, and 6,500 firefighters drawn from throughout the West battled to keep fire lines intact.
The inferno that damaged or destroyed 330 homes in Laguna Beach was contained by this evening, but a fire in Altadena, which has scorched more than 5,000 acres and engulfed 115 homes northwest of downtown Los Angeles, remains out of control.


Cox to Form a Tiger Fund
Archibald Cox Jr., former chief of CS First Boston, said yesterday that he had joined the Tiger Management Corporation, where he will be head of a new fund investing in companies in China, Southeast Asia, Latin America and Eastern Europe.
As chairman of the new Tiger International Fund, Mr.
Cox will start by helping raise money from investors and be responsible for investing up to $1 billion in companies in those markets.
He plans to live in Hong Kong to be close to China, the fund's major field of operations.
Tiger International will invest directly in companies and projects for which there is no way of investing through publicly traded stocks or bonds.


BUSINESS DIGEST
The Economy
The economy perked up and inflation subsided during the third quarter, the Government reported.
The gross domestic product expanded at a 2.8 percent annual rate while inflation slipped to 1.8 percent, the lowest during a quarter since 1986.  [ Page A1. ]
President and Mrs.
Clinton used public appearances to shore up support for national health proposals.  [ A18. ]


In Britain, Publication of Leavitt Novel Put Off
Viking said yesterday that it would delay publication of David Leavitt's novel "While England Sleeps" in Britain until a court holds a hearing to determine whether the poet Stephen Spender, who has charged that the novel is a badly disguised account of his own life, should be granted a trial in the matter.
A preliminary hearing was held yesterday in London, but because Viking had already voluntarily decided to delay publication in Britain, the substantive issues were put off and will be heard at another hearing within 10 days, said Sam Sylvester, a lawyer for Mr.
Spender.
The novel, an account of a love affair between two men in the 1930's, is already available in the United States and was to have been published in Britain on Thursday.


Transit Authority Moves to Control False Claims
The New York City Transit Authority has begun its first systematic effort to prevent fraudulent injury claims on the city's subways and buses by going after the lawyers and doctors who the agency says "make these frauds possible."
The effort will involve a new unit of prosecutors and detectives that the Brooklyn District Attorney's office has formed to focus on ferreting out such fraud through a computerized hunt for lawyers and doctors repeatedly involved in false transit-injury claims.


Seymour Propp, 76, Executive Who Led Quincy Mining Co.
Seymour Propp, former president of the Quincy Mining Company, a copper mining and exploration business based in Hancock, Mich., died on Tuesday at Mount Sinai Hospital.
He was 76 and lived in Manhattan.
His family said he had had a long illness.


Saudi Officials Reporting Accord With Shiite Foes
The Saudi Government has reached an agreement with its Shiite opponents by which they would suspend their activities abroad, including putting out publications that attack Saudi Arabia's policies and record on human rights, Saudi officials said today.
According to senior Saudi officials and spokesmen for the so-called Reform Movement, a loosely organized Shiite opposition, the group halted publication of its monthly newsletter, Arabian Peninsula, which was printed and distributed from London, and agreed to stop inveighing against the Government.


Review/Dance; The Taylor, In Wedding Of Darkness And Light
Paul Taylor is famous for bright-looking dances with a dark underside.
But Mr.
Taylor has never merged the two quite so inseparably as in "A Field of Grass," presented by the Paul Taylor Dance Company in a world premiere on Wednesday night at City Center.
An evocation of six songs by Harry Nilsson from the late 1960's and early 70's, the dance begins on an insidiously goofy note.
Why, one wonders, is Mr.
Taylor bothering to plunk a grinning dancer center stage, seated in a lotus position and dragging on a cigarette, to the accompaniment of this tepid musical soup?
Very gradually, as "A Field of Grass" moves from one song through another, Mr.
Taylor creates a landscape filled with green, sun, a soft breeze and gamboling youngsters in bell-bottom jeans.
As gradually, the dancers' bodies tauten.
Tall, threatening city buildings seem to have sprung up across earth that one recognizes as tinged with blood.
The sun comes out again from behind thin storm clouds at the end.
But it shines down on games forbidden in the time that the songs establish and the dance suggests.


City Opera Committee Bisects Christopher Keene's Power
A dispute between Christopher Keene, the general director of the New York City Opera, and the executive committee of the company's board over the hiring of an executive director has turned into a battle for control of the 50-year-old company's artistic future.
Also hanging in the balance is Mr.
Keene's own future with the company.
At issue are the committee's choice for the newly created executive directorship -- Mark Weinstein, the company's director of business and finance for 10 years before he left to take another job in June -- and the kind of authority the position will carry within the company.
Division of Power
Mr.
Keene expressed his objections to board members on Tuesday in a letter, parts of which were published yesterday in New York Newsday.
His objections centered on the fact that Mr.
Weinstein had been promised complete control of non-artistic matters, including the power to hire and fire staff members.


Cho-Liang Lin, Violinist
The violinist Cho-Liang Lin is to play two concerts this weekend, tonight and tomorrow as 7:30 P.M. at the Taipei Theater, 1221 Avenue of the Americas, at 49th Street.
Joining him are the pianist Li Jian and the cellist Jian Wang.
The program includes Nielsen's Violin Sonata No. 2, Ravel's Sonata for Violin and Cello, and Brahms's Piano Trio in B. Tickets are $15.
Information: (212) 373-1850.


Diner's Journal
Back in Manhattan
In his career as a chef, Jonathan Waxman has been like a comet: shining brightly one moment, then disappearing from view.
Now, after selling his interest in Table 29, a restaurant in Napa, Calif., his orbit has brought him back to New York City, where he was once involved with several restaurants.
He is to be a consultant for Ark Restaurants, which owns 19 restaurants in Manhattan.
He will work with Larry Forgione of An American Place and chefs from Ark Restaurants to revise menus for Poiret, Museum Cafe and Peretti's on the Upper West Side; Jim McMullen and Canyon Road on the Upper East Side; Albuquerque Eats and B. Smith's in midtown and Gonzalez y Gonzalez and Louisiana Community Bar and Grill on Broadway downtown.


Abroad at Home; The Guilty Men
A pathetic byproduct of the genocide in Bosnia has been the attempt by some Americans of Serbian ancestry to deny the reality of the Serbian aggression there.
"What's happening in Bosnia," Bob Djurdjevic of Phoenix wrote to The New York Times the other day, "is not a 'genocide.' . . . It is a tragedy largely inflicted on the Muslims by their own Government."


Genzyme
Shares of the Genzyme Corporation, a Cambridge, Mass., drug manufacturer, dropped sharply yesterday even though the company posted record quarterly earnings.
Investors were apparently reacting to warnings from analysts who said Genzyme was facing declining revenues from some of its important products.


Americans Would Hail Laws on Movie Violence; Disney's Dilemma
To the Editor:
The folks at the Walt Disney Company may be forgiven if they're confused on what you want them to do about censoring movies.


Economy Won't Grow With Tax Subsidies
To the Editor:
Charls E. Walker, former Deputy Treasury Secretary, applauds Presidents who favored investment tax credits and liberalized depreciation rules, and criticizes those, like President Clinton, who do not advocate tax subsidies to encourage capital spending (letter, Oct. 18).


Keenan Tries to Make A New-Age Transition
When Mike Keenan entered an upscale American college in 1968 as a poor, crew-cut Canadian on an athletic scholarship, he attended classes six days a week and lived in a dormitory from which women and booze were barred.
By the time he graduated in 1972, the long-haired Keenan was attending classes three days a week with Vietnam vets and antiwar demonstrators, and his dorm was aquiver with sex and awash in beer.
What he learned living through the enormous changes of those four years, the Ranger coach says now, has become a source of psychic capital from which he draws as a modern manager of men in the 90's, manipulative rather than despotic, using sensitivity rather than intimidation to create winning teams.


Corrections
A picture caption on Oct. 19 about the opening of the Urban Forest Ecology Center in Van Cortlandt Park in the Bronx misidentified a girl shown with a horse.
She is Teresa Ayala.


THE MEDIA BUSINESS: Advertising; One actor can hawk in many tongues, most of them firmly in cheek.
WHEN Woody Allen did it, audiences roared.
Marni Nixon made a career of it.
Milli Vanilli did it, but got caught.
Now Madison Avenue is eagerly embracing it.
The subject in question is the use of lip-synching and dubbing, production techniques by which the voices of actors or singers are replaced by the voices of unseen other people.
When the performers on screen move their lips, the audience actually hears the voices of the talent offscreen.


Children Leave Occupied Brooklyn School for New One
Chanting "back to school" and waving paper pennants, about 350 children and their parents marched seven blocks yesterday from the dilapidated Brooklyn school they had occupied for 10 days to the new elementary school that will be their home until June.
There they were met by the teachers and staff who also were reassigned when the old school, Public School 156 in Brownsville, was closed because of asbestos and maintenance problems.


Nice Tie: Zubov Roars Back Against a Stingy Roy
There is no word in the English language that would have had as great an effect on Sergei Zubov, the Rangers' young Russian defenseman.
"Binghamton," Mike Keenan said to Zubov Sunday night in the team dressing room, after Zubov had played another soft period of hockey in what has been a disappointing early season.


Players Try to Minimize Lott's and Simms's Brief Encounter
Ronnie Lott says he never forgets anything that happens on the football field.
But he has let slip from his memory one of the more lasting images of him and Giants quarterback Phil Simms on the same field.
It occurred at the end of a game between the 49ers and Giants on Dec. 3, 1990, when the free safety and the quarterback went face mask-to-face mask walking off the field at Candlestick Park, in full view of "Monday Night Football" cameras.
San Francisco won, 7-3, beating a Giants team that was 10-1 entering the game.


Tighten the Sanctions on Haiti
Standing before the United Nations General Assembly yesterday, Haiti's deposed President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, passionately argued for a complete trade embargo against his country to force its military rulers to step down and allow him to return to office.
Ordinary Haitians deserve this sort of cooperation from the international community.
First they took the risk of supporting Mr.
Aristide and electing him to office with an almost 70 percent majority.
Since then they have endured obscene brutality from the Haitian military and paramilitary "attaches," who have not shrunk from murdering Mr.
Aristide's followers, whether prominent members of his Government or the desperate poor who comprise most of his following.


Governor's Plea Ignites Criticism By Oklahomans
Far from bringing a long-running investigation of his campaign finances to a close, Gov.
David Walters's agreement to plead guilty to a misdemeanor has touched off a prairie storm of criticism.
Indeed, the effort to resolve his campaign violation has prompted the prosecutor, a fellow Democrat, to suggest that he resign, Republicans to threaten an impeachment drive against him and many Oklahomans to throw up their hands in confusion and disgust over the deal.


Art in Review
'Up in Smoke'
Knoedler  19 East 70th Street  Manhattan  Through Nov. 4
These days, this delightful show probably has to be considered a guilty pleasure: it presents more than 75 photographs made since 1911 on the theme of smoking.
In picture after picture, people are shown indulging in the noxious weed, whether in the form of cigarettes, cigars or pipes.
But whatever the show may lack in health-consciousness, it more than makes up in glamour, and in humor.


Market Place; A ski resort company is poised to benefit from a sport's rebound.
DESPITE a recent rejuvenation of the ski business, there are still many resorts that face hard times and are considered prime acquisition candidates for the stronger operators.
And few resorts are liquid enough to take advantage of the rich opportunities.
According to some Wall Street professionals, investors angling to profit from this should consider an enterprise like S-K-I Ltd., a publicly traded company in Killington, Vt., that has deep enough pockets to do some buying.


Sounds Around Town
Cook at the Carlyle
Barbara Cook, Cafe Carlyle, 35 East 76th Street, at Madison Avenue, (212) 570-7184.
Miss Cook, one of Broadway's most beloved lyric sopranos, has rarely sounded better than in her newest show at the Cafe Carlyle, a show that has its last two performances tonight and tomorrow night.
Coinciding with the release of "Dorothy Fields: Close as Pages in a Book," Miss Cook's strong new album on DRG Records, the show concentrates on lyrics by Broadway's greatest female lyricist.
The material spans 44 years, ranging from a swinging "I Can't Give You Anything But Love," with music by Jimmy McHugh (from "Blackbirds of 1928"), to "It's Not Where You Start," with music by Cy Coleman (from the 1972 musical "Seesaw").
There is a $40 cover charge and no minimum.
STEPHEN HOLDEN Drama at the Tea Room
Julie Wilson, Russian Tea Room, 150 West 57th Street, Manhattan, (212) 265-0947.
Miss Wilson, a great dramatic interpreter in the grand heartfelt tradition of Mabel Mercer, has found a new freedom in her Russian Tea Room engagements.
Instead of being a salute to individual composers and songwriting teams, her program ranges over the decades, sprinkling standards with contemporary songs.
In her new show, the pianist Mark Hummel is standing in for her longtime musical partner, William Roy.
Among the songs are "I'm a Fool to Want You," "Body and Soul," "Here's to Life" and a sultry, swinging version of "Sentimental Journey." Shows are at 9 and 11 P.M. tonight and tomorrow.
There is a $25 music charge and a $20 minimum.
S.
H.


INSIDE
White House Drops Concept Of a Cap on Health Spending
The Administration has backed away from the politically contentious idea of imposing a limit on national health care spending, instead proposing to control costs by capping the growth of insurance premiums.
Page A19.
Trade Pact and Mexico Sugar
If Mexicans switch to corn syrup in soft drinks, they might export more sugar, and that worries some lawmakers in Washington.
Page A3.
Clinton's Old School Ties
Upsetting two Senators and Hispanic groups, President Clinton plans to nominate a mentor from Yale Law School to the appeals court.
Page B9.
Doris Duke Dies
The tobacco heiress and philanthropist, whose life was woven of luxury and unhappiness, was 80.
Page B11.


Trial Begins in Berlin for Iranian Charged in Dissident's Death
A reputed agent of the Iranian secret police and four accused accomplices went on trial today for the murder of a leading Iranian dissident last year.
Federal prosecutors say Iran ordered the killing of the dissident, Sadegh Sharafkandi, who with three aides was cut down in a hail of gunfire at a Berlin restaurant.
A guilty verdict would be a triumph for political and human rights groups that have charged Iran with sponsoring an international terror campaign against its opponents.


NEWS SUMMARY
International A3-11  MEXICAN SUGAR AND TRADE PACT  Fears of sugar imports from Mexico illustrate the kind of pressure Congress faces in the trade accord, because if Mexicans switch from sugar to corn syrup in their soft drinks, they could export more sugar.
A3  ARISTIDE URGES A TOTAL EMBARGO  The exiled President of Haiti urged the United Nations to impose a total trade embargo on his country to force its military leaders to resign and said he would not return until they surrendered power.
A6  Haiti's Prime Minister said he would stay put for the time being.
A6


Eldon Dyer; Professor, 64
Eldon Dyer, who was mathematics editor for the Encyclopaedia Britannica for many years, died on Tuesday at his home in Katonah, N.Y.
He was 64.
The cause was cancer, the City University of New York said.
Professor Dyer was distinguished professor emeritus of mathematics at the Graduate School and University Center of the university.


Debut in Met's 'Boheme'
The Italian conductor Carlo Rizzi is to make his Metropolitan Opera debut tonight at 8 in the company's first performance this season of Puccini's "Boheme." The production, by Franco Zeffirelli, features Veronica Vollarroel as Mimi, Carol Neblett as Musetta and Richard Leech as Rodolfo.
Mark Oswald is to sing the role of Schaunard, and appearing in their roles for the first time at the Met are to be Timothy Noble as Marcello, Yanni Yannissis as Colline and Francois Loup as Benoit and Alcindoro.
Remaining tickets are $22, $83 and $123.
Information: (212) 362-6000.


A Gang of Ghosts Ready To Rumble
HALLOWEEN is New York's most problematic holiday.
For most of America, Oct. 31 offers a thrilling opportunity to pry the lid off the underworld and unleash, for a few hours, the forces of darkness and chaos.
In controlled circumstances, ghouls, witches, demons, goblins and assorted Hollywood celebrities are free to roam the earth and torment the living, extorting a shiver of terror as their due for dwelling in the kingdom of the dead.
New York has too much of the terror and chaos thing already.
In fact, the city may need its own version of Halloween, in which hordes of average people, with healthy complexions and slightly out-of-date clothes, go door to door and act polite.


How Corporate Clients Try to Hold Down Their Legal Fees
To the Editor:
Our staff read with interest your Oct. 22 front-page report that law firms, in the face of competition and descreasing revenues, are giving up the practice of billing by the hour.
You state that "no comprehensive national survey" has been done on the subject of law firm billing practices and related matters.


Satellite Broadcaster Chooses Bozell Shop
United States Satellite Broadcasting Inc. said yesterday that it had selected Bozell Minneapolis as the first agency to handle its consumer advertising account and to introduce its direct-broadcast satellite system next year.
Although billings were not disclosed, Adweek estimated that spending could run as high as $40 million during the first two years of operations of the system, which will compete against cable television systems.


Candidates on TV
The two mayoral candidates will be interviewed separately tonight on a special edition of "The Charlie Rose Show" on Channel 13.
Mayor David N. Dinkins will be appear live between 9 P.M. and 9:30 P.M., and Rudolph W. Giuliani will appear between 9:30 P.M. and 10.


Magnate Corners Boredom Market; Is a Spoof, Taken Seriously, Still a Spoof? Oh, Who Cares.
The Boring Institute is, eh, well, aaah . . . nondescript.
But the work that comes out of its headquarters, an archetypal white clapboard house on an ordinary tree-lined street in this quintessential suburb, has become a staple on the entertainment food chain.


A California Wildfire's Path of Destruction


Plot Warning Is Reviewed By the F.B.I.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation is reviewing the allegations of an informer who said after the World Trade Center explosion that he had warned law-enforcement agents of a plot to build a bomb, and that if they had worked with him, they would have prevented the blast, officials said.
But some officials disputed important parts of the informant's account yesterday, saying that conversations with him took place half a year before the attack on the trade center, and months before the bomb was actually built.


Yanks Look to Bridge the Talent Gap With Jays
The meetings of the Yankee hierarchy over the past three weeks have been exhaustive, with dozens of ideas discussed and dozens dismissed.
Every time the executives agreed upon a potential strategy, they needed to implement backup plans to guard against unforeseen developments.
Remember how their attempt to sign Greg Maddux became a fiasco last winter, with Maddux opting to accept less money from the Atlanta Braves?
But amid all the uncertainty, there is one constant that guides the Yankees' thinking: the presence of the Blue Jays in their division.
With every option the Yankees have tabled, it has been impossible for them to ignore the two-time World Series champions lurking above them.


U.S. Judge Rules Council Lines In Bridgeport Violate Rights Act
Less than a week before Election Day, a Federal judge has ruled that a Bridgeport City Council district map drawn this year violates the Federal Voting Rights Act and the United States Constitution and must be redrafted.
The judge ordered that municipal elections proceed next Tuesday, to avoid throwing the city government into chaos, but established strict timetable requiring a new map within 60 days, and a special election within 120 days to replace the winners of next week's contests.


Accusations Fly as Nassau Candidates Debate
Benjamin L. Zwirn, the Democratic candidate for Nassau County Executive, defended his reputation for fiscal conservatism during a debate today in which his Republican opponent, Thomas S. Gulotta, charged that he was just another free-spending liberal Democrat.
"Mr. Zwirn is a tax-and-spend liberal," said Mr.
Gulotta, the incumbent.
"Of all of the candidates seeking the presidency, Bill Clinton was not liberal enough for Mr. Zwirn -- he endorsed the most liberal, Jerry Brown."


A Trick, or a Treat, or Just a Fickle Superhero?


Emergency Agency Praised For a Change, on Flooding
The Federal Emergency Management Agency, scorned by previous Congresses for its responses to Hurricanes Andrew and Hugo and other natural disasters, won Congressional praise today for its role in the flooding last summer in the Midwest.
Much of the praise focused on the agency's new director, James Lee Witt, the first professional emergency manager to head the agency since it was established in 1979.
Immediately after testifying, Mr.
Witt left for Southern California to supervise temporary housing for victims of wildfires there.


Sports of the Times; Iraq Saves World Cup For the U.S.
THE nation of Iraq did one huge favor for the United States yesterday.
It saved this soccer-deprived republic from even the remote threat that the 1994 World Cup would have been whisked to a real soccer power.
I doubt that the Iraqis were very happy about that side effect of their 2-2 tie with Japan, which meant neither nation qualified for the 1994 cup.
The Iraqis would have been a great story: a nomad team forced to play only road games because of the troubles in their homeland.
They were in the same condition in the 1986 World Cup in Mexico when I interviewed them in their hotel in Toluca, and the goalkeeper gave me a keychain with Saddam Hussein's photo in color.
During the Gulf war in 1991, I went scrounging around for that souvenir, but I couldn't find it.


Nursing Their Wounds
Memphis investors who are hoping to be awarded a National Football League expansion team will reassess their position today.
They will seek to ways to improve their presentation or consider whether the time has come to end their quest.
"It's not my nature to quit," said a millionaire cotton merchant, WILLIAM B. DUNAVANT .
"But it's also not my nature to be made a fool of." (AP)


At the Bar; For President Clinton, old-school ties take precedence over senators' wishes in a search for a judge.
Bypassing the favorite candidate of Connecticut's two Democratic Senators and upsetting Hispanic groups, President Clinton is planning to nominate a mentor from his days at Yale Law School to the prestigious Federal appeals court in New York.
Earlier this week, The New York Law Journal reported what had been wafting around Mr.
Clinton's alma mater for weeks: that the President would soon nominate the long-time dean at Yale Law School, Guido Calabresi, for a seat on the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.
Mr.
Calabresi would replace Judge Thomas Meskill, who took senior status in June.


Business-Political Scandal Widening in Japan
A simmering bribery scandal that has exposed deep webs of corruption between powerful politicians and construction companies entered a dangerous new phase today when the first case went to court and a former mayor admitted accepting the equivalent of $1 million in cash.
Toru Ishii, the former Mayor of the large northern Japanese city of Sendai, did not formally plead today and he did not say what the money was for, but prosecutors have charged that it was a bribe to steer lucrative construction contracts to several major contractors.


Perfect Deportment
United States hockey players, the ugly Americans of the 1992 Winter Olympics, have been instructed to keep their sticks down and and their mouths shut.
"I have a policy: Anyone who commits a boneheaded penalty or stupid play doesn't dress for the next game," said the national team's coach, TIM TAYLOR , who is preparing his squad for the 1994 Winter Games in Lillehammer, Norway, in February. (AP)


Jerry Inc. to Handle Naturistics Products
Del Laboratories Inc. of Farmingdale, L.I., said yesterday that it had named Jerry Inc. of New York to handle its Naturistics line of mass-market beauty-care products, cosmetics and fragrances.
Billings on the account, previously handled in-house, were estimated at $7 million.


Billions Flow in October Into Riskier Stock Funds
In a surge of buying, Americans poured billions of dollars into stock funds this month.
And there seemed to be an attraction to more speculative funds.
"Our sales have been just up and up and up," said Don Webber of State Street Research, a fund manager, speaking of the year.
"But this month, sales of equity funds are up 47 percent from last month."


Kansas Agency Gets Sonic Drive-In Chain
Sonic Industries of Oklahoma City, which operates the Sonic Drive-In chain of 1950's-style fast-food restaurants, said yesterday that after a two-month review, it had selected Barkley &amp; Evergreen Inc. of Shawnee Mission, Kan., to handle its account.
The account had been at Advertising Inc. in Tulsa, Okla., for the last seven years.
Billings were estimated at $15 million.
In addition to handling Sonic's advertising, Barkley will also handle duties like public relations and direct marketing.
A new ad campaign is scheduled to begin in April.


G.D.P. Data Fail to Dampen Bonds
The Government's report on third-quarter economic growth and comments by a Federal Reserve governor sent ripples through the bond market yesterday.
By the end of trading, prices of Treasury securities had moved higher.
But it was not exactly clear why traders and investors ultimately chose to be positive about the report, which showed that the gross domestic product rose at annual rate of 2.8 percent, after adjustment for inflation.


Tax Plans For Tobacco Rile Industry
While executives of the tobacco industry had resigned themselves to an additional Federal tax of 75 cents for a pack of cigarettes to help finance health care changes, as the Clinton Administration proposed on Wednesday, they were outraged yesterday about the substantial -- and unexpected -- increases for cigars, snuff and other tobacco products.
"My first reaction was they put the decimal point in the wrong place," said Alan Hilburg, a spokesman for the Smokeless Tobacco Council, a trade association for makers of snuff and chewing-tobacco products.


Corrections
An article yesterday about accounts of a plot to build a bomb that was eventually exploded at the World Trade Center referred imprecisely in some copies to what Federal officials knew about the plan before the blast.
Transcripts of tapes made secretly by an informant, Emad A. Salem, quote him as saying he warned the Government that a bomb was being built.
But the transcripts do not make clear the extent to which the Federal authorities knew that the target was the World Trade Center.


FLURRY OF ATTACKS AS RACE FOR MAYOR IS NEARING AN END
A visit from the President, a flurry of broadcast appearances and saturation-strength television commercials propelled the New York City mayoral campaign toward its final weekend yesterday as Mayor David N. Dinkins rolled into high-geared attack and Rudolph W. Giuliani made more tempered appeals to liberal swing voters.
With polls showing the race too close to call but voters' unfavorable impressions of Mr.
Giuliani edging upward from the Mayor's past broadsides, Mr.
Dinkins unleashed his harshest commercial of the campaign, using footage of Mr.
Giuliani's epithet-spiked speech to a rowdy police rally near City Hall last year and condemning him for excessive zeal as United States Attorney in Manhattan.


Aristide Asks for Total Trade Embargo of Haiti


Engineers Give Shape to Tire and Vehicle Fragments at Trade Cente Trial
The World Trade Center case has taken shape like someone making a pointillist painting -- a point of paint here, a few more points there.
Its forms became more distinct yesterday when prosecutors led two automotive engineers through a reconstruction of the dozens of vehicle fragments found in the blast wreckage.
Metal parts clanged together and prosecutors and a witness maneuvered around long and dangerously jagged pieces of wreckage so they could demonstrate to the jury that parts of the blown-apart vehicle found in the World Trade Center rubble matched the parts of another Ford Econoline van acquired by the Federal Bureau of Investigation for comparison purposes.


White House Drops Talk of Capping U.S. Health Spending
The Clinton Administration has backed away from the politically contentious idea of imposing a limit on annual national health care spending, Donna E. Shalala, Secretary of Health and Human Services, said today.
She told the Senate Finance Committee that the Government instead expected to control health care costs by imposing limits on how fast insurance premiums could rise.


Review/Art; Visions of Outsiders And the Self-Defined
"Driven to Create: The Anthony Petullo Collection of Self-Taught and Outsider Art" at the Museum of American Folk Art is a lively show that has some problems, beginning with the terms in its title.
Outsider art -- not so long ago called naive art -- is enjoying a high profile these days.
But who exactly qualifies as an outsider?
The insane, the visionary, the aged, the merely quirky, any artist living and working at a reasonable distance from the mainstream art world?
And what about self-taught?
Does it simply refer to the unschooled, to anyone who rejects esthetic conventions, or to anyone who tries to invent a visual vocabulary from scratch?
To judge by this exhibition, all of the above.


Rail Stock Shakes Nikkei
What began as a jerky roller coaster ride for the newly listed shares of the East Japan Railway Company earlier this week turned into a general stock market rout by today, with prices, investor sentiment and the market's overall reputation declining.
For the second day, trading in the shares of JR East, as the Government-controlled railroad is known, had to be suspended while the Tokyo Stock Exchange struggled to cope with waves of sell orders that paralyzed its computers.
The temporary halt only seemed to raise the level of anxiety in the market, however, by exposing potentially serious shortcomings in trading systems.
Investors just sold other shares.


CHRONICLE
Sometimes it really pays to wait on the wealthy.
The SULTAN OF BRUNEI, believed to be the world's richest man, left a $170,000 tip Monday for the hotel staff at the Four Seasons in Cyprus at the end of a five-day stay there, The Associated Press reported yesterday.
The 46-year-old ruler of the small, oil-rich sultanate is said to be worth at least $33 billion.
He attended last week's meeting of the Commonwealth, an association comprising Britain and 49 of its former colonies, held in the coastal city of Limassol .


Former G.O.P. Chairman Found Guilty of Bribery
The former chairman of Connecticut's Republican Party, Richard Foley Jr., was convicted yesterday of accepting $25,000 in bribes in exchange for promising to influence fellow lawmakers to change their votes on banking legislation that was initially rejected, then approved.
Mr.
Foley, a colorful, blustery former State Representative from Oxford, appeared unmoved as the verdict was read.
He was released on his own recognizance until his sentencing Jan. 7.
Outside the courthouse, he said he was disappointed, but made no other comment.
He could not be reached by phone last night.


Government and Rebels Continue to Battle for the Former Soviet Georgia


TV Weekend; Falk Adds 2 Hats to His Ensemble
Peter Falk has a retirement annuity in "Columbo," and he's making the most of it.
In Sunday's installment at 9 P.M. on ABC, the latest in a sporadic series of two-hour "Columbo" movies, Mr.
Falk is not only the star, but also the writer and the executive producer.
Further, he has snagged Faye Dunaway as his co-star.
The basic "Columbo" formula, devised way back in 1971, remains intact.
Viewers are allowed to see an ingenious crime being committed.
Enter the police detective Lieutenant Columbo to spot the inevitable flaws and, as always, bring the perpetrator(s) to justice.
Some cases work better than others.
Sunday's is nifty.


Books of The Times; Pornography, the Constitution and a Fight Thereof
Only Words
By Catharine A. MacKinnon
152 pages. Harvard University Press. $14.95
In a very short, very angry book called "Only Words," the feminist lawyer and professor Catharine A. MacKinnon argues that pornography leads to violence against women, that pornography causes the men who consume it to rape, abuse and discriminate against women.
"Sooner or later," she writes, "in one way or another, the consumers want to live out the pornography further in three dimensions. Sooner or later, in one way or another, they do. It makes them want to; when they believe they can, when they feel they can get away with it, they do. Depending upon their chosen sphere of operation, they may use whatever power they have to keep the world a pornographic place."


Kodak Chief Offers a New Vision
George M. C. Fisher, the new chairman of the Eastman Kodak Company, said yesterday that he planned to improve the company's performance through revenue growth and faster product development, and not -- at least for now -- through job cuts beyond the 10,000 already announced.
That policy direction, which diverges from the financial community's long-running wisdom that Kodak must slash costs and at least 20,000 of its 130,000 jobs to fatten its perennially thin profit margins, was one of several indications yesterday that Mr.
Fisher has his own ideas about how Kodak should be run.


Judge Dismisses Suit By Indian for Land
A state judge today dismissed an Indian land claim in the Waterbury suburb of Southbury, ending a threat to the holdings of about 1,200 property owners.
The land claim was made by Aurelius H. Piper Jr., on behalf of the 100-member Golden Hill Paugussett tribe.
But during court proceedings tribe members and representatives of national American Indian organizations testified that Mr.
Piper, also known by his tribal name, Quiet Hawk, lacked the authority to make the claim, and that the majority of the tribe was opposed to the claim.


Fighting Fire of the Future: Making a Stand Where Homes Can Be Saved
In this community where the sprawl of Los Angeles meets the scrubland of the San Gabriel Mountains, exhausted firefighters have been battling what experts call the fire of the future.
Employing air assaults and prison crews on the ground to clear away brush, firefighters have struggled for the last two days to outrace hungry wildfires and outwit the changeable Santa Ana winds while setting up a fire line to protect vulnerable homes at the city's fringes.


Both Mayoral Candidates Want Federal Monitoring for the Polls
Amid expectations of a tight election, both mayoral candidates have asked the United States Justice Department to monitor the polls for possible voter fraud on Tuesday.
The requests, made in Oct. 20 letters by Rudolph W. Giuliani's running mate for comptroller, Herman Badillo, and Mayor David N. Dinkins's campaign staff, come amid allegations that thousands of people have been registered more than once as voters, either because of fraud or mistakes by the New York City Board of Elections.


In Their Own Words
RUDOLPH W. GIULIANI
Rudolph W. Giuliani spoke yesterday to a group of the elderly at the Hellenic American Neighborhood Action Committee Demotsis Velone Center in Astoria, Queens.


88 Picassos Lead Fall Auction Parade
IN the next two weeks, the attention of the New York art world shifts away from the galleries and the museums and toward the auction houses during the fall sales of Impressionist, modern and contemporary art.
This twice-a-year ritual, some of the best free theater in town, offers a variety of entertainment this season.
Among the offerings, which go on view this weekend at the auction houses, are everything from the experimental to revivals, as paintings, sculptures and drawings with estimates totaling more than $207 million appear for the art market's autumn pulse-taking.
The usual pre-auction anxiety is evident as collectors, dealers and experts from all over the world flock to Sotheby's and Christie's to see works by artists ranging from Picasso and Renoir to Gorky and Hockney.
Just how the market will fare in these economic times is the question everyone is asking.
While this fall's auction catalogues are much leaner than those of the boom years in the 1980's, and the atmosphere is noticeably sadder, the experts who put the sales together are also far wiser.


His Brain 'Aching,' Clinton Tries A Soft Touch to Push Health Plan
A day after delivering his health care proposal to Congress, President Clinton yesterday moved to humanize the complicated universal health insurance plan that he said he had studied "until my brain aches."
Setting aside the fist-pounding oratory that he used in his address to Congressional leaders on Wednesday, Mr.
Clinton adopted a confessional tone.
Instead of trolling for votes from potentially skeptical lawmakers, Mr.
Clinton used his public appearances to shore up the base of popular support for his plan.


Transactions
National Hockey League  HARTFORD WHALERS -- Recalled Mario Gosselin, goaltender, from Springfield of the American Hockey League.
NEW JERSEY DEVILS -- Recalled Tommy Albelin, defenseman, from Albany of American Hockey League.
SAN JOSE SHARKS -- Assigned Kip Miller, center, and Mike Rathje, defenseman, to Kansas City of the International Hockey League.
TAMPA BAY LIGHTNING -- Recalled Tim Bergland, forward, from Atlanta of the International Hockey League.
International Hockey League  CINCINNATI CYCLONES -- Recalled Brad Smyth, right wing, from Birmingham of the East Coast Hockey League.
Colonial Hockey League  CHL -- Suspended Darren Miciak, forward, for one game for receiving his third game misconduct of the season.
MUSKEGON FURY -- Signed Earl Switzer, defenseman.
UTICA BULLDOGS -- Signed Jay Zeidel and John Petrone, defensemen.


U.S. SAYS ECONOMY GREW AS INFLATION SLOWED IN SUMMER
The economy perked up during the summer, expanding at a 2.8 percent annual rate despite floods and drought that cut farm output, the Commerce Department reported today.
At the same time, inflation subsided to a 1.8 percent annual rate, the weakest rise for a quarter since oil prices collapsed in 1986.


Art in Review
Larry Mantello
Jose Freire Fine Art  130 Prince Street  SoHo  Through Nov. 10
If pop culture gave itself a party, it would look like Larry Mantello's chockablock, more-is-not-enough debut at Freire.
Working entirely with the bright and mostly worthless trinkets to be found in souvenir stores, gift shops, toy stores and party-decoration outlets, Mr.
Mantello has turned the gallery into maze of zany installations and overloaded assemblage sculptures.
He has also painted some walls hot pink, covered others with wallpaper or with blown-up resort photographs, and levitated helium balloons all over the place.
Disco music emanates from one work, air freshener from another.
With repeated appearances of fake food -- hamburger-shaped yo-yos, plastic bagels, chocolate-kiss pinatas, furry ice cream cones and elaborately iced cakes that the artist makes himself -- there is virtually no sense that isn't aroused, or at least assaulted.
Take the young ones, but stick around, for this is a show that grows on grown-ups, too.


The Spoken Word
"MONDO BARBIE," Universalist Church, 160 Central Park West, at 76th Street.
Readings from the book "Mondo Barbie" (St. Martin's Press, 1993), a collection of poetry and fiction about the Barbie doll, by several of its authors.
Sponsored by the Writer's Voice.
Tonight at 8.
Admission: $8; $4 for college students and the elderly; free to high school students and anyone with a Barbie doll.
Information: (212) 875-4124.
NORDIC POETRY FESTIVAL, Cooper Union, Great Hall, Seventh Street and Third Avenue, East Village.
A two-day event, with readings, lectures and seminars featuring 50 poets from eight Nordic countries and 30 American and British writers, including John Ashbery, Tama Janowitz, Anthony Burgess, Fran Lebowitz and Derek Walcott.
Sponsored by the Nordic consulates and embassies in the United States and by Nordic cultural organizations.
Tomorrow and Sunday, noon to 8 P.M.
Admission: $10 for one day; $15 for two days; $5 or $7.50 for students.
Information: (212) 682-0727.
"PELHAM BAY IN THE FRONTIER DAYS," Allerton Branch Library, 2740 Barnes Avenue, the Bronx.
A lecture about the settlement of the eastern Bronx in the 1600's, given by Lloyd Ultan, a history professor at Fairleigh Dickinson University.
Sponsored by the Bronx County Historical Society.
Tomorrow at 1 P.M.
Free.
Information: (718) 881-8900.
"CONSTRUCTING THE 'AMERICAS': TELEVISED VERSIONS OF GENDER, POLITICS AND CULTURE IN LATIN AMERICA," New York University, Room 656, Tisch School of the Arts, 721 Broadway, at Waverly Place, Greenwich Village.
A two-part conference featuring historians, film makers and scholars.
Sponsored by the N.Y.U.
Center for Latin American and Caribbean Studies.
Today, 7 to 10 P.M.; tomorrow, 9:30 A.M. to 1 P.M.
Free.
Information: (212) 998-8558.
FICTION READING, St.
Mark's Church, 131 East 10th Street, East Village.
Silvia Sanza, author of "Alex Wants to Call It Love," and Lynne Tillman, author of "Motion Sickness," will read from their work.
Tonight at 8.
Suggested contribution: $6.
Information: (212) 674-0910.
POETRY READING, University Settlement, 184 Eldridge Street, Lower East Side.
Terese Svoboda and Fay Chiang will read their poems.
Tonight at 7.
Suggested contribution: $4.
Information: (212) 674-9120.
POETRY BENEFIT, New York University, Main Building, Room 703, 100 Washington Square East, Greenwich Village.
Gwendolyn Brooks, Cornelius Eady, Sharon Olds, Yevgeny Yevtushenko and poets from Goldwater Hospital will read from their works.
The program benefits a creative writing workshop at the hospital, sponsored by N.Y.U.
Tonight at 7.
Tickets: $25.
Information: (212) 998-8816.
POETRY READINGS, Biblio's, 317 Church Street, TriBeCa.
Elena Alexander and Nicky Paraiso will read from their work tonight at 6.
Leeann Brown and Laynie Brownie will read on Sunday, 5 to 7 P.M.
Donations accepted.
Information: (212) 334-6990.
POETRY READING, Nuyorican Poets Cafe, 236 East Third Street, East Village.
Raymond Nat Turner reads from his work, followed by a poetry competition featuring Marcel Christian, O. V. Hirsch, Rolando Morales and Sara Valentine.
Tonight at 10.
Admission: $5.
Information: (212) 505-8183.
TALKS AND WALKING TOURS, Lower East Side Tenement Museum, 97 Orchard Street, near Delancey Street.
Sunday: "How We Lived: Life in a New York City Tenement," a lecture, at 11 A.M.; "The Bowery: A Walking Tour," Sunday at noon; "Peddler's Pack: A Jewish Heritage Tour," Sunday at 1 P.M.
"The Streets Where We Lived," a tour of the Lower East Side, at 2 P.M.; "House of Heritage," a slide show recounting the history of 97 Orchard Street, at 3 P.M.
Lecture and slide show: $4; $3 for children.
Walking tours: $12; $10 for students and the elderly.
Information: (212) 431-0233.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.07
3.06
2.93
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
3.06
2.93
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.16
3.17
3.16
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
4.95
5.00
6.24
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.95
6.00
7.57
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.02
7.08
8.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.48
5.47
6.70
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Americans Would Hail Laws on Movie Violence
To the Editor:
In "Janet Reno's Heavy Hand" (editorial, Oct. 22), on the Disney Company's self-censorship of one of its movies, "The Program," and the Attorney General's warning to television industry executives to clean up violence before the White House and Congress do it for them, you state that the R rating makes it simple to keep children away from certain movies.
Unfortunately, this is not so.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY  PROGRAM REDUCES COURT BACKLOGS
In Brooklyn, a new program imposing strict deadlines on criminal court schedules has done what seemed to be impossible in New York courts: reduced astronomical case backlogs.
A1.


Ladislav L. Rado; Architect, 84
Ladislav Leland Rado, an architect whose work stands in cities around the world, died on Tuesday at his home in Biscayne Beach, Fla.
He was 84 and also had a home in Armonk, N.Y.
Mr.
Rado was born in Czechoslovakia, was a graduate of the University of Prague and began his architectural career in Brno.
He came to the United States at the invitation of Walter Gropius, then the chairman of the architecture school at Harvard University, and received his master's degree from Harvard in 1940.
In 1945, he and Antonin Raymond founded Raymond &amp; Rado, which designed the American Embassy in Jakarta, Indonesia; 2 Hammarskjold Plaza in Manhattan and the Federal Office Building in Albany as well as residential, recreational and industrial structures.


Armory Track Opens Again
It has been more than seven years since anyone has jumped over a hurdle at the Armory Track and Field Center.
But yesterday nearly 200 youths from high school and community track teams took a victory lap inside it to commemorate its reopening.
The Armory, on 168th Street and Fort Washington Avenue in Washington Heights, opened in 1909 and was used by the National Guard before it was converted into an athletic field house.
It closed in 1985 and used as a shelter for the homeless.
But track athletes had difficulty finding other sites for competition and that didn't sit well with Dr.
Norbert Sander, the 1974 New York City Marathon winner who used to compete at the Armory in high school and college.
"There are no other such facilities like it in the five-borough area," Sander said.
"The sport was affected without it."
He organized a fund-raising effort, enlisting the support of Mayor David N. Dinkins and James Capoziello, the executive commissioner of the Human Resources Administration.
The long-jump and high-jump pits must still be installed, but they will be completed in time for the indoor high school season.


G.M. Has $113 Million Loss, Beating Wall St. Predictions
The General Motors Corporation said today that it lost $113 million in the third quarter, compared with a $1.1 billion loss a year earlier, as red ink from its struggling North American auto operations overwhelmed profits earned abroad.
The loss was smaller than Wall Street had expected, particularly since G.M. reported Monday that it would take a $950 million charge against its earnings for the quarter, or $589 million after taxes, to pay laid-off workers.
The loss equaled 49 cents per share of common stock; G.M. shares, which had already climbed more than 9 percent since Monday's close on the New York Stock Exchange, rose further on the news.


Pro Football; Taylor Confronts an Old Truth: At 34, Healing Can't Be Rushed
Five years ago, even two years ago, Lawrence Taylor wouldn't have thought twice about playing in pain.
Playing with limbs broken and muscles aching is considered part of the job.
To Taylor's way of thinking, if he doesn't suit up when his body is hurting, he's not only short-changing the team, it's almost as if his manhood is being challenged.
But Taylor, the Giants' future Hall of Fame linebacker, has struggled in recent weeks, dealing with the pain of a severely pulled left hamstring and the mental sting of a relatively new concept: waiting out an injury and thinking about the whole season and not just one game.


Ballot Issues in Three Regions Debt Questions for New Yorkers
Albany seeks voter approval next week for three constitutional amendments to ease restrictions on New York State and local borrowing.
Two make sense.
One doesn't.
To prevent fiscal shenanigans, the State Constitution sets precise rules for public bond issues.
But Wall Street has changed since the rules were written; they need to be updated.
Questions No. 1 and No. 3 do just that, and should be approved.


Critic's Notebook; Tracing the Splendid Arc Of Fellini's Sweeping Vision
TOWARD the end of "Voices of the Moon" (1990), Federico Fellini's latest film, not yet released here, there's a scene of incredible beauty and sadness.
An angry old man named Gonnella, played by an actor who has something of the look and shape of a caricature of Fellini, enters a noisy disco and starts cursing the hedonistic dancers from a platform high above.
He shouts into the din: "Barbarians! Have you never heard the sound of a violin?" The people below stop and stare up at Gonnella.
"Dancing," he says, "should be like lace." With that, he makes his way down to the dance floor.
Taking the hand of his ancient mistress, he begins an elegant waltz.
As he and the woman move gracefully around the floor, seeming to float on air, the old man hangs onto a life in which music, dance and all the other arts still count for something.


Corrections
A dance review yesterday about the Sardono Dance Theater of Indonesia and its New York City debut at the Brooklyn Academy of Music misstated the day of the performance.
It was on Tuesday, not yesterday.


Jonas Hollander; Advertising Executive, 67
Jonas Hollander, manager of the Los Angeles advertising office of The New York Times, died yesterday at his home in Woodland Hills, Calif.
He was 67.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Dinkins in the 11th Hour: Pulling Out the Stops
ON THE SCREEN: News clips and black and white still pictures of Rudolph W. Giuliani over menacing music, as male voice intones the script, part of which is repeated in titles on screen.
Camera closes in on the words "strong-arm tactics." Stories with headlines like "Lawyers Assail U.S. Attorney" and "Tells of Taping of Mother." Footage of police officers breaking through barricades near City Hall, and of Mr.
Giuliani in shirtsleeves, pointing finger and shaking fist as the second syllable of the barnyard expletive he uses is bleeped out in keeping with general broadcast standards.
PRODUCER: Doak, Shrum, Harris, Carrier, Devine of Washington.


Black Ministers Endorse Whitman


Leaders in Haiti Wrong to Think They Can Stall U.S., Clinton Says
President Clinton said today that leaders of the Haitian military government are "just wrong" if they think they can wait out United States insistence on the restoration of the country's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
Responding to a plea from Father Aristide in a speech at the United Nations today, the Administration said it was considering further economic sanctions to force Haiti's military leaders to permit a return to democracy in the Caribbean country.


Newark's $150 Million Answer to Lincoln Center Is Under Way
In a big tent pitched yards from a park where homeless men spend their days, the air was heady with hope and promise and symbolism.
As the New Jersey Symphony Orchestra played Aaron Copland's "Fanfare for the Common Man," arts mavens, corporate heads and politicians were joined by 21 schoolchildren from each of New Jersey's 21 counties to break ground today for what will clearly be more than just a new building in downtown Newark.


Selection Is Delayed On Forest Agency Boss
The Clinton Administration has delayed selecting a new head of the Forest Service, an appointment that has divided the agency over what direction it should take.
Agriculture Secretary Mike Espy, who oversees forestry, said today that David G. Unger, a career forest manager, would replace F. Dale Robertson temporarily as the chief of the agency.
Mr.
Espy had previously said that he wanted a new leader for the Forest Service.
Mr.
Unger is expected to serve only until a permanent replacement is found, the Agriculture Department said.


Jets Ticket Is Just a Ticket; Giants Ticket Is a Treasure
Jets season-ticket holders, eat your hearts out if you can't get a seat for Sunday's "road" game against the Giants.
Consider Jets quarterback Boomer Esiason.
The Long Islander owns 36 season seats, and buys 62 tickets for every Jets home game at Giants Stadium.
But the Giants are the home team this week.
As a visiting player, Esiason is entitled to buy only two tickets.
Yet, he says, "I got all the tickets I needed in June, but I'm not going to divulge where."


Man and Girl Are Killed by Amtrak Train
A man and a 3-year-old girl were hit and killed by an Amtrak train yesterday in Elizabeth, N.J., in what appeared to be a suicide by the man, the police said.
The man was seen sitting on the track by the engineer of the approaching train, who was unable to stop the train before it struck the man about 6:45 P.M., said Detective Derek Glenn of the Newark Police Department.
The engineer did not see the girl, Detective Glenn said, but her body was found next to the man's, beside the track.


Take the Salmon, Give Me the Snow
Greg Gumbel sat in the shadow of a 7-foot troll, the owner of a droopy 18-inch-long nose, at a table in a troll theme park restaurant.
He was moved to ask, almost plaintively, "Shouldn't a thesis be written about how many nightmares Norwegian children have from these things?"
Gumbel ate none of the smoked fish and cured meat that was the day's lunch fare.
"Gamey," he pronounced the buffet.
But Gumbel's refusal to eat fits into the nonparticipation broadcast philosophy of CBS's prime-time anchor for next year's Winter Olympics in Lillehammer, Norway.


The Post Backs Giuliani
The New York Post editorial page endorsed the Republican-Liberal candidate, Rudolph W. Giuliani, for mayor in today's issue.
The editorial praises Mr.
Giuliani and predicts that if elected he will be "one of the most hard-line mayors in the modern history of this city."


CHRONICLE
Cus D'Amato, who was the dean of boxing managers and trainers when he died in 1985, ran the Gramercy Gym at 14th Street and Irving Place in Manhattan for more than 40 years.
Yesterday, officials of a neighborhood revitalization group made sure his name would not disappear from the area.
The gym was razed earlier this year to make way for low-income housing, so the 14th Street Union Square Local Development Corporation erected a sign naming part of 14th Street "Cus D'Amato Way." Floyd Patterson, Jose Torres and Vinnie Ferguson, fighters he managed, participated in the ceremony.


Packwood Diaries Said to Suggest Involvement in Criminal Activities
Three days after Senator Bob Packwood warned that releasing his diaries would embarrass other senators, the chairman of the Senate Select Committee on Ethics said today that the diaries suggested that Mr.
Packwood might have been involved in criminal activities.
The chairman, Senator Richard H. Bryan, Democrat of Nevada, did not say what is in the diary, what accusations are under investigation or how serious they may be.
But his assertion was the first indication that the ethics panel was looking into possible criminal wrongdoing by Mr.
Packwood that was unrelated to the initial reasons for the ethics inquiry, accusations of sexual misconduct.


Infomercial Venture For Interpublic Unit
The Brockway Direct Response Television Corporation, which produces many of the program-length commercials known as infomercials, said yesterday that as expected, it had formed a joint venture with E. C. Television, an international syndication unit of the Interpublic Group of Companies in New York.
Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.
As part of the partnership, Brockway and E. C. Television will produce infomercials and create interactive television programs for worldwide distribution.
Richard Brockway, chairman of Brockway, will head the new venture as chief executive and managing general partner.


Motorola Succession Is Puzzle for Wall St.
As the board of Motorola Inc. prepared to meet Friday to discuss management changes in the wake of the sudden departure of George M. C. Fisher, the company's chairman and chief executive, Wall Street struggled today to believe the company's assertions that business would continue as usual.
Shares of Motorola fell sharply in early trading on the New York Stock Exchange, but quickly rebounded and spent much of the day trading between $1 and $1.50 off the opening price.
The stock finished down $1.125, at $104.50.


Reynold Carlson, 81, Latin American Envoy
Dr.
Reynold Erland Carlson, a former United States Ambassador and economic-development expert for the Ford Foundation in Latin America, died on Wednesday at the Green Hills Health Care Center in Nashville.
He was 81 and lived in Nashville.
He had suffered a long illness, his family said.
He was with the Ford Foundation from 1959 to 1975, except for three years after President Lyndon B. Johnson sent him to Colombia as Ambassador in 1966.
At the foundation, he was successively a consultant, representative in Rio de Janeiro, associate director of the foundation's Latin American program, representative in Buenos Aires and, finally, regional program adviser with headquarters in Lima, Peru.


Pain and Suffering?
To the Editor:
So far as I know, all the current proposals for improving health care overlook one obvious remedy.
The huge damages awarded for pain and suffering, which inflate the premiums for malpractice insurance, can be dispensed with without injustice; money cannot compensate for a lost life or a broken leg.
A Federal statute abolishing the award of such damages would save billions of dollars.
And, in my opinion, such a statute would be constitutional.
LOUIS LUSKY  Ridgewood, N.J., Oct. 20, 1993 The writer retired as Betts Professor of Law, Columbia Law School.


XEROX CORP. (N)
The Xerox Corporation said yesterday that third-quarter net income rose 24 percent, exceeding the expectations of industry analysts and buoying the company's shares.
Xerox stock rose $5.75, to $76.375, on the New York Stock Exchange yesterday.


Prudential May Face Civil Suits
The enforcement staff of the Securities and Exchange Commission has recommended civil action against at least five former and current executives of Prudential Securities, including three top former retail executives, people with knowledge of the inquiry said yesterday.
The five executives have been informed by S.E.C. lawyers that the commission staff is recommending charges that they failed to insure that brokers under their supervision complied with the Federal securities regulations, people involved in the case said.
As many as a dozen former and current Prudential executives are under S.E.C. investigation, other people in the case said.
None of them is a part of Prudential's current senior management.


COMPANY BRIEFS
ALLIED-LYONS P.L.C., London, has opened a $30 million Baskin Robbins ice cream manufacturing plant in Russia.
HOSPITALITY FRANCHISE SYSTEMS INC., Parsippany, N.J., a hotel franchiser, said it had been granted an option to buy 600,000 shares of Alpha Hospitality Corp. common stock at $14 a share.


Coleman Is Fined
MARCO COLEMAN of the Miami Dolphins was fined $2,000 by the National Football League yesterday for throwing a punch during last Sunday's game against Indianapolis.
The defensive end already had been fined $1,000 Monday by Coach DON SHULA.
Coleman has the right to appeal the N.F.L. fine within 10 days but has not said if he will do so.
During the Dolphins' 41-27 victory over the Colts Sunday, Coleman threw a right cross at Colts running back ROOSEVELT POTTS in the second quarter. (AP)


Campaign Waltz May Cost County Executive, Critics Say
Andrew P. O'Rourke appears to be waltzing toward the close of his re-election campaign, sometimes literally so.
The other day the Westchester County Executive, a burly, silver-haired grandfather who projects a cultivated affability, showed up at a Golden Harvest Dance for 1,000 elderly people and waltzed and tangoed a half-dozen women across the floor to Swing Era tunes like "Sentimental Journey." With a carefree air, he showed off the terpsichorean wiles his four sisters taught him when they were growing up on welfare in Manhattan's Hell's Kitchen and aspired toward what Mr.
O'Rourke calls "polite society."


Desert Ins: Saudis and South Koreans in World Cup Finals
When the emotions of this unusual soccer tournament were finally spent tonight on three different fields and under a full desert moon, the Japanese were crestfallen and the Iraqis were bitter.
But the Saudi Arabians and South Koreans were weeping for joy because those two teams will be playing in next summer's World Cup finals in the United States.
The Saudis claimed one of the Asian qualifying spots in this ethnically and politically diverse grouping by defeating Iran, 4-3.
The South Koreans claimed the other one on goal differential by beating North Korea, 3-0, and by getting a lot of help from Iraq, which crushed Japan's hopes of qualifying with a last-minute equalizer.


Corrections
Wednesday's editorial on the Canadian elections misidentified the last Prime Minister from the Liberal Party.
He was John Turner, who held the office for less than 11 weeks in 1984, not Pierre Trudeau.


Davis W. Gregg, 75, Insurance Authority
Dr.
Davis Weinert Gregg, an economist and insurance authority who expanded the industry's professional school, the American College, in Bryn Mawr, Pa., died on Wednesday at his home in Bryn Mawr.
He was 75.
The cause was cancer, said a spokesman for the Gregg Conference Center at the college.


Clinton Mixes Signal And Then Recaps
On the day he was to travel to New York to give a last-minute pre-election boost to Mayor David N. Dinkins, President Clinton made a rude fashion choice for his morning jog -- a baseball cap embroidered with the name of a new movie about a young man who aspires to play football for Notre Dame.
The name of the film: "Rudy."


Restaurants
Being a new restaurant critic in town has its drawbacks: there are a lot of restaurants I haven't yet eaten in.
But it also has its advantages: there are a lot of restaurants where I am still not recognized.
In most places I am just another person who has reserved weeks in advance, and I still have to wait as more important people are waltzed into the dining room.
I watch longingly as they are presented with the chef's special dishes, and then I turn and order from the menu just like everybody else.
One of my first interests was to review the cooking of Sylvain Portay, who became chef at Le Cirque late last year.
Over the course of five months I ate five meals at the restaurant; it was not until the fourth that the owner, Sirio Maccioni, figured out who I was.
When I was discovered, the change was startling.
Everything improved: the seating, the service, the size of the portions.
We had already reached dessert, but our little plate of petit fours was whisked away to be replaced by a larger, more ostentatious one.
An avalanche of sweets descended upon the table, and I was fascinated to note that the raspberries on the new desserts were three times the size of those on the old ones.


For Cleaner Politics in Suffolk
Next Tuesday, Suffolk County voters have a rare chance to enhance local democracy.
Proposition 5 would reduce the influence of special-interest money in politics, and increase meaningful electoral competition, by creating a public campaign financing system for countywide and local legislative races.
Under the proposed system, candidates who raise a threshold amount in small contributions and agree to limit their campaign spending and contributions would receive one-third of the spending limit in public financing.
The idea isn't new.
New York City, Los Angeles and 23 states have already enacted similar public financing systems, and there's a chance Congress may soon follow suit.


Knicks Win, Minus Ewing and Riley
Pat Riley and Patrick Ewing were ejected, but the Knicks were not defeated.
Overcoming a 14-point deficit with 10:30 to play, New York came back for an emotional 103-99 preseason victory tonight at the America West Arena here.
It was a stunning comeback, considering Ewing (30 points) and Riley were ejected with 42.8 seconds to play in the third quarter.


Composers Orchestra
The American Composers Orchestra opens its 1993-94 season at Carnegie Hall on Sunday afternoon at 3.
The orchestra's music director, Dennis Russell Davies, is to conduct the program, which features the New York premiere of Copland's recently discovered ballet score, "Grohg." Also on the program are David Soley's "Relieves/Repousse," Michael Daugherty's "Oh Lois!" (based on the comic strip characters Superman and Lois Lane), and Roger Sessions's Seventh Symphony.
The performance will be preceded by a discussion with Mr.
Soley and Mr.
Daugherty, moderated by Robert Beaser, at 1:45 P.M.
Tickets are $9 to $40.
Information: (212) 247-7800.


CHRONICLE
A wee baby boom at "CBS This Morning": a boy was born yesterday morning to ANDREA JOYCE, a sports reporter for the network, and HARRY SMITH, an anchor of the morning program.
The Smith baby weighed 8 pounds, 13 ounces and is named Grady Thomas Smith.
Grady, meet Jared -- that's Jared Brandon Cohen, who was born Oct. 15 to Mr.
Smith's co-anchor, PAULA ZAHN.


No to Recall in New Jersey
Republicans campaigning for control of New Jersey's Legislature in 1991 promised to give the public the power to initiate legislation.
But as soon as they got control they didn't want to share power with anyone, and the initiative idea died.
Instead they voted to offer a weak substitute on next week's ballot -- the power to recall elected officials.
It deserves to die, too.
The proposal would amend the State Constitution to permit special elections to remove state, municipal and county officials and members of Congress.
State laws already permit the recall of some municipal and county officials.
The effect has been good and bad.
The Mayor of Atlantic City was recalled in 1984.
But recently the Mayor of West New York in northern New Jersey was recalled and re-elected in the same balloting.


Frank Lemay Dies; State Dept. Aide, 36, Warned About Iraq
Frank M. Lemay, a State Department economist who warned in a 1989 memorandum that President Saddam Hussein of Iraq was diverting American farm loan money to buy weapons, died on Thursday at his home in Washington.
He was 36.
His companion, Keith Krueger, said the cause was AIDS.


Giuliani Gets Free TV Time But It's a One-Man Debate
Rudolph W. Giuliani got one full hour of free prime-time television last night, but it was hardly a free ride.
In an appearance that was an odd cross between a debate and a news conference, he gripped a lectern with intensity, sometimes laughed nervously, showed flashes of humor and often sparred with the questioners.
And when it was all over, he thanked them for a "really terrific discussion."
In his remarks on WCBS-TV just five days before the election, Mr.
Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal candidate for mayor, also altered an earlier stance that was thought to have hurt him among liberal voters -- his insistence that if he were mayor he would have denied Louis Farrakhan, the Nation of Islam leader, a permit to speak at Yankee Stadium.
Mr.
Farrakhan, who has been criticized for anti-Semitic remarks, had planned to hold a rally at the stadium this weekend, but has canceled the event.


Reviews/Film; Simulated Sex For a Sendup Of Obsession
Many of the simulated sexual couplings that make up a good portion of Michael Mak's erotic comedy "Sex and Zen" are so outlandishly acrobatic that they are no more believable than scenes from martial arts movies in which the combatants fly like Superman.
But because what's being depicted is passionate, voracious sex rather than stylized combat, the spirit of "Sex and Zen" is quite different from Hong Kong martial arts films that are just as far-fetched.
For those who accept the absurd simulations as realistic, "Sex and Zen" will have soft-core pornographic appeal.
For others, its appeal should be as a cheeky if predictable sendup of erotic obsession and its unhappy consequences.
"Sex and Zen," which opened today at the Cinema Village, is based on Li Yu's novel "The Carnal Prayer Mat," an erotic work that was banned for centuries in China.
It follows the sexual swath cut by Mei Yeung Sheng (Lawrence Ng), a knight-errant in fanatical pursuit of ultimate pleasure.


Reviews/Film; A Femme As Fatale As Can Be
Like so many other films from Hong Kong, Stephen Shin's action thriller "Black Cat" has the gaudy color, carefree rhythm and detachment of a high-powered comic strip.
In its wildly expressionistic opening sequence, Catherine (Jade Leung), a waitress in an eerie, blue-lighted truck stop, goes berserk when a customer makes a pass at her, killing him and a police officer who has been called to the scene.
At her arraignment, Catherine shoots her way out of a Los Angeles courtroom in a blitz of gunfire.
Moments later, she is kidnapped by the C.I.A., which implants a microchip in her brain and trains her to become a political assassin with the code name Black Cat.
The film, which opens today at the Quad Cinema, makes no pretenses toward realism: the film is a Hong Kong answer to "La Femme Nikita" and its American remake, "Point of No Return." "Black Cat" is a stylish pop fantasy spun around an invincible female action hero.
Miss Leung, a Hong Kong-based model turned actress, survives more assaults than the Terminator and Rambo put together while executing various impossible missions.


Tensions Are Rising in Somalia Amid Fears of Renewed Civil War
Although clan fighting in the capital has subsided in recent days, growing tension and sporadic clashes are being reported in other areas of the country as Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid tries to increase his faction's power base, United Nations military officials say.
The officials say the unrest and a stalemate in political talks could mean the return of civil war to Somalia, which is still struggling to recover from two years of anarchy and famine.


Islanders Are Bitten By Those They Fed
It's played in an arena that resembles a crime scene by game time, when a cordon of police officers arrives to guard the place.
Every goal for the home team, and until tonight there hadn't been many, is accompanied on a soundtrack by the menacing hiss and snarl of a Florida panther, this state's endangered species and the hands-down winner as namesake for the National Hockey League's newest expansion team.
A white blimp circles the ice above twin Zambonis between periods, and vintage "Miami Vice" music roars from the sound system whenever the panther isn't vocalizing.
This is Florida Panther hockey, the latest and, he claims, the last foray into the wilderness of expansion territory for the former Islander general manager, Bill Torrey.


Top Eygptian Police Official Slain in Militant Stronghold
Gunmen presumed to be Islamic militants shot and killed a senior police official and wounded two bodyguards and two bystanders in southern Egypt today, the Interior Ministry said.
The official, Brig.
Gen.
Mahmoud al-Deeb, died instantly when a group of gunmen sprayed his car with automatic gunfire in a marketplace in the militant stronghold of Qena, 275 miles southeast of Cairo, officials said.
General Deeb directed investigations in Qena's Security Department, which is charged with interrogating militants.


Benefits in New G.M. Pact
The tentative three-year labor agreement negotiated between the General Motors Corporation and the United Automobile Workers last weekend includes generous inducements for laid-off workers to move to other plants and for older ones to retire.
The details emerged today as 400 U.A.W. local leaders overwhelmingly approved the contract, which must still be ratified by the 265,000 U.A.W. members who work for G.M.


Trade Pact Passage May Hinge on Mexican Sugar
After years of discussion, the prospects for free trade in North America may hinge on this arcane question: Will Mexicans decide to sweeten their soft drinks with corn syrup instead of sugar, and then try to export the extra sugar north?
As the United States Congress prepares to vote on the North American Free Trade Agreement next month, Mexico is coming under heavy pressure from American lobbyists, legislators and Government officials to promise in writing that the sugar will not be shipped north.





For Witt, Final Figure Is Yet to Be Cut
At its core, figure skating is a sport of frozen water and molten gossip.
It's debatable whether people would prefer to talk to you or about you.
Hot air has rushed in to fill the vacuum that is Katarina Witt's bid for a third Olympic gold medal.
She is keeping her free-skating routine under wraps until a December exhibition in Germany.
So naturally, rumors have gone from a lazy trot to full gallop.
She is overweight.
She is embarrassing herself.
She is over the hill at 27, unable to compete with the new generation of teen-age mutant ninja triple-jumpers.


Home Video
A Special Category
The setting will be Hollywood (Universal City, to be precise) and if statuettes aren't passed out to the likes of Clint and Jodie, the Special Interest Video Association still wants its awards ceremony to have something of an Oscar spin.


Pentagon Plans Shift in War on Drug Traffickers
The Defense Department announced a modest shift yesterday away from its ineffective and heavily criticized attempts at intercepting drugs to a greater emphasis on helping countries in Latin America attack the major drug trafficking organizations.
But drug experts said the change was likely to have little effect on the flow of illegal drugs into the United States.
Brian E. Sheridan, the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Drug Enforcement Policy and Support, said the military planned to cut spending on the interception of drugs, which now accounts for 71 percent of its $1.17 billion anti-drug budget, by 6 to 11 percentage points.
It intends to increase spending on training and equipment for countries that grow, refine and export illegal drugs to 16 percent, up by 5 percentage points.


UAL Posts Big Gain Amid Union Tensions
The parent of United Airlines reported better-than-expected earnings yesterday, while signs emerged that talks with its unions about a buyout effort were strained.
United's pilots union informed its members last night on a recorded telephone message that it had sued the company over its marketing agreements with other carriers, including a recent agreement with Lufthansa German Airlines that requires approval by the Department of Transportation.
The message said those agreements violated the terms of the pilots' contract by substituting other airlines' aircraft to fly United routes.
A spokesman for the pilots union was not available for comment last night.


Review/Pop; Australians With Roots Both Celtic And Gothic
Dead Can Dance may be the ultimate cult band of a certain somber type.
The group, formed in Melbourne, Australia, in the early 1980's by Brendan Perry and Lisa Gerrard, has released six albums on 4AD, a London pop label specializing in music aswirl with a heavy Gothic atmosphere.
And in concert at Town Hall, where the sextet sold out two shows on Wednesday and Thursday, the spectral mood of its music was reinforced by an artful, low-key theatricality.
Thursday's concert also drew an intensely devout, ethereal-looking audience, with many people wearing black.
Wearing a floor-length white gown and with her blond hair in braids, Miss Gerrard, who has chiseled, Garbo-like features, presents herself as a solemn New Age Brunnhilde.
That image might seem pretentious were it not for her voice, a commanding folk alto with a buzzing vibrato that matches her look by lending the material an austere Celtic flavor.


Q &amp; A
Savings Bond Changes  Q. Will the reduction in interest from 6 percent to 4 percent on series E savings bonds affect the original interest on a bond purchased 15 or more years ago?
STANLEY LIKOFF, Bellerose, L.I.
A.
The original interest on your bond was not affected, but interest earned afterward may be.
The change in the guaranteed minimum rate for United States Savings Bonds affects bonds bought after March 1 and bonds entering new extension periods after that date.
The interest you receive on a bond depends on its issue date.
Assuming you bought a bond in October 1978, the rate was fixed for the first five years, after which it went into a 10-year extension period, in which interest was paid on a variable-rate basis.
The guaranteed rate for the current extension period is 4 percent, but you may get more if the market-based average rate is higher.
"If you hold the bond long enough, it will enter another extension period at the 25-year point," said Richard J. Schneebeli, deputy director of the Savings Bond division of the Treasury Department.
"It will then earn the guaranteed minimum rate or the market-based variable rate prevailing at that time, whichever is higher." Taxes on Noncitizens  Q. My husband and I are legal residents but not United States citizens.
What Federal gift and estate taxes apply to us?
ROSEMARY WEBER, Manhasset, L.I.
A.
Most gift and estate tax rules apply to both citizen and noncitizen residents.
The same tax rates apply, and the first $600,000 in an estate is exempt from Federal estate tax.
An important exception, however, is that transfers to a noncitizen spouse do not automatically qualify for the unlimited marital deduction on estate taxes.
Such gifts are limited to $100,000 annually.
"If you are married to a noncitizen, you should consider including in your will a qualified domestic trust that will be eligible for the estate tax marital deduction," said Robert W. Benjamin, a partner in the New York law firm of Esanu Katsky Korins &amp; Siger.
"If all else fails, the surviving spouse will have a short grace period either to reform the will in court or to become a U.S. citizen." I.R.A.
Cutoff Point  Q. Can one, working during the year he or she turns 70 1/2, make a deductible contribution to an I.R.A., while at the same time becoming subject to I.R.A. withdrawal requirements?
BERNARD MOSS, Washington  A. Taxpayers who work, but who do not participate in their employer's retirement plan, can make tax-deductible contributions of up to $2,000 a year to an individual retirement account.
But beginning with the year in which a taxpayer reaches 70 1/2, tax-deductible contributions can no longer be made to an I.R.A. by or for the benefit of that taxpayer.
"There are also special rules allowing a married working taxpayer to make tax-deductible contributions to an I.R.A. for the benefit of his or her spouse, even if the taxpayer is over age 70 1/2," said Jerry Uslander, a principal of William M. Mercer Inc., a New York employee benefits consultancy.
"This deduction ceases once the spouse reaches age 70 1/2, no matter what the age of the taxpayer."


In Hollywood, a Former Vietnamese Star Rebuilds Her Career
For Kieu Chinh, acting out the most wrenching scene in the film "The Joy Luck Club" -- when her character has to embrace twin daughters one last time, then abandon them forever -- was reliving the greatest trauma of her own childhood.
Before the scene was shot, Wayne Wang, the director of "The Joy Luck Club," led Ms.
Chinh to a tree at the foot of a mountain in China and draped his coat over her shoulders for a moment to shelter her from gusts of wind and cold rain.
"Think of anything in the past," Ms.
Chinh recalls the director telling her.
"Say anything in Vietnamese that you want to say." Then he left her in front of the cameras.


Charlotte Pepe, Laboratory Head, 83
Charlotte O'Keefe Pepe, head of Chemicolloid Laboratories of Garden City Park, L.I., died on Thursday while attending a business meeting in Paris.
She was 83 and lived in Garden City.
Her family said the cause was a heart attack.


Corrections
A headline in Business Day yesterday, about the possibility of civil suits by the Securities and Exchange Commission against at least five former and current executives of Prudential Securities, misstated the scope of the potential legal action in some editions.
The enforcement staff of the S.E.C. has recommended civil action against only the executives; the securities firm has already settled with the commission.


Corrections
An article in Science Times on Oct. 12 about a link between temporal lobe epilepsy and artistic achievement referred incorrectly to the behavior of Vincent van Gogh after he shot himself in the chest in 1890.
Doctors found a letter in his pocket in which he said he had painted three canvases, but he did not do the work after the shooting.


Aspin Orders Pentagon Overhaul Of Strategy on Nuclear Weapons
Defense Secretary Les Aspin ordered an overhaul of the military's 45-year-old nuclear weapons strategy today, saying the main threat to American security now stems from nuclear terrorists and renegade states, not from the superpower war for which the arsenal was designed.
American nuclear missiles and aircraft have been placed on lower alerts since the cold war ended in 1991, but they remain pointed largely at cities, factories and military assets of a Soviet Union that no longer exists.


Sherrard Will Miss Rest of Season
The Giants put wide receiver Mike Sherrard on the injured reserve list today, meaning he will miss the rest of the season, including the playoffs.
Sherrard, who fractured his hip two weeks ago against the Philadelphia Eagles, is expected to remain on crutches for at least another six weeks and probably won't participate in any football-related activities until mid-January.
Although there was an outside shot that Sherrard could have been back at the end of the season and the playoffs should the Giants make them, the team didn't want to take any chances.


United's Talks With Unions Seen as Affecting Others
The outcome of the effort by United Airlines pilots' and machinists' unions to gain control of the carrier -- expected by industry analysts to either succeed or fail in the next few days -- will have broad implications for many carriers.
Since deregulation, airlines have turned to mergers, growth plans, even a commission appointed this year by President Clinton to solve their ills.
Regardless of who is to blame for their billions in losses in recent years, the carriers, particularly United, are now looking to their workers for help -- indeed, they say, as the last alternative to dismantling parts of their operations.


Clinton Pushes Trade as New Frontier
Evoking the memories and language of John F. Kennedy to make a case for continued American involvement abroad, President Clinton said today that the United States cannot turn away from global economic commitments that he said constitute "our new frontier."
Mr.
Clinton, who joined members of the Kennedy clan at a ceremony marking the opening of a new museum at the John F. Kennedy Library here, said that his domestic and foreign policy objectives are what President Kennedy would have worked for.


Knicks Deliver a Message to Suns Team They Expect to See Later
No game is meaningless in the Knicks' rivalry with the Phoenix Suns.
That alone was reason for the Knicks to savor Thursday night's 103-99 preseason triumph at the America West Arena.
But the victory was also significant because Patrick Ewing was ejected.
It was significant because Pat Riley was ejected.
It was significant because New York erased a 14-point deficit with 9 minutes to play.
And it was significant because the Knicks came back with a front line of Herb Williams, Charles Oakley and Tony Campbell, with Greg Anthony and John Starks in the backcourt.


Tax Fairness for D.C.
With a population of nearly 600,000, the District of Columbia has more people than Vermont, Wyoming or Alaska.
Yet its Mayor and City Council have limited power.
And the District is denied a voting representative in the same Congress that rules on its affairs.
The colonial character of this arrangement was underscored this week when Congress voted on the Washington D.C. budget, and grandstanding politicians from other places tried to deny its citizens the right to spend their own money as they see fit.


To Cigar Smokers, Proposed Tax Rise Is Latest Indignity
Cigar smokers have suffered the scorn of Americans who think their habit is vile.
They have seen the steady disappearance of places where cigar smoking is acceptable.
Now they are being told that the Federal Government wants to raise taxes on their cigars to help finance health care.
"It's absurd," said Lew Rothman, president of J. R. Rothman, the country's largest catalogue dealer for cigars, who lists among his clients Robert DeNiro, Bill Cosby, Mario Puzo, Doc Severinsen, Al Hirt, Jack Paar and Milton Berle.


Back From the Edge; Promotion and Vindication for Officer Who Stood Alone
For years he wondered if he was the only cop fighting corruption.
His superior officers shunted him aside.
And when the Mollen Commission was established, he worried that he was being set up to take the fall for the Police Department's failure to police itself.
Yesterday Sgt.
Joseph Trimboli got a promotion and a long round of applause from his fellow officers.
He was promoted to detective squad supervisor by Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly, who only last year had questioned Sergeant Trimboli's ability as an investigator.


Market Takes Breather As a Hectic Week Ends
A day after propelling blue-chip stocks to new highs, investors appeared to be groping for direction yesterday, sprinkling their orders here and there in a session of tentative trading.
Despite more favorable economic news, the Dow Jones industrial average fell from its record of Thursday, dropping 7.27 points to 3,680.59.
For the week, the Dow was up 31.29 points.
Stocks in smaller companies generally gained yesterday, bolstering other indicators, which had lagged on Thursday.


Michael Now Knows He's Boss's Favorite
The agonizing wait about his future is over.
Even if he does not know the details yet, Gene Michael's contract as general manager of the Yankees will soon be renewed for two years and he will even receive a raise.
George Steinbrenner revealed the decision yesterday.
"As far as I'm concerned, he's my g.m.," the Yankee owner said in a telephone interview.
"It's fine. We just haven't had a chance to sit down for the final session."


3-Alarm Fire Destroys Building at Fulton Fish Market


Mayoral Agenda: A periodic report on key issues facing the election winner -- Education; Shaken School System Presents Major Challenges
From the day he takes office, the victor in Tuesday's mayoral election in New York City will have to take up the problems and the promise of the largest public school system in the country, in a major test of the future of public education in America.
He will have to find a way to renew public confidence in a shaken and divided public education system, while cutting spending to close a $2 billion long-term city budget gap.
He will have to lead the fight for more state school aid, while coming up with $1.2 billion to pay for a five-year backlog in school maintenance.


Overstuffed, Overhyped and Over in Jersey
Can this Giants-Jets Super Bowl be any more overstuffed, overhyped and bordering on nonsensical than it has been all week?
All that's needed now is for Joe Namath to come out of retirement, run through the tunnel and guarantee he's going to beat the Giants by himself.
Now comes more fuel to the pseudofire.
Jets cornerback James Hasty today suggested that because the Jets have more to play for -- if they lose, the team would fall to 2-5 and their season would be about dead -- the Giants might actually not care as much about the game.


A First: Women in Ring
DALLAS MALLOY , 16, and HEATHER POYNER , 21, will meet in the ring at Edmonds (Wash.) Community College tonight in a boxing first.
They will be the first women to compete in a sanctioned amateur boxing match in the United States.
They will box three two-minute rounds.
Malloy is a high school dropout from Bellingham, Wash.
Poyner is a former high school cheerleader and volleyball player from Lynden, Wash. (AP)


TRANSACTIONS
Baseball
COMMISSIONER'S OFFICE -- Announced that Sal Artiaga has resigned as president of the Arizona Fall League.
Promoted Steve Cobb, marketing director, to vice president of the AFL and announced he will assume full responsibility of all aspects of the league.
Named Spec Richardson AFL consultant for the remainder of the season.
Awarded negotiating rights for Reynaldo Ordonez, shortstop, to the New York Mets; Edilberto Oropesa, pitcher, to the Cincinnati Reds; and Jose Manuel Cuellar, catcher, to the Seattle Mariners.
American League


No Headline
"I'm just trying to help make this place livable." -- BOB GEARY, a San Francisco policeman who patrols with a ventriloquist's dummy.  [ 7:4. ]


Stephen H. Whitmore, Lawyer, 39
Stephen H. Whitmore, a partner with the New York law firm of Berlack, Israels &amp; Liberman, died on Wednesday at his home in Manhattan.
He was 39.
The cause was cancer, his family said.


Helicopter Makes Emergency Landing in East River


Mary C. Lawton, 58; U.S. Official Shaped Intelligence Policies
Mary C. Lawton, the Justice Department official in charge of foreign intelligence surveillance, died on Monday at her home in Bethesda, Md.
She was 58.
A department official said the cause was a pulmonary embolism.


Judge Will Hear QVC Plea To Block Paramount Deal
A Delaware Chancery court judge has set aside Nov. 16 to consider QVC Network Inc.'s request to block the proposed merger of two media giants, Paramount Communications and Viacom Inc.
QVC, which is scrambling to stop the friendly merger, had asked the court for an injunction to halt the $10 billion deal.
In its request, it asked the court to remove anti-takeover and other provisions that would make it prohibitively expensive for QVC, but not Viacom, to acquire the company.


CBS Cancels a Series 2 Days After Premiere
CBS bombarded the nation with promotional ads for its series "South of Sunset" for two weeks during the baseball playoffs and World Series, and the viewers apparently decided they had seen enough.
In one of the fastest cancellations in television history, CBS waited just two days after the premiere of "South of Sunset" before declaring it dead on arrival.
The cancellation completes CBS's four-year association with Major League Baseball with a final touch of disaster.
The deal cost the network about $500 million in losses.


Philip P. Cohen, 85, Leader in the Study Of Metabolism, Dies
Philip Pacy Cohen, a pioneer in the study of human metabolism and a former department head at the University of Wisconsin Medical School, died on Monday at a nursing home in Portland, Ore.
He was 85.
The cause was a brain tumor, said his daughter, Julie Cohen Anderson.


SHELL OIL CO.
The Shell Oil Company reported sharply higher third-quarter earnings yesterday, citing cost-cutting and higher profit margins for refined products and chemicals.
But the increase -- to $187 million from $18 million in the third quarter of 1992 -- resulted partly from $76 million in special tax benefits.
Revenues fell to $5.4 billion from $5.7 billion a year earlier.
Shell said the decline was partly because of a $4 drop in crude prices in the quarter.


Jury Rules in Favor of Lockhart's Widow
A jury yesterday awarded $15.7 million to the widow of Carl (Spider) Lockhart, a former New York Giants defensive back, agreeing with her contention that doctors had failed to diagnose her husband's cancer when he complained about it in 1979.
After the trial in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, the six-member jury found that malpractice by Dr.
William Grace 3d, chief of oncology at St.
Vincent's Hospital, was "a proximate cause" of Lockhart's death in 1986.
The jury also held the hospital responsible for Grace's error, making it liable, along with the doctor, for the damages.


Expect a Blushing Bride And a Breathless Groom
THE way Tom Young and Pam Kezios figure it, when they get married in two weeks in the middle of running the New York City Marathon, it should cost them about 10 or 12 minutes, but will be worth it.
"Think of what we'll have to tell our children," said Ms.
Kezios, a 31-year-old legal secretary, while she and her fiance were visiting here from Chicago to scout the route, find a minister, pick up some wedding gear and go through a wedding rehearsal.


CHRONICLE
Another step forward for womankind?
JEAN STAPLETON will play the role of Van Helsing, the vampire-hunting doctor in "Dracula," in a performance of the thriller on Monday at the Classic Stage Company, 136 East 13th Street in Greenwich Village.
The show, an adaption by Mac Wellman of Bram Stoker's classic, is staged as a radio drama read from scripts.
"That means I didn't have to memorize anything and there is only one rehearsal," said Ms.
Stapleton, who has just returned from New Zealand, where she filmed a Showtime television series for children.


U.N. Extends Mission in Somalia For 2 Weeks as It Considers Shift
The United Nations mission in Somalia was extended today for two weeks while the Security Council decides whether to change its mandate by placing less emphasis on searching for Gen.
Mohammed Farah Aidid, the Somali faction leader, and more emphasis on promoting political reconciliation among the warring clan-based factions.
In the resolution, the Council reaffirmed its commitment to "undertake an in-depth consideration of its humanitarian, political and security activities" in Somalia, which will be based on a report by Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali to be submitted before Nov. 18.
He is expected to lay out the problems of enforcing a mandate with the dwindling number of United Nations peacekeeping troops in Somalia.


Financial Planning: A Web of Credentials but No Regulations; A Touch of Psychology From a Top Money Man
When my wife, Carol, and I arranged to meet with Stuart Kessler, a financial planner, we thought we would discuss stocks, bonds and mutual funds.
Instead, we discussed career goals, values and death.
Mr.
Kessler said he could not talk about our investments without first talking about our plans, expectations and general station in life.
"We spend a lot of time on these things," he said.
"Part of the job of a financial planner is psychological."


Let's Remember More Than the Maine
To the Editor:
The Army's Civilian Marksmanship Program, the subject of "The Democrats' Big Guns" (editorial, Oct. 18), had its origin not in the Spanish Civil War, as you state, but in the Spanish-American War.
That the Spanish Civil War of 1936-39 (the fight against Franco) and the Spanish-American War of 1898 (America's intervention to drive the Spanish out of Cuba) are confused exposes a gap in our national knowledge.


METRO DIGEST
NEW YORK CITY
SHARP DIFFERENCE IN CANDIDATES' VIEWS  Beyond the questions of competence and temperament, crime and race, the 1993 campaign for mayor of New York City has offered voters two candidates with sharply different philosophies of local government.
Page 1.


Labor Official Retreats on Higher Minimum Wage
Under pressure from the White House, Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich said today that he would delay until next year his plans to recommend a higher minimum wage.
Two weeks ago Mr.
Reich said that by the end of October he would recommend that the minimum wage, now $4.25 an hour, be increased by about 25 cents.
But White House officials warned him immediately afterward that such a move would be unwise because it could antagonize business leaders at a time when President Clinton needs them for his health care and trade proposals.


Seeking Identity Beyond 'King's Son'
With a reticence verging on shyness, Martin Luther King 3d today worked the lunchtime crowds in downtown Atlanta in his quest to be elected chairman of the Fulton County Commission next Tuesday.
Invariably, the reactions veered far from county politics.
"Are you Martin Luther King's son?" asked Brenda Graham, reaching out to shake his hand.


Islanders Refuse to Get Struck Twice in Florida
Riled over the prospect of suffering consecutive embarrassments against Florida's two young National Hockey League teams, the Islanders played tonight as if on a mission.
Or at least as if they were in the playoffs.
The rough checking and tenacious play that helped them advance as far as the Stanley Cup semifinals last spring helped the Islanders defeat the Tampa Bay Lightning, 4-2, tonight before 22,332 at the Thunderdome.
The emotional performance came a night after a 5-2 loss to the first-year Florida Panthers in Miami.


RESULTS PLUS
YACHT RACING  Women's Entry Folds  U.S.
Women's Challenge, the only all-female entry in the competition, quit the Whitbread Round the World Race yesterday.
A statement from the skipper, Nance Frank, cited lack of money as the reason for the yacht's withdrawal, although the entry was also said to have been troubled by disharmony among its 12-woman crew.
On Thursday, the navigator, Adrienne Cahalan, of Australia, and the watch leader, Mikaela von Koskull of Finland, left the team.
Their departure deprived Challenge of two of its most experienced sailors.
Challenge finished 11th among the 14 yachts in the first leg, from Southampton, England, to Punta del Este, Uruguay.
The boat was slowed by numerous technical problems, including a split mainsail and hardware and electronics failures. (AP)


Business Digest
Companies
George L. Ball was forced out of his top post at Smith Barney Shearson and is being investigated by Federal regulators for his role in a scandal at Prudential-Bache, which he headed from 1982 until 1991, Wall Street executives said.
He was asked to leave Smith Barney over concern that the Prudential scandal would eventually stain the reputation of his new employer.  [ Page 37. ]


Hillary Clinton Courts Four Senators Backing Rival Health Care Proposal
Hillary Rodham Clinton traveled 932 miles today to tell four Republican Senators they were in "the good faith camp" on health care and to minimize their differences with the President over how to pay for insurance coverage.
She said there was not much difference between the plan the Senators support -- which would require individuals, not employers, to pay for health insurance -- and the one that President Clinton submitted to Congress this week requiring employers to pay for premiums, because both would include universal care and a comprehensive benefits plan.


Jean Ann O'Hare, C. R. Holladay Jr.
Jean Ann O'Hare, a corporate counsel for Pfizer Inc., the pharmaceutical concern, and Charles Randolph Holladay Jr., a partner in the law firm of Meilke &amp; Holladay, both in New York, were married yesterday in Westport, Conn.
Rabbi Charles Lippman and the Rev.
James B. Wattley, an Episcopal priest and cousin of the bridegroom, officiated at Christ and Holy Trinity Church.


Corrections
An article in Your Money on Oct. 2 about Walter L. Morgan, a pioneer in the mutual fund business, misstated his relationship to the Vanguard Group.
Mr.
Morgan founded the Wellington Management Company, which ultimately became part of Vanguard.
John C. Bogle established the Vanguard Group.


Review/Pop; A Siberian Singer's Style Goes With New York Reeds
A typical traditional singer from Tuva, in southern Siberia, wouldn't arrive on stage with an LP cantilevered atop her hairdo, or wearing tights and ankle boots suitable for a Central Asian version of the B-52's.
But Sainkho Namchylak, who performed on Thursday night at the Kitchen with Ned Rothenberg, no longer sticks to traditional music; she has joined the international improvising avant-garde.
The concert was part of the Kitchen's Autumnmusic series, which ends tonight.
She found common musical ground with a musician from the opposite side of the globe; Mr.
Rothenberg is a New Yorker.
Mr.
Rothenberg, on alto saxophone, bass clarinet and shakuhachi (a Japanese wooden flute), was a deferential partner to Ms.
Namchylak, who sings both traditional Tuvan music and an avant-garde vocabulary of scat syllables, twitters and shrieks.


Bridge
A positively disastrous trump break is usually fatal, but those who remember the Latin motto that translates as "Never despair" can sometimes survive.
An example is the diagramed deal from a sectional Swiss Team event earlier this month in Ardsley, N.Y.
One would expect North-South to land in game in no-trump, hearts or clubs and make a fortunate 12 tricks.
But the partnership wandered into five diamonds, making East, for the moment, a happy man.


Teachers Union Acts Shamefully to Mayor
To the Editor:
I protest the highhanded action of the United Federation of Teachers in not endorsing Mayor David N. Dinkins for re-election.
By letter on Oct. 25, nearly two weeks after the teachers union leadership "leaked" its decision to the press, it finally notified the rank and file of its action.
But, instead of saying that the union was not endorsing Mayor Dinkins, the letter named three choices (all Democrats): Stanley Michaels for City Council in District 7, Manhattan Borough President Ruth W. Messinger and Manhattan District Attorney Robert Morgenthau.
By omission, the union leadership implicitly failed to endorse the Mayor or to acknowledge his granting a new contract with budget-breaking raises.


Confusion Over Policies Leads to Talk of Change
BUYERS of life insurance are entitled to descriptions of their policies and how they work.
But the computer-generated tables supplied by insurance agents often show results that are just not realistic.
Even after scouring these documents, people frequently cannot determine what the policies' benefits would be if they lived, died or stopped paying premiums at any given time.


Incentives of $31 Million Keep Kidder, Peabody in New York
In the latest high-priced deal to persuade a company not to move to the suburbs, Mayor David N. Dinkins said yesterday that Kidder, Peabody &amp; Company, the Wall Street firm, had accepted $31 million in incentives and would move its headquarters from lower Manhattan to Rockefeller Center.
The deal, in the wake of a series of corporate relocations out of New York City, came at a politically sensitive time, since Rudolph W. Giuliani, Mr.
Dinkins's opponent in the mayoral election on Tuesday, has repeatedly criticized the Mayor for losing too many battles to hold onto companies.


Cost Curbs Help Macy Cut Losses
R.
H.
Macy &amp; Company, which operates the Macy's, Bullock's and I. Magnin store chains, tripled its cash flow in September by keeping a tight rein on expenses, according to documents filed in United States Bankruptcy Court yesterday.
The company almost broke even last month, posting a $600,000 operating loss compared with an $18.8 million loss in the corresponding period last year.
Sales, however, dipped slightly as the company continued to struggle against weak economies in California and the Northeast, where it has the most stores.


CHRONICLE
People go to fashion shows for a variety of reasons: to see, to be seen, to take the pulse of Seventh Avenue.
TOMMY TUNE, the producer, director and dancer, plans to take in a few of the New York shows, which begin tomorrow under tents in Bryant Park, to sharpen his artistic senses.
"We are always seeking to refine our natural vision, and scrutinizing fashion design is one way of achieving that," he said the other day, taking a break from "Best Little Whorehouse Goes Public," a show he's developing.
"Going to fashion shows enhances my eye for detail. Every little stitch counts and when I am working with a big show, I like to find ways to enhance my eye for detail.


Sightseeing Helicopter Makes Forced Landing in East River
It was a dream autumn day in Manhattan for four Paris tourists who set out yesterday afternoon on a short sightseeing ride by helicopter across the perfect blue sky.
But only minutes later, as the tour paused near Wall Street, the helicopter suddenly lost power and was forced to land in the East River.
No one was injured, but it was quite an event for the four passengers who had not had this kind of adventure in mind.


Traffic Alert
TODAY STRYCKER'S/COLUMBUS AVENUE FAIR Columbus Avenue will be closed between 86th and 96th Streets from 11 A.M. to 6 P.M.
Also, 50th Street will be closed between Fifth Avenue and Avenue of the Americas from 6 A.M. to 6 P.M. today and tomorrow for construction activity.
TOMORROW VILLAGE HALLOWEEN PARADE Avenue of the Americas will be closed between Spring and 22d Streets from 6 P.M. until completion.
IRVING PLACE FESTIVAL Irving Place will be closed between 14th and 20th Streets from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.
SAFETY NOTE
Fire officials recommend changing batteries in smoke alarms twice a year, when daylight time starts and ends.
The date this fall is tomorrow.


Methodist Leader Requests U.S. Curb on Human Cloning
A leader of the United Methodist Church has asked President Clinton to issue an executive order banning the cloning of human embryos at all federally financed institutions, the Religious News Service reported yesterday.
That request, made this week by the Rev.
Thom White Wolf Fassett, general secretary of the 8.9-million-member denomination's General Board of Church and Society, was prompted by news accounts of cloning experiments at George Washington University aimed at producing extra fertilized embryos for implantation when couples are unable to conceive naturally.


For Whitman, a Noisy Welcome to Florio's Turf
Christine Todd Whitman took her Republican campaign for governor into Camden, the heartland of Gov.
Jim Florio's political fief, yesterday.
The reception was raucous.
Mrs.
Whitman had scheduled four stops, beginning with Cooper Hospital, where she visited the women's care unit and the children's unit.


The Islands Russia and Japan Dispute
To the Editor:
The dispute between Japan and Russia over the so-called Kurile Islands is more nuanced, both historically and legally, than Marvin Gregory's Oct. 22 letter suggests.
The contest for the Kuriles dates back to Russian and Japanese imperial competition in the 19th century.
In 1945, Russia recovered by force what it had lost after the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-5.


Thomas Fortuin, 48, Lawyer and Officer At Paramount Films
Thomas Mark Fortuin, a senior vice president of Paramount Pictures, died on Monday at Hoag Memorial Hospital Presbyterian in Newport Beach, Calif.
He was 48 and lived in Laguna Beach, Calif.
The cause was complications from AIDS, said his companion, Michael Mickiewicz.


COMPANY BRIEFS
DIAL CORP., said its G.E.S.
Exposition Services Inc. unit had acquired Andrews, Bartlett &amp; Associates Inc.
Both companies are in the trade show and convention-services industry.
PACER TECHNOLOGY, Rancho Cucamonga, Calif., has acquired Super Glue Corp., Hollis, N.Y.
Terms were not disclosed.


No Funeral for Doris Duke
Doris Duke, the tobacco heiress and philanthropist who died on Thursday at her home in Beverly Hills, Calif., directed that her remains be cremated and scattered at sea and that no funeral or memorial service be held.
Bernard Lafferty, a friend and adviser to Miss Duke, made her wishes known yesterday through a statement issued by his spokesman in Manhattan, Howard J. Rubenstein.


This Year, Nothing and No One Is Exempt From Dressing Up


INSIDE
Dismissal at Smith Barney Tied to Prudential Scandal
A top Smith Barney Shearson executive, George L. Ball, was forced out of his post and is being investigated by Federal regulators for his role in a scandal at Prudential Bache, which he headed from 1982 until 1991, Wall Street executives say.
Page 37.
Court Acts on Gay Policy
The Supreme Court allowed the Pentagon to enforce its new gay policy while the Administration appeals a ruling banning military discrimination against homosexuals.
Page 6.
Wage Increase Delayed
Under pressure from the White House, Labor Secretary Robert B. Reich said he would delay until next year his plans to recommend a higher minimum wage.
Page 8.


GIULIANI COMPLAINS ABOUT DINKINS ADS
Rudolph W. Giuliani yesterday called Mayor David N. Dinkins "desperate to save a failing mayoralty" and said the Mayor was lying and distorting the truth in "vicious, nasty, false advertising" that served only to bring all New Yorkers down.
As he campaigned around the city, Mr.
Giuliani condemned the Mayor and warned everyone within earshot to expect a deluge of unfair attacks in the final days before the vote.


Sports of The Times; Finding Way to Stop The Madness
THERE was no Midnight Madness at Duke University last night.
No blaring bands, no television cameras, no hordes of screaming fans with faces painted blue and white.


Ireland and Britain Offer Plan for I.R.A. Talks
The Prime Ministers of Britain and Ireland conferred today in Brussels on Northern Ireland and issued a statement promising that "new doors could open" for peace talks on the British province if the Irish Republican Army ended its campaign of violence.
The Prime Ministers -- John Major of Britain and Albert Reynolds of Ireland -- said in a statement after their meeting that once "a renunciation of violence has been made and sufficiently demonstrated, new doors could open and both Governments would wish to respond imaginatively to the new situation."


Henderson, Tanana, Farr Free Agents
Rickey Henderson and three others who played in this year's World Series joined a growing list of free agents yesterday.
Henderson and Danny Cox of Toronto, and Jim Eisenreich and Larry Andersen of Philadelphia were among 30 players who filed, bringing the number of free agents to 67.
Steve Farr, the Yankees' No. 1 relief pitcher, and Frank Tanana, who joined the team in September, added their names to the list after the Yankees opted not to offer them salary arbitration.
Charlie O'Brien, one of the Mets' catchers, also filed.


Smith Barney Forces Out Ball
George L. Ball, the former head of Prudential-Bache Securities, has been forced out of his senior post at Smith Barney Shearson and is being investigated by Federal regulators for his role in the unfolding scandal at his former firm, Wall Street executives and people involved in the case said yesterday.
Mr.
Ball, the chairman and chief executive of Prudential-Bache from 1982 to 1991, was asked to leave his job as a senior executive vice president at Smith Barney over concern that the Prudential scandal would eventually stain the reputation of his new employer, executives at the firm said.


Mets Win Rights To Cuban Shortstop
The Mets, making the most out of being the worst, yesterday scored a rare and maybe remarkable triumph when they won the rights to a 21-year-old Cuban national team shortstop who defected to the United States during last summer's World University Games in Buffalo.
"Maybe it's an indication that the losing has ended for this organization," said General Manager Joe McIlvaine.


With European Union's Arrival, Fears on Economy Cast a Shadow
This was to have been a day for the leaders of the European Community to celebrate finally the coming into effect of the Treaty on European Union.
But instead, the summit meeting today was overshadowed by anxiety about growing unemployment and mounting welfare costs in their recession-stricken continent.
In a communique, the European Community leaders agreed to work more closely together to create jobs and economic growth after the Treaty on European Union goes into effect on Monday.


For Motorists on the Spot, Relief From Tow Trucks
In a traffic-choked town of short tempers and tall fines, it is a classic confrontation: The tow truck driver has just hooked an illegally parked car and is about to pull away.
The hapless motorist runs up, moaning excuses, pleading for pity.
The tow truck driver is unbending.
Anger boils over, maybe violence.
This all-too-familiar New York street scene may soon be a thing of the past in most of midtown Manhattan, the city's Transportation Commissioner, Lucius J. Riccio, said yesterday, proclaiming not a miracle but a kind of common-sense victory over Kafkaesque bureaucracy.


Bulls Lose Williams
SCOTT WILLIAMS , who was expected to be the starting center for the Chicago Bulls, injured his knee in a practice session prior to the team's 110-94 victory over the 76ers last night and could be lost for the season.
A magnetic resonance imaging examination showed that Williams damaged the patella tendon in his right knee. (AP)


Executive Changes
LEVEL ONE COMMUNICATIONS INC., Folsom, Calif., said John C. Zimmerman had joined the company as chief financial officer and vice president of administration.


Schott to Return Monday
Marge Schott, who was suspended from operating the Cincinnati Reds last March 1, will be permitted to resume control of the club Monday but will remain on probation for four months.
"She'll be back in her office, but she has to operate under certain restraints the next four months," Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, said yesterday.


Financial Planning: A Web of Credentials but No Regulations; The Search for Someone Trustworthy
When Thomas and Midge Bailey of Norcross, Ga., retired in the mid-1980's, they gave their financial planner clear instructions.
"We told him we didn't want our retirement money in high-risk things," Mrs.
Bailey said.
"We wanted safe investments for the income."
But the planner put much of the couple's $260,000 stake in high-risk investments, like oil and gas limited partnerships.
He earned hefty commissions -- up to 10 percent -- while their investments turned sour.


'Yuppies' Label Belittles Work of Volunteers
To the Editor:
As a New York Cares volunteer, I adamantly object to "Yuppies Come Out to Paint Up and Fix Up," the headline on your Oct. 17 article about New York Cares Day.
It is an insult to the 4,000 volunteers who worked Oct. 16 and the organization that spent months planning the event.
While some of the Oct. 16 volunteers may have been "yuppies," the majority were not.
Such a term makes those who volunteered their time and energy sound like a bunch of dilettantes descending from their ivory tower.


Big Loss and Job Cuts for Amdahl
The Amdahl Corporation, the struggling mainframe computer manufacturer, reported a third-quarter loss today far in excess of analysts' already-pessimistic estimates.
The company also said it had suspended its quarterly dividend and would eliminate 1,800 jobs.


Classical Music in Review
Ensemble Organum  St. Mary the Virgin Church


Two New Offerings for Varied Investing
Among a flood of new funds created to buy stock in utilities is Strong American Utilities Fund.
Because utilities are mostly mature companies, paying high dividends, investors in these funds can reap a steady income while maintaining some exposure to the equities markets.
The Strong fund has a 30-day yield of 5.46 percent.
The fund, which can invest up to 25 percent of its portfolio in energy stocks as a hedge against rising inflation, is managed by W.H.
Reaves &amp; Company, Jersey City, which specializes in utilities stocks.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
Scouting the Top Teams  Here are scouting reports for this weekend's top high school football games in the Catholic High Schools Football League, the Public Schools Athletic League and selected Long Island and New Jersey games.
Records are in parentheses.
C.H.S.F.L.
St.
Anthony (6-1) at Chaminade (7-0), tomorrow


Brewer Revives a European Tradition in Texas
Pierre Celis is about to prove you can go home again.
The 68-year-old Belgian brewer, who sold his brewery in Belgium to a giant brewer several years ago, has been making beer in Texas for the last year and a half.
Now, he is going to sell beer in Belgium once again.
Regardless of whether his beers should be classified as Belgian-style Texas beer or Texas-style Belgian beer, there is no question that Mr.
Celis, a Ross Perot-size man who often wears a bolo tie, has carved out a niche for himself in the beer business.
He has sucessfully established himself as one of the leaders in the growing international taste for white, or wheat, beer.


Two Ways to Run a City; Mayoral Candidates Offer a Clear Choice Between Opposing Views of Government
Beyond the questions of competence and temperament, crime and race, the 1993 campaign for mayor of New York City has offered voters two candidates with sharply different philosophies of local government.
David N. Dinkins and Rudolph W. Giuliani have not met this time in a debate to spell out those ideologies, and the campaign has often wandered into more visceral diversions.
But the differences between the two men emerge with great clarity from their campaign statements, position papers and weeks of appearances in the five boroughs of the city.


3 Roars for Panthers
JERRY RICHARDSON vowed that the first thing he would do after he got a National Football League expansion team was thank all the people who helped him over the last 6 1/2 years.
The N.F.L.'s newest owner, a former receiver for the Baltimore Colts, got his chance yesterday when 50,000 Carolina Panthers fans jammed a downtown parade route to welcome him home.


MODERATE GROWTH IN SEESAW PATTERN SEEN FOR ECONOMY
The economy is showing more signs of life, but even third-quarter growth of 2.8 percent, announced on Thursday, is not likely to be the start of a prolonged period of smooth, strong expansion.
Many economists predict that the economy will grow moderately in coming months.
But the process is likely to continue to be choppy, they caution, with periods of solid expansion alternating with anemic growth like that in the first half of this year.


Fire Built for Warmth Spread Disaster
It had grown chilly before dawn on Wednesday, so Zhang Andres Huang, a 35-year-old transient living without shelter in a canyon near here, gathered some brush and lighted a fire.
But there was a strong, dry wind that morning, and the fire spread out of control.
Mr.
Huang, a native of China who arrived here only weeks ago and speaks no English, told investigators through an interpreter that he had tried in vain to stomp out the fire and had run for help, banging on a canteen to attract attention.
A short time later, sheriff's deputies found him about to be engulfed in flames.


High Court Lets Pentagon Put Gay Policy Into Effect
The Supreme Court cleared the way today for the Pentagon to carry out its new policy on homosexuals in the military while the Clinton Administration appeals a Federal judge's order banning all discrimination against gay and lesbian service members.
The Justices' unanimous action, the granting of a stay against the judge's order at the Administration's urgent request, was essentially procedural and did not necessarily reflect a judgment on the constitutionality of restrictions on military service by gay men and lesbians.
That underlying question may reach the Court either in a later phase of this case or in other cases now in the legal pipeline.


Back to Work as Coleman And Mahorn Rejoin Nets
Derrick Coleman had missed the Nets' last four preseason games because of wisdom-tooth extraction.
Rick Mahorn hadn't played a game since bruising his kneecap in training camp.
With the season opener next Friday, Coach Chuck Daly was glad that both players returned to practice today.
"He seems to be O.K," Daly said, referring to Coleman.
"He went the whole practice and he worked real hard. He's just one of those gifted players like that."


An Aggressive Prosecutor Who Plays to Win
In the restrained world of Federal prosecutors, where public demeanor usually ranges from guarded to grim and most traces of singularity are kept carefully hidden, Mary Jo White stands out like a pair of jeans in a closet full of pinstripes.
Though her days in a female lawyers' basketball league are long gone, and her Honda motorcycle is gathering dust, Ms.
White, the new United States Attorney in Manhattan, insists that her interests run more toward sports than cerebral pursuits.
When asked what book she last read, she said, "Besides the sentencing guidelines?"


Westchester Hospital Joins Health Group
United Hospital Medical Center, a 294-bed community hospital here, today affiliated with New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center in Manhattan as part of an alliance called the New York Hospital Care Network.
The affiliation comes as major hospitals throughout the nation are trying to broaden their services and geographic reach in anticipation of changes in the health-care industry.


Classical Music in Review
Gotham Ensemble
Merkin Concert Hall


New Government Corruption Scandal Leaves Brazil Stunned
Nearly one year after the nation's President resigned in a corruption scandal, charges of a major kickback scheme now grip the Brazilian legislature, clouding the future of Latin America's largest democracy.
A former budget director has disclosed a system of payoffs that diverted millions of dollars in taxpayer money into the hands of members of Congress and has implicated 32 politicians who he said profited from the scheme.


Olympians Pull Their Weight As Pros
Combined, Michael Carbajal and Oscar De La Hoya weigh less than Riddick Bowe.
But the slender, undefeated American fighters will attract more than 15,000 fans to the America West Arena on Saturday night.
It is a tribute to their popularity that the bouts will be on pay-per-view television despite fighting in divisions that are unknown to most sports fans.


In Burundi, Partition Can End the Bloodshed
To the Editor:
The coup and killings in Burundi are regrettable, but were predictable.
In 1972, when I served as United States Ambassador to Burundi, I witnessed the ethnic strife between the Tutsi and Hutu communities.
The alienation between the two communities is deeply rooted and is an intrinsic part of the culture.
The minority Tutsi (around 14 percent of the population) and the majority Hutu have had a history of ethnic clashes since the 19th century.


Arabs End Objections To U.N. Seating Israel
Reflecting the improved political climate in the Middle East, the General Assembly agreed today to seat Israel at its session this year without an Arab challenge.
From 1982 to 1989, Arab nations always challenged the credentials of the Israeli delegation, which was seated only after a procedural maneuver by the Scandinavian nations that prevented the Assembly from voting on proposals by the Arabs to bar Israel.


Six Accused in Killings
Six men suspected of being members of an extortion gang in the South Bronx that preyed on drug dealers were indicted yesterday on murder, kidnapping and weapons charges, the Bronx District Attorney said.
The suspects face four counts of second-degree murder, including the killing of George Calderon, who was described by Robert T. Johnson, the Bronx District Attorney, as a significant heroin dealer.


U.N. Envoy Proposes Talks To End the Impasse in Haiti
The United Nations' envoy to Haiti called today for new talks with the nation's military leaders and renewed demands that they take steps to comply with a negotiated agreement restoring democracy in the next two days or face a rapid cutoff of trade.
Speaking at a news conference on the eve of the original date set for the return of the nation's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the special United Nations representative here, Dante Caputo, said his organization would have "no alternative" but to extend sanctions if Haiti's Army leaders did not respond favorably to the call for new talks.


Oh, You Know What I Meant
A bound document produced for holders of Paramount Communications stock last week came off the presses with a little glitch.
What Paramount meant to say in the Schedule 14D-9 solicitation statement, filed Oct. 25 with the Securities and Exchange Commission, was that the Viacom Inc. and Paramount boards would have to entertain certain kinds of competing offers.
Offers that were bona fide and lacking "material contingencies relating to finance," for example.


Corrections
An article yesterday about the groundbreaking for the New Jersey Performing Arts Center misstated the background of Lawrence P. Goldman, president of the arts center.
He oversaw the renovation of Carnegie Hall, not Lincoln Center.
Because of an editing error, the article also included an incomplete reference to Newark's Mayor.
He is Sharpe James.


Teachers Union Acts Shamefully to Mayor; Not Race Alone
To the Editor:
I concur with the thrust of "Clinton Spoke the Truth on Race" by Lani Guinier (Op-Ed, Oct. 19), that honest discourse is essential to improving relations between our citizens.
Yet, when we limit any type of discourse on race to black and white, we omit other real elements of difference that contribute to this crisis: age, gender, social and economic status, sexual preference, physical ability, ethnicity and religious affiliation.


For County Executive in Nassau
Long Island's Nassau County is suffering the effects of a bloated, deeply entrenched political machine.
Nassau's incumbent County Executive, the Republican-Conservative Thomas Gulotta, showed promise earlier in his tenure.
He understood the intricacies of government and seemed to have a handle on the county budget.
But bad economic times have gotten the best of him.
Mr.
Gulotta is too tied into the wasteful, patronage-laden ways of the Republican machine to bring the revolutionary changes in government that Nassau needs.
His opponent, the Democrat Benjamin Zwirn, might just have the temperament and talent to bring reform.
We support his election.


Corrections
An article on Monday about Secretary of State Warren Christopher's visit to Eastern Europe and Central Asia mistranslated Almaty, the new official name for the capital of Kazakhstan, a city formerly known by the Russified name Alma-Ata.
Almaty means Father of Apples, not City of Apples.


Penn State Can Keep Coalition Contented
As Penn State football fans continue to adjust to the subtleties of life in the Big Ten Conference (Let's see: If we beat Ohio State, and Michigan beats Wisconsin. . . . ), they have some company.
The coach is figuring the possibilities, too.
"I did some things last Saturday," Joe Paterno remembered of his off day, "and then when I came home I got to watch the second half of the Illinois-Michigan game because we are going to play Illinois down the road, and got kind of caught up in the 'if this happens and that happens,' and 'what if' and all that kind of stuff. It certainly continues to make the season interesting even though you may get licked."


Canada's Quarrel With Nafta
Supporters of the North American Free Trade Agreement hoped that the Liberal Party, once it won the Canadian elections, would drop its vow to renegotiate the trade pact.
But this week Jean Chretien, the Prime Minister-elect, resurrected the threat.
That's unfortunate, because renegotiation could bury Nafta -- an important pact that would raise living standards in Canada, Mexico and the U.S. and lock Mexico into its pro-market reforms.
The threat is also unnecessary, because Nafta doesn't bear on the trade issues that disturb Mr.
Chretien the most.
The dispute is mostly about subsidies the Canadian Government gives industries like wheat and lumber.
These subsidies are designed to solve domestic problems, like bailing out flagging industries and developing downtrodden regions.
But the two countries' economies are so intertwined that domestic subsidies inevitably affect trade between them.
Subsidies help Canadian producers lower their prices, giving exporters an "unfair advantage," according to their U.S. competitors.


Review/Music; Abbado, the Berlin Philharmonic and Mahler
What a magnificent, eloquent, unpredictable and flawed organism the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra is.
On Thursday night in Carnegie Hall, the orchestra that once seemed an extension of Herbert von Karajan's gesturing arms gave the first of three New York concerts conducted by Karajan's successor, Claudio Abbado.
It was the first time since 1982 that the orchestra had played in New York under its own music director (visits in 1986 and 1991 were led by James Levine and Bernard Haitink, respectively).
And it was the first time New Yorkers could hear how Mr.
Abbado has been shaping this great instrument since he became its caretaker and leader in 1989.
The orchestra looks younger, but its sonic tradition has not been radically modified; it was still recognizably the instrument heard in recordings and previous concerts.
The famous sleek strings still had an astonishing elegance; the orchestra as a whole could give a polished, glorious three-dimensional body to sound.
And there were moments when the ensemble seemed to have its familiar organic quality, breathing with its conductor and the score..


Raymond Lockhart, Television Producer, 65
Raymond Lockhart, a former producer for NBC News, died yesterday in Beth Israel Medical Center in Manhattan.
He was 65 and lived in Manhattan and Topsoil Island, N. C.
His family said the cause was cancer.


Classical Music in Review
Yo-Yo Ma, cellist and Emanuel Ax, pianist  Avery Fisher Hall


As Envoy to Tokyo, Mondale Takes a New Tack on Trade
When President Clinton named Walter F. Mondale as Ambassador to Japan earlier this year, Government officials here hoped for an updated version of their favorite envoy, Mike Mansfield, an elder statesman who rarely ventured into battles over trade.
But in the six weeks since Mr.
Mondale arrived here talking about creating "a more dignified relationship," going beyond each country's lectures about how the other should change, the comparisons to Mr.
Mansfield have quickly melted away.


A Mild Russian Summer, A Harsh Keenan Winter
Sergei Zubov spent the summer in Russia, his homeland, getting married, going on vacation, having a good time.
Sure, he received the mailing from his new coach, Mike Keenan, the one that detailed the training routine he was expected to follow during the off season.
He just didn't pay much attention to what it said.


The Running Man: Johnson Craves Role
With the Jets looking to control the clock and take some of the steam out of the Giants' defensive front on Sunday, this would be a perfect time for Coach Bruce Coslet to turn running back Johnny Johnson loose.
Johnson, who came to the Jets on draft day in a trade with Phoenix, has had success running against the Giants.
In five games with the Cardinals, Johnson, a 6-foot-3-inch, 220-pound workhorse, has averaged 85 yards on 22 carries.
Last season, he had a career-best game against the Giants, carrying the ball 36 times for 156 yards and 2 touchdowns.


Giuliani Ahead in Fund-Raising But Dinkins Says He'll Match It
Rudolph W. Giuliani had $900,000 more in the bank than Mayor David N. Dinkins earlier this week, according to campaign records filed last night.
But officials of the Dinkins campaign said they are continuing to raise money and will be able to match resources with the Republican-Liberal candidate during the crucial last days of the mayoral campaign.
The records filed last night with the city's Campaign Finance Board showed that Mr.
Giuliani had about $1,033,000 on hand on Monday and that he was still allowed to spend $437,000 of that before Tuesday, under the city's campaign finance law.
Mayor's Campaign Fined
The campaign reports indicate that Mr.
Giuliani raised no money during the one-week reporting period and that he already has more money on hand than he can spend.


Dummy Is on Ballot (He Isn't Seeking Office)
Along with school vouchers, sales taxes and city charter revisions, voters in San Francisco will decide next Tuesday whether to allow a veteran police officer to walk his beat with a ventriloquist's dummy.
The ballot measure is a spot of comic relief in an otherwise uninspiring off-year election here and seems popular with voters in the North Beach neighborhood where the officer, Bob Geary, and the dummy, Brendan O'Smarty, had worked without a peep of official complaint until a series of high-level changes in the police department.


Novosibirsk Journal; For Yeltsin, Siberia's Heart Is Cold
This rough-edged city of 1.5 million people, only 100 years old, has traditionally seen itself as the geographical center of the Russian empire and the capital of resource-rich, autonomy-minded Siberia.
But Novosibirsk was also the center of open resistance to President Boris N. Yeltsin in his battle with Parliament, and the results have produced a deep, defiant sullenness.
Vitaly P. Mukha, the longtime boss of this huge central Siberian province, 1,900 miles from Moscow, admits that in the game of politics he simply chose wrong.
On Sept. 22, the day after the final showdown in Moscow began when Mr.
Yeltsin proclaimed Parliament disbanded and Parliament retaliated by naming Vice President Aleksandr V. Rutskoi acting President, Mr.
Mukha said in an open session of the provincial legislature: "From this day on, there is no President Yeltsin. The President of Russia is Rutskoi. Some say to be calm, but no! We must inspire people to oppose Yeltsin."


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-5 GLOOM AS EUROPEAN CHIEFS MEET  A meeting of the European Community was intended to celebrate the start of its treaty on unity, but instead it was dampened by anxiety about the economy.  1


Secret Tapes Tell of Plan To Kill Bombing Suspect
The Egyptian authorities intended to kill a defendant in the World Trade Center bombing trial when he was arrested and tortured in Egypt a month after the bombing, an informer told the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Transcripts of telephone conversations between the informer, Emad A. Salem, and agents for the Federal Bureau of Investigation quote Mr.
Salem as saying that the defendant, Mahmud Abouhalima, was spared when the United States asked that he be returned to stand trial.
If not for that request, Mr.
Salem said, Mr.
Abouhalima would have been made to "disappear." Ties With Egypt
It is unclear how much Mr.
Salem, a 43-year-old former Egyptian Army officer, could have known about the Egyptian Government's plans.
Although he is quoted in other parts of the transcripts as saying he had maintained ties with Egypt, the transcripts do not include the source of his information on the plan to kill Mr.
Abouhalima, and it could not be confirmed independently yesterday.


Jordan Says That Life In Retirement Is a Dunk
MICHAEL JORDAN , wearing his college basketball shorts under a dapper white suit and silvery vest, has told the television interviewer OPRAH WINFREY that he is happy in retirement.
"Nothing," Jordan said in response to a question about what occupies his time now that he is free from the rigors of the eight-month-long professional basketball season.


Classical Music in Review
Leon Albert Williams  Baritone Merkin Concert Hall


More Women, More Cash In Legislative Campaigns
Used for years as cannon fodder in hopeless election campaigns and denied nominations in races they could win, this year women are making a determined effort to get through the doors of the New Jersey Legislature, armed with one of the basic weapons of politics: money.
Now there are only 14 women in the 120-member New Jersey Legislature, several of them Republicans who were transformed from sacrificial lambs to lawmakers in the tax-revolt landslide in 1991 when there were no safe districts for Democrats.


Bonilla Is Available, If the Price Is Right
Trade Bobby Bonilla?
It's an interesting proposition.
It would be a great gamble.
The Mets won't rule it out.
And New York won't collapse in outrage if it happens.
"Is Bonilla untouchable?" asked Joe McIlvaine, the general manager of the Mets.
"He is unless he's traded."


Not Exactly on the Air, Koch Airs His Views
In 1977, David Garth devised television commercials that helped make Edward I. Koch, a quirky Congressman from Greenwich Village, Mayor of New York.
This year, he has figured out how to help Mr.
Koch, now a one-man media conglomerate, help Rudolph W. Giuliani become Mayor, despite a clause in Mr.
Koch's television contract that bars him from making political ads.
The new 30-second commercial uses footage of Mr.
Koch's recent comments about Mr.
Giuliani on WABC-TV's "Eyewitness News Conference" in which the former mayor said: "I know that Rudy Giuliani is intelligent, is courageous, a man of integrity. He brings a principle of one standard, a single standard for a single city."


Advice for a Fraction of the Price of a Personalized Plan
Can't afford a financial planner?
With planners' bills often reaching thousands of dollars, the problem is hardly rare.
Luckily, alternatives exist.
The telephone is one option.
For $3.95 a minute, a caller to 800 ASK-A-CPA can get financial advice from an accountant or certified financial planner.
"We want people to call us back and back and back, so we try to answer questions as quickly as possible," said John Howland, a partner in the venture, called Money Minds of Glenview, Ill.


New Jersey NOW Divides on Endorsement
To the Editor:
Anna Quindlen hits the nail on the head in "Gender Gaffe" (column, Oct. 24), on the National Organization for Women and the race for governor in New Jersey.
But she is not the only woman to recognize the shortcomings of Christine Todd Whitman, the Republican candidate.
Although the political action committee for the state chapter of the National Organization for Women decided -- by a very narrow margin -- to recommend Mrs.
Whitman over Gov.
Jim Florio, this vote did not reflect the viewpoints of most of the NOW chapters throughout the state.


Berlin Concern Agrees to Build Public Toilets
At a time of occasionally high-flown oratory in the mayoral campaign, New York City Department of Parks and Recreation officials reported progress yesterday on a matter of perhaps more pressing concern to many: they said a company had agreed to install 30 public toilets in and around the city's parks by March 1995.
The announcement came amid a long-delayed effort by the city's Department of Transportation to install as many as 200 public toilets on city streets.
It also came less than a month after two other companies withdrew their bids to install toilets in the parks, saying that the city would not allow them to display enough advertising on the toilets and nearby kiosks.


Tough Balancing Act at Loehmann's
When Loehmann's, the discount stores of choice for generations of thrifty fashion mavens, posted signs brandishing designers' names, added more lower-priced women's clothing, and stopped removing labels, many customers were not appreciative.
They were outraged.
They missed the thrill of hunting for the elusive designer original, the feeling of power when they could decipher the code on a tag that told them they had bagged a Bill Blass.


Most Scary Cardinal
Phoenix Cardinals players aren't laughing about a photo of their beleaguered coach, JOE BUGEL , which was published by The Arizona Republic newspaper as a cut-out Halloween mask this week.
The Republic's editors said yesterday that the picture was a time-honored joke, but a number of players said they would refuse to talk to reporters from the paper until it publishes an apology to the coach and his family.


Campaign Stop: A periodic report on neighborhood reaction to the mayoral race. -- 5. Morris Heights; Dinkins Supporters Stay the Course
Christopher Kennedy's face registered nothing as the crack of four gunshots, perhaps a block away, echoed off the rain-dampened brick of his apartment building on University Avenue in the Bronx.
He just looked up the street as he waited in the drizzle for the school bus to drop off his 9-year-old stepdaughter.
"Minorities are suffering," he said, flicking his cigarette to the sidewalk.
"We're suffering a lot."


Christopher Raises Level of State Dept.
To the Editor:
Representative Frank McCloskey, who wrote "Christopher, Resign" (Op-Ed, Oct. 24), is a well-regarded member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee, and I respect him.
I do, however, differ with his view that Secretary of State Warren Christopher should resign.
I have more than one reason to point a finger at Mr.
Christopher for diplomatic failures of the United States.
I almost lost my life and all my personal belongings during the tragic war of Nicaragua in 1979, in which due to Mr.
Christopher's indecisions, Nicaragua was lost to an anti-American Marxist Government.


Durufle Organ Recital
Marie-Madeleine Durufle, an organist and the widow of the composer Maurice Durufle, is to play works by Bach, Franck, Vierne, Liszt and Durufle in a recital on Nov. 21 at 3 P.M. at the Church of the Ascension, Fifth Avenue at 10th Street in Greenwich Village.
It will be Mrs.
Durufle's first New York performance since a retrospective of her husband's works in 1989.
Tickets are $10 to $25.
Information: (212) 254-8553.


David M. Bick, 51, Expert in Real Estate
David M. Bick, president of Manhattan Capital Partners Inc. and an expert in real-estate investment and restructuring, died on Monday in Stamford Hospital in Connecticut.
He was 51 and lived in Stamford.
His office said the cause was a heart attack.


Classical Music in Review
Sahan Arzruni  Pianist Merkin Concert Hall


Teachers Union Acts Shamefully to Mayor; Voting by Color
To the Editor:
Lani Guinier writes about the issue of race in New York City's mayoral election (Op-Ed, Oct. 19).
Her basic accusation is that whites vote along racial lines.
Yet how about the black vote?
More than 90 percent of the black voters will vote for Mayor David N. Dinkins.
Why?
Most will base their vote solely on his race.


Key Rates
In percent
Previous
Year
Yesterday
Day
Ago
PRIME RATE
5.5-6.00
5.5-6.00
6.00
DISCOUNT RATE
3.00
3.00
3.00
FEDERAL FUNDS*
3.07
3.04
3.04
3-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.02
3.02
2.95
6-MO. TREAS. BILLS
3.17
3.16
3.18
7-YR. TREAS. NOTES
5.01
4.95
6.34
30-YR. TREAS. BONDS
5.96
5.95
7.62
TELEPHONE BONDS
7.04
7.02
8.65
MUNICIPAL BONDS**
5.48
5.48
6.68
*Estimated daily average, source Telerate **Municipal Bond Index, The Bond Buyer Salomon Brothers and Telerate for Treasury's bellwether bonds, notes and bills


Teachers Union Acts Shamefully to Mayor; Found Him Wanting
To the Editor:
In 1985 New Yorkers elected Ed Koch mayor.
In 1989 we voted him out.
In his place we elected David N. Dinkins, and now we may vote him out too.
Lani Guinier asserts (Op-Ed, Oct. 19) that any repudiation of Mayor Dinkins is racist.
Perhaps.
But how does she account for those who voted him into office last time?


Make Debates Mandatory
It looks as though, for the first time in more than 30 years, the principal candidates for mayor of New York City won't debate each other.
Why?
Because they can't agree on ground rules -- which really means that they don't want to agree, which also means they don't have high regard for what the voters need and want in the campaign.
Mayor David Dinkins says he won't debate unless George Marlin, the Conservative and Right to Life candidate, is included.
Rudolph Giuliani, the Republican-Liberal challenger, says no debate unless Mr.
Marlin is not included.
Result: no debate, period.
Neither side would compromise.


Finding a business loan When Banks say No
Peter Sayki, 43, and Douglas Campbell, 40, quit their jobs as product development engineers to start their own business.
With a loan, some savings and from friends and family, their high-tech venture got off to s strong start.
Usinf computers and lasers, they supplied companies with product prototypes of everything from satellites to refrigerator parts.
But to meet demand, their Sicam Corporation of Somerville, N.J., needed working capital.
Additional bank financing seemed impossible because the company lacked a track record and its business was difficult for bankers to grasp.
The entrepreneurs found help in a state program.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 19 about the Hamptons International Film Festival misstated the role of Darryl Macdonald, its artistic director, in the founding of the Seattle Film Festival.
He was a co-founder of the Seattle festival with Dan Ireland, not its sole founder, and they were co-directors of the festival from 1975 to 1986.
Mr.
Ireland remains an associate director of the festival and vice president of the board.


Ex-Mayor of Yonkers Dies in Apparent Suicide
A former mayor of Yonkers who played a central role in the city's controversy over housing desegregation was found dead with a gunshot wound in the head yesterday in what the police called an apparent suicide.
The Yonkers Police Commissioner, Robert K. Olson, said that officers found the body of Nicholas J. Wasicsko in Oakland Cemetery in Yonkers, where his father is buried, after being alerted by a call from a caretaker about 5:20 P.M.


Beliefs
Cloning, wrote a leading American scientist in a leading American medical journal, is "the aspect of genetic intervention that most requires public discussion today."
That was in 1971.


SHIFT ON CAMERAS BY NORTH KOREANS
North Korea continues to block thorough inspections of suspected nuclear-weapons sites, but will allow the resumption of routine maintenance of surveillance cameras, international atomic-energy officials and diplomats said today.
The North Korean concession on the cameras forestalls a threat of possible United Nations sanctions, but falls short of the regular inspections the country had promised the International Atomic Energy Agency.


Observer; Now Perhaps To Begin
You get the impression the Clintons wish somebody -- anybody -- would step in and take this health-care thing off their hands.
The press's polite way of saying this is that both President and Mrs.
Clinton have "signaled flexibility."
With 100 lobbies laboring for clients whose devotion to health care would be the very model of Christian selflessness if only the beastly profit motive would slink away and die, the Clintons must feel some of the loneliness Custer experienced when Sitting Bull turned up.


Westchester Sees Replay Of Challenge By Legislator
During six terms as an Assemblyman, Richard L. Brodsky developed a reputation as a zealous and often abrasive legislator.
A New York Post columnist last year named him "most obnoxious lawmaker of the year" because he was so "arrogant and nasty."


Californians Set For More Wind And New Blazes
Fire crews braced for new troubles today as weather forecasters predicted new Santa Ana winds starting tonight.
But they reported substantial progress in containing or dousing most of the major wildfires in Southern California.
The National Weather Service issued "red flag" warnings for the entire state of California, predicting 30- to 40-mile-an-hour winds starting tonight and continuing through Saturday.


My Mom, Bride of Dracula
Some kids pined all year for Christmas.
Others longed for their birthdays.
For me, the climax of the year was Halloween, and it was a family event.
My parents "helped me make" (that is, made for me) a creepy disguise we hoped would baffle the neighbors.
We'd do anything to fool them.
I once went out as a witch; no one expected an 8-year-old in drag.


On Pushing (Not Cranking) the Mower
MANY gardening trends have been displacing the traditional ways, but plant tenders have probably been so busy they haven't noticed.
Now that the season is slowing down to a saner pace, there is time for reflection.
The suburbs are becoming quieter.
There is less of that deafening noise from the power mowers and more of that gentle hum from the old-fashioned push 'em yourself reel mowers.
The older models are coming back!


Bermuda
At one time, Bermuda's busiest tourist season was winter.
Visitors, particularly the affluent, would come for a month or longer.
Many of today's visitors still prefer the period from November to March, when the army of T-shirts thins and cashmeres move in, when beach life scales down and the temperature favors golf and tennis.
Hotels and restaurants are not as crowded, rates are lower and cooler does not translate to cold.
At the beginning of the year, in an attempt to convince prospective guests that January toMarch is not cold, a number of hotels offered a "temperature guarantee," which will be repeated in 1994.
During these months, participating hotels (including Lantana Colony, Elbow Beach, the Reefs and the Princess Hotels) will give a 20 percent discount on room rates on any day the temperature does not reach 68 degrees.


Leslie E. Smith, Todd S. Jackson
Leslie Elizabeth Smith, a daughter of Betty W. Saco of Rye, N.Y., and Robert G. Smith of Westfield, Mass., was married yesterday to Todd Stuart Jackson, a son of Pegi P. Jackson of Cardiff-by-the-Sea, Calif., and Frederick A. Jackson of Alpine, N.J.
The Rev.
Dr.
Stan Aronson, a Unitarian-Universalist minister, officiated at the Larchmont (N.Y.) Yacht Club.
The bride, a graduate of Skidmore College, is a freelance makeup artist for film and video productions.


Bermuda
At one time, Bermuda's busiest tourist season was winter.
Visitors, particularly the affluent, would come for a month or longer.
Many of today's visitors still prefer the period from November to March, when the army of T-shirts thins and cashmeres move in, when beach life scales down and the temperature favors golf and tennis.
Hotels and restaurants are not as crowded, rates are lower and cooler does not translate to cold.
At the beginning of the year, in an attempt to convince prospective guests that January toMarch is not cold, a number of hotels offered a "temperature  guarantee," which will be repeated in 1994.
During these months, participating hotels (including Lantana Colony, Elbow Beach, the Reefs and the Princess Hotels) will give a 20 percent discount on room rates on any day the temperature does not reach 68 degrees.


Corrections
The art column on Oct. 10 about a show at the Scarsdale Historical Society misidentified the publisher of a book, "The Man in the Red Flannel Suit," by the artist Robert Heitmann.
It is Golden Press, not Golden Bough.


On The Road to Nowhere
THE MEXICAN TREE DUCK By James Crumley. 247 pp.
New York: The Mysterious Press/ Warner Books. $19.95.


Corrections
An article in The Times Magazine last Sunday about the role of fashion in society reversed the names of the art director of Club Monaco, a Canadian clothing manufacturer.
He is Douglas Lloyd.


Possessed? You Might Give Maury Povich a Call
THE last couple of months have been busy ones for real-life ghostbusters, devil-defiers, hooligan-haters -- and talk-show hosts and tabloid-television news shows.
First, an Arizona psychologist performed an exorcism on a 10-year-old and billed the state $180 for the two-hour procedure.
Then "The Maury Povich Show" devoted a whole hour to exorcism, and on Friday Joan Rivers questioned a man who claimed he had chased vampires in Dracula's castle.
Then the Amazing Kreskin, who calls himself a "mentalist," went haunted house-hunting with a television crew. (They didn't find the ghost of Aaron Burr's wife, as promised, but a dollar bill did sail mysteriously across the carpet.)


Neighborhood Report: Central Park; A Rebirth For Upper Park
It was like an outing at a romantic 19th-century English lakeside home: on a recent weekend afternoon, visitors sunned themselves on the terrace while taking in a concert by the Harbor Jazz Ensemble.
Others sat on newly installed benches overlooking the lake.
Nearby, toddlers clambered around the swings and slides in the playground, opened last year.
Long neglected, the northern end of Central Park is enjoying something of a renaissance since the opening this month of the Charles A. Dana Discovery Center, gateway to the Harlem Meer and the wild North Woods.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
GRAMERCY PARK  Good Old Folk From North Carolina
As part of its 95th anniversary celebration, the National Arts Club will hold the exhibition "North Carolina in New York," which will feature the works of some of North Carolina's best-known painters, sculptors and folk artists (pictured above, "Wrestlers" by Jim Moon).
Most of the artists attended the Penland School of Crafts in Appalachia, which is dedicated to traditional handicrafts.
Much of the exhibit will focus on studio glass, a process pioneered by North Carolina artists decades ago.
The opening reception (a good spot to load up on Southern food and bluegrass music) is free.


Motorola Will Be Just Fine, Thanks
GEORGE M. C. FISHER flunked one major test of chief executive leadership last week: that of managing a graceful transition of power.
Motorola Inc., its customers and competitors, and Wall Street were all stunned by the announcement Wednesday that the 52-year-old scientist-turned-manager was leaving the prospering electronics giant immediately to take over the helm at the embattled Eastman Kodak Company.
Mr.
Fisher left Motorola with a number of high-stakes initiatives hanging fire.
The company's PowerPC microprocessor, jointly developed with I.B.M. and Apple Computer at a cost of over $1 billion to challenge the Intel Corporation's hammerlock on microchips for personal computers, is just beginning production.
Iridium, its plan to build and launch 66 satellites to create a telephone network in the sky, is in its formative stages.
And Motorola is wrestling with the need in most of its businesses to become more global, more deeply involved in consumer markets and more skilled in software design.


Corrections
The Dining Out column in the Long Island weekly last Sunday referred incorrectly to the status of Costa de Espana, a restaurant in Port Jefferson.
It remains in business; the former co-owner has opened Mansion Madrid in Lindenhurst, L.I.


Karen E. Blaney, Robert W. Holm
Karen Elizabeth Blaney, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Bernard J. Blaney of Delray Beach, Fla., was married yesterday to Robert W. Holm, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Reinhart Holm of Port Washington, L.I.
Msgr.
John J. Wiest performed the ceremony at the Roman Catholic Church of St.
Mary in Manhasset, L.I.
Mrs.
Holm, 25, is a lawyer for Deloitte &amp; Touche, the accounting firm in New York.
She received undergraduate and law degrees from Fordham University.
Her father, who is retired, was the chief financial officer in New York for the McCrory Corporation,the retail variety store chain.


At Halloween, Unicef Faces Declining Collections in U.S.
Last year, at the Earth Summit conference in Rio de Janeiro, Jim Grant, executive director of Unicef, introduced himself to Al Gore, then a Senator from Tennessee.
"Unicef?" said Mr.
Gore.
"What ever happened to those little orange boxes we used to go around with on Halloween?"
What did happen to those little orange boxes?
"Wherever I go people ask about the orange boxes," said Mr.
Grant, whose professional life is spent lobbying the powerful on behalf of the United Nations Children's Fund.
"I was meeting with a group of Congressmen and it turned out three of the four had used those little orange boxes -- and they all supported an increase in our appropriation."


Ohio State and Snow Blow Past Penn State
Somewhere above the swirling snow and all the noise from the Horseshoe, wherever his season ticket may be, W. W. Hayes had to love this.
Let the coaches in their short-sleeve shirts draw up their puntrooskies and their pretty pass patterns.
In Woody Hayes's Ohio -- and a quarter-century after the last national championship, you better believe it still is -- they build a team the old-fashioned way, for days like this, when the snow blows over a treacherous field even before Halloween.
John Cooper, the beleaguered Buckeye coach with the perfect record this season, has adjusted to life in the 90's with a greater emphasis on speed.
But Ohio State's 24-6 victory over Penn State, on a long, gray afternoon for the Nittany Lions in Ohio Stadium, was created with speed made effective by power, the kind manufactured by an imposing offensive line that helped the Buckeyes take a large step toward a return to the Rose Bowl.
Big Gap Between Old and New
Ohio State, 8-0 over all and 5-0 in the Big Ten, demonstrated a surprisingly wide gap between itself and the newest member of the conference.
The Buckeyes rushed for 224 yards and were led by Raymont Harris, who gained 151 on 32 carries, both career highs.
He was the most effective beneficiary of the big men up front: left tackle Alan Kline, left guard Jason Winrow, center Jack Thrush, right guard Dave Monnot and 310-pound right tackle Korey Stringer.
"We just went and did what we do best," Winrow said, remembering the start of the third quarter.
"Run the ball inside the tackle box. We knew we had them where we wanted." A 68-yard drive, which Butler By'not'e ended from the 4-yard line, gave the Buckeyes an 18-point lead that was never seriously threatened.
With that line at work under conditions that favor their advantage in power, Harris and the Buckeyes imposed their will.
"I couldn't believe it," Harris said when asked about the weather.
"It was like, 'October? Snow?' I knew with the conditions like that, we would run the ball more. I liked that."
And the Buckeye defense, led by the relentless Dan (Big Daddy) Wilkinson, the 300-pound sophomore defensive tackle, transformed the Lions' passing game from an uncertain element of its offensive scheme into a liability.
The combination was overwhelming.
Penn State (5-2 over all, 2-2 in the Big Ten) is tied for sixth place.
The Lions entered the game with an average of 278 rushing yards a game.
Today they were held to 149 yards, including 123 by Ki-Jana Carter, the Columbus-area hero who ran for more than 100 yards for the sixth time this season and became the first to gain more than 100 this season against the Buckeyes.
But with his cutback ability diminished by the muddy conditions, and with Penn State's comeback hopes necessitating the pass, Carter gained just 29 yards after halftime and was hardly a factor.
Too many Lions could say that.
Quarterback Kerry Collins was 6 for 19 in the second half, and 13 for 39 over all, with 4 interceptions.
The Lions were held to 109 yards in the second half and went without a touchdown for the second time in eight games, including the 24-3 Blockbuster Bowl loss to Stanford at the end of last season.
"We didn't come into this game thinking, 'Wow, this is Penn State, an icon from the past,' " Harris said.
"Really, they were no more important than Purdue or Northwestern, or any other Big Ten team." 5 Penn State Turnovers
Penn State's first defeat on the road to a Big Ten team since the Lions lost here in 1975 came as the result of five turnovers, a blocked field goal, and an inability to take advantage of favorable field position and come from behind in the second half.
"We just did not have good field position throughout the game," Paterno observed.
His team's four possessions in the third quarter began at its 46-yard line, and at Ohio State's 44, 44 and 32.
The possessions ended with an interception, an unsuccessful fourth-down play from the Buckeye 13, a punt and a fumble.
The result was the type of celebration usually reserved for Michigan victories.
"All I smelled was liquor when the fans went on the field," Wilkinson said.


Campaign Trail's Final Miles


Dinner in Denver
To the Editor: Because of your Aug. 1 article on Denver, my wife and I celebrated our 33d wedding anniversary at Cliff Young's.
From the moment we arrived at the restaurant we were given first-class attention.
The food was elegant.
I had rack of lamb and my wife had the catch of the day.
The waiters made us feel as if we were the only ones in the restaurant.


Ambulance Service: A User's Guide
YOU are sailing around the loop in Central Park on your new Rollerblades when suddenly your skate catches in a pothole -- or was it some horse droppings -- and you are catapulted through the air. @$#%&amp;$ X&amp;!
The world goes black.
The next thing you know, you open your eyes to find yourself flat on your back, with two people in green uniforms sliding you into a dark, gadget-filled van.
You try to sit up but discover that an array of thick orange belts have you pinned to a wooden board.
You open your mouth to yell but find that your neck is bound in some stiff plastic contraption that is cradling your chin and a clear plastic mask covers your mouth.


Alfie, Oh Alfie, What Can We Do With Ye?
To the Editor:
Alfie Kohn misses the critical scientific criteria: Rewards must be pinpointed to specific performance standards achievable by all and directly related to the performance of the individual or group.


Financing A Co-op Privately
ANYONE eager to sell an apartment in a financially troubled New York co-op building is well aware of the frustration that comes from knowing a potential buyer will be refused conventional financing.
In effect, this sort of seller has become a social outcast.
Real estate agents may even refuse to list the unit because it seems a waste of time.


Conversations/Paul A. Samuelson; The Man Who Wrote the Book Suggests Econ 101 for Presidents
ASK Paul A. Samuelson how he came to win a Nobel Memorial Prize in Economics, and he begins by talking about his teen-age years during the Great Depression, not far from the steel mills of Gary, Ind.
"One out of three Americans couldn't find a full-time job," said Mr.
Samuelson, now a professor emeritus at M.I.T.
"There was no money for relief. It was a poverty amidst plenty. If you lived in a middle-class neighborhood, little children came nightly with a note saying, 'We're starving, we're starving. Could you give us a potato or a dime?' "


Jody Lanciotti and Christopher King
Jodean M. Lanciotti, the daughter of Jackie Lanciotti of Chicago Heights, Ill., and Frank Lanciotti of South Chicago Heights, Ill., was married yesterday to Christopher Q. King, a son of Seth and Mary King of Brewster, Mass.
The Rev.
Greg Skiba, a Unitarian minister, performed the ceremony at the Union Church of Hinsdale, Ill.
Mrs.
King, 32, is known as Jody.
She graduated from Eastern Illinois University.
Her father is a salesman for Pepsi-Cola.


In the Traveler's Lost and Found
I HEARD it said a long time ago, in the days when the Egyptian Book of the Dead was regarded as a kind of tour guide to an acid trip, that on every good trip, something precious is lost.
It was said that this was in fact the mark of a good trip, the physical item lost representing a letting go of established forms of self -- of status, poses, connections, all manner of possessions.
And so it has been.
On every good trip, no matter where, there is a kind of redistribution of belongings, rather like bees pollinating.
The lost item reminds you that travel is a two-way process, a kind of binding of person and place in which the place too will have its say.
If a place speaks to you then something of you will be left there.
And so the strongest memories are often of tangible things lost, and intangibles gained.


Spies &amp; Thrillers
John Gardner's trilogy featuring Herbie Kruger ("The Nostradamus Traitor," "The Garden of Weapons" and "The Quiet Dogs") is now a tetralogy.
In MAESTRO (Otto Penzler, $23), Big Herbie, the shambling ace of British intelligence, is called back from retirement to interrogate Louis Passau, a great 90-year-old German-born American conductor.
It seems that an unauthorized biography of the conductor maintains that Passau, a Jew, not only worked for the Nazis but also channeled top-secret information to the K.G.B. after the war.
And why should Kruger be given the job of sticking close to Passau and debriefing him?
Because he too is German-born, with a comprehensive knowledge of classical music (especially Mahler), and because he is an ardent admirer of Passau's.


On Bid Rigging and Price Fixing
To the Editor:
Michael Sproul ("Before Setting Antitrust Policy, Study It," Viewpoints, Oct. 10) asserts that the Department of Justice "has never examined" the price effects of the price-fixing and bid-rigging schemes it prosecutes. (He examined 25 cases and found that prices did not fall following indictments or convictions.) On the contrary, the department commonly studies the price effects of conspiracies.
These studies typically are not placed in the trial record, however, and therefore normally cannot be made public.


And in the West, There's No Clear Favorite
Everything is more wide-open out West, from the style of play, to the race for the top spot.
At least four teams have legitimate title hopes.
Charles Barkley of the Suns wants a championship ring to scratch his bald head with.
Seattle, a superb defensive team, returns even deeper and hungrier.
The Portland Trail Blazers are ticked off at those who have written them off.
And Houston's Hakeem Olajuwon still has a championship dream.


Good Eating; Ethnic Pleasures, Elmhurst to Astoria
ELIAS CORNER (Diner's Journal)  (718) 932-1510; 31st Street and 24th Avenue, Astoria; $; no credit cards accepted
This popular, tiny neighborhood spot serves some of the freshest seafood in New York City.
There is a glass fish counter at the entrance and a tiny square kitchen behind it.
The small dining room with a cooler for beer and wine, a plastic shark mounted on the wall, and the pale fluorescent lighting is convivial.
There are no menus.
Regulars walk over to the counter and pick their seafood.


Like Snowflakes, Holidays Issues Differ
OVER the last 11 days, the United States Postal Service has issued its usual collection of Christmas stamps: four secular designs and one Madonna and Child.
But the secular stamps, in particular the one showing a snowman with a carrot nose, come in enough different designs to keep sharp-eyed noncollectors grazing through their mail to identify each one.
The four secular stamps, called Christmas Contemporary, are Snowman, Toy Soldier, Jack-in-the-Box and Reindeer.
The stamps are sold in two formats, the usual perforated lick-'em-stick-'em strips and panes, and the peelable self-adhesives, which come mounted on small cards.


Betting On The Baby Boom Bull Market
"THE baby boomers are doing to the stock market what they did to the housing market."
That quote, from Claudia Mott, the small-capitalization stock guru at Prudential Securities, sums up the best long-term bullish case now available for the stock market.
And it may prove to be right.


At Yale Repertory, Mamet's 'Oleanna'
WHY not take David Mamet's disputatious play about sexual harassment, "Oleanna," the season's opener at Yale Repertory, as an indictment of bureaucratic educational systems that imprison instructors and confound students?
That way everybody -- which means men and women -- suffers at the mercy of a common enemy.
And don't forget that a university campus is meant to give Mr.
Mamet's work a new imprimatur of environmental correctness that means more than its title.
But that's not what will go on drawing audiences to "Oleanna," even though Mr.
Mamet set up the play within the hallowed portals of academia.
To be sure, according to low-budget constraints, all the audience sees on stage is an office with a desk and a chair or two that a professor can pick up and hit a student over the head with, but we know there's a university out there.
And the on-stage talk is more of tenure and grades than of sexism and rape.


F.Y.I.
As a classroom assignment, seniors at Saint Agnes Boys High School on the Upper West Side of Manhattan sent in their questions about New York City.
Here are several.
Why Police Wear Blue
Q.
What is the history behind the color blue for uniforms for the New York City Police Department?
Why was it chosen?
A.
The department's official colors are blue, white and green.
Blue was chosen as the uniform color largely for practical purposes, said Officer Dominick Palermo, assistant curator of the Police Museum at the Police Academy in Manhattan.
"Sometimes you have to change a flat tire," he explained.
"It is much easier to get grease off of blue than white. Also, the color blue has meanings, such as courage and strength."
The uniform, modeled after that of the British police, was adopted in 1853.
New York officers resisted it at first, opting instead for street clothes and an eight-point star that identified them as police officers, because they thought the uniforms looked too British (not such a popular group in New York at that time).
On the Beam
Q.
What is the purpose of the big point at the top of the Empire State Building?
A.
The top part of the "point" is an antenna used by 13 major FM radio stations as well as Channel 41, a Spanish-language television station.
The tippy-top of this antenna transmits the Home Shopping Network's signal.
Map Help
Q.
Why is it that even though 12th Avenue and the Henry Hudson Parkway connect, they still remain separate streets on maps of the city?
A.
Lisa Daglian, spokeswoman for the City Department of Transportation, says the Henry Hudson Parkway is also known by three other names south of 57th Street: West Street, West Side Highway and 12th Avenue.
The map you have may be trying to let you know that and telling you to look for signs accordingly.
A Lot of Tokens
Q.
How much does it cost to run the New York City subway system?
A.
Some $2 billion a year, with half from fares and half from government subsidies, which the Transit Authority began receiving in 1964.
Cabby Specifications
Q.
What type of training do New York cabdrivers need and what type of license are they required to have?
A.
All New York City taxi drivers -- there are now 40,000 -- must be at least 19 years old and "proficient" in English, hold a valid driver's license from any state, have a good driving record and be felony free.
They must get a license from the Taxi and Limousine Commission ($62) and go to taxi school for 20, 40 or 80 hours, depending on their language skills and knowledge of city geography.
No More Duck Intrigue
Q.
I am reading "The Catcher in the Rye," which poses the intriguing question that no one really answers -- where do the ducks in Central Park go during the winter, or does someone take care of them there?
A.
About 15 types of waterfowl pass through Central Park during the year.
Most migrate south, but many Canada geese and mallards stay all year, fending for themselves or relying on the kindness of strangers.
Ebbets Neighborhood
Q.
What section of Brooklyn was Ebbets Field located in?
A.
Ebbets Field was built in 1913 in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn, so desolate at the time that the area was also known as Pigtown, Goatville, Tin Can Alley and Crow Hill.
Ebbets Field's first game, an exhibition match between the Dodgers and the Yankees, was that same year.
Man on a Horse
Q.
On 59th Street by Central Park is a statue of a golden man on a horse.
Who is he and what is he pointing at?
A.
The statue is of Gen.
William Tecumseh Sherman with Victory, dedicated on May 30, 1903.
In fact, he isn't pointing, Victory is.
But the way it was designed by the sculptor, Augustus Saint-Gaudens, their motions are meant to look as one, according to "Manhattan's Outdoor Sculpture" by Gayle Cohen (Prentice Hall, 1988).
The statue had lost its golden sheen over the years, but around 1990 the Victorian Society in America spiffed it up.
As for whom or what Victory is pointing at, Abbey Lavine, a reference assistant at the New-York Historical Society, said, "Well, at whatever Victory would be pointing at." JENNIFER STEINHAUER


UNIVERSITY PRESSES -- IN SHORT: NONFICTION
POLITICAL MEMOIR IT HAD TO BE REVOLUTION Memoirs of an American Radical.
By Charles Shipman.
Cornell University, $29.95.


More on the Races
TERM LIMITS Will the cure be worse than the problem? Page 41.
HEDGING THEIR BETS Scores of contributors have given money to Dinkins and Giuliani.
Page 41.


When One N.F.L. Coaching Legend Catches Up to Another
If the Dolphins beat the Kansas City Chiefs today in Miami, the victory would be No. 324 in regular-season or playoff games for Don Shula over his 31 years as a National Football League head coach.
And that figure would tie the career record that took George Halas 40 years to set with the Chicago Bears.
The 63-year-old Shula said that when he was a young coach, he remembered being in awe of Halas, the receiver, the Hall of Fame founder, coach and iron-fisted ruler of the Bears.
Shula had other memories from his days as a defensive back.


Hold the Wine And Pass the Beer
BEER is big: there are more varieties of beer than ever on store shelves; new breweries are opening; restaurants are beginning to have beer lists, and many restaurants are designing special menus to accompany an assortment of beers.
The beer dinner is replacing the wine dinner.
And it can also happen at home.
At a restaurant beer dinner, an assortment of four or five beers are chosen, like wines, to accompany certain dishes.
Sometimes the dishes themselves are made with beer.


Julie L. Strauss, Matthew Russman
Julie Lynn Strauss, an assistant district attorney in Manhattan, and Matthew David Russman, an associate at the New York law firm of Simpson Thacher &amp; Bartlett, were married last evening.
Rabbi Martin Freedman officiated at the Marriott Financial Center Hotel in New York.
Mrs.
Russman, 25, is a daughter of Carol and David Strauss of Englewood Cliffs, N.J.
She graduated cum laude from the University of Michigan, from which her husband graduated magna cum laude and was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She received her law degree from the Brooklyn Law School.
Her father is a senior vice president of Oppenheimer &amp; Company, the New York investment bank.
Her mother is an owner of Travel Four, a travel agency in Clifton, N.J.


ARNOLD GLIMCHER AND HIS ART WORLD ALL-STARS
Here I thought female artists had come a long way maybe since Life magazine's 1951 photograph of the Irascibles.
That famous image, which brought together 15 abstract painters like Jackson Pollock and Willem de Kooning, at least included one woman, Hedda Sterne.
Art dealer Arnold Glimcher got his start by promoting Louise Nevelson.
Your cover photograph of his stable of stars -- in a pose recalling the shot of more than four decades ago -- has not a single woman.
I sense a missing link.
A case for the Guerrilla Girls?
CAROL STRICKLAND Setauket, L.I.


On Pushing (Not Cranking) the Mower
MANY gardening trends have been displacing the traditional ways, but plant tenders have probably been so busy they haven't noticed.
Now that the season is slowing down to a saner pace, there is time for reflection.
The suburbs are becoming quieter.
There is less of that deafening noise from the power mowers and more of that gentle hum from the old-fashioned push 'em yourself reel mowers.
The older models are coming back!


SUNDAY, October 31, 1983; IN THE BEGINNING
It's called the Big Bang Challenge.
Unfortunately, it's not a contest to see who can make a better universe.
It's a contest to come up with a better name for the beginning of the universe we've already got.
The magazine Sky and Telescope is running the contest.
Why?
Because the Big Bang, as a name, is inaccurate, "ugly," "trivializing" and "irreverent." The deadline has passed, but not to worry; there's no prize.
What's worrisome is junking the catchiest title for a cosmological theory since Genesis, and a prime candidate for the Pulitzer Prize in Alliteration.
And what's more upsetting is this reverence business.
How deep in pomp must one be standing even to think of trying to make science reverent?


Going on a Jag
Budget Rent a Car is adding 500 Jaguar XJ6 sedans to its fleet next month in 10 United States cities.
The rate is $59 a day.
The catch is that the cars can be rented only by invited customers -- previous Jaguar owners and others who have rented luxury cars from Budget.
The company has sent out 10,000 invitations in Seattle, Atlanta, Detroit, Dallas/ Ft.
Worth, West Palm Beach, Tampa, Boston, Chicago, Phoenix and San Francisco.


Good Eating; Packed House
LONDON LENNIE'S (Diner's Journal)  (718) 894-8084; 63-88 Woodhaven Boulevard, Rego Park; $; all major credit cards


Spreading the Gospel of Improvement Districts
AN astute director of a business improvement district usually has some telling statistics at the ready.
Gretchen Dykstra has more than a few.
Ms.
Dykstra, the president of the 18-month-old Times Square Business Improvement District, had it at the tip of her tongue last week that purse snatching and pickpocketing in the district were down 43 percent in the three months from April through June this year.
In that period last year the district's uniformed but unarmed security officers were just getting started.


Prosecuting Bucket Slaying Could Be Tricky, Experts Say
At the outset, the case against Pedro Jose Gil looked fairly simple.
The police quickly identified him as the man who hurled a bucket of spackling compound off the roof of a Washington Heights apartment house on Oct. 8, killing a police officer, and investigators said Mr.
Gil confessed soon after his arrest.
But for Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan District Attorney, taking the case to a grand jury for an indictment could be turning into something of a tightrope walk.
There is a good chance, legal experts say, that rather than indicting for murder, the grand jury could indict Mr.
Gil on a far less severe manslaughter charge, potentially exposing Mr.
Morgenthau to criticism that he was too easy on the defendant.
Mr.
Morgenthau also runs the remote risk that the grand jury would not indict Mr.
Gil at all.


Kathryn George, William Tyree
Kathryn Carolyn George, a deputy manager in trade finance, and William Brophy Tyree, the manager of the treasury department, both at Brown Brothers Harriman &amp; Company, the private bank in New York, were married yesterday.
Msgr.
William McKeevor performed the ceremony at St.
Agnes Roman Catholic Church in Key Biscayne, Fla.
Mrs.
Tyree, 28, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Quintin H. George of Sudbury, Mass.
She graduated from Trinity College in Hartford, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father is the programs manager of Navy communications at the Raytheon Company, the diversified manufacturing concern, in Sudbury.
Her mother is the assistant to the superintendent of Lincoln Sudbury Regional High School.


Striving for Votes


Viennese Works, Halloween Flavor
TWO musicians who play in the New York Philharmonic, the violinist Asya Meshberg of Darien and the violist Katherine Greene of Guilford, founded the Lumina Quartet, taking that name they said because they hoped "to illuminate audiences by sharing their passion for chamber music."
With New York colleagues Roberta Cooper (also the cellist of the Wave Hill Trio) and the violinist Natasha Shamis, Lumina begins its third season at Norwalk Community-Technical College today at 3:30, the program focusing on three Viennese masters, Mozart, Schubert and Hugo Wolf (tickets at the door).


Neighborhood Report: Morrisania; FREEING PARENTS TO STUDY


Shana Bak, Jamin Koslowe
Dr. and Mrs.
Joseph Bak of Monsey, N.Y., have announced January wedding plans for their daughter Shana Bak and Jamin Koslowe, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Neil H. Koslowe of Silver Spring, Md.
Miss Bak is a candidate for a master's degree in mathematics education at Columbia University.
She and her husband graduated from Yeshiva University, she summa cum laude, he magna cum laude.


Sung From the Heart


Backstairs


Oct. 24-30: Protesting Violence; Angry Cabbies Jam Midtown Manhattan
The frustration felt by New York City taxi drivers spilled over last week as about 5,000 of them jammed midtown Manhattan with their cabs and turned one evening's rush hour upside down to express their horror over violent crimes against drivers.
Thirty-five have been killed this year and 45 last year, almost always as they sat behind the wheel and a passenger suddenly became an attacker.


Correction; Crime Report: South Brooklyn
A chart in the Neighborhood Report last week gave 1992 crime statistics, rather than 1993 figures, for the 68th Precinct of Brooklyn.
This is a corrected chart containing figures through May 1993.
Chg.
from
Complaints
1992
68th Precint
Rapes
10
25.0%
Felony assaults
100
0.0
Grand larceny:
motor vehicles
844
-15.0
Burglaries
450
-6.0
NEW YORK CITY
Rapes
1,174
-0.1
Felony assaults
15,768
-4.0
Grand larceny:
motor vehicles
46,735
-8.0
Burglaries
40,404
-7.0


Residential Resales
In the following reports, the "listed at" price is the asking price when negotiations began that ended in the sale.
Time on market is from most recent listing to contract.
MANHATTAN
CHELSEA  $235,000
107 West 25th Street  1-bedroom, 1-bath, 1,300-sq.-ft. loft-co-op; elevator, high ceilings, 2 exposures; maintenance $779, 60% tax-deductible, listed at $249,000, 3 months on market (Broker: Herbert H. Kliegerman Associates)  GREENWICH VILLAGE  $1.75 million
36 West 9th Street  3-family, 5-story, 1845 Greek Revival town house; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, dining room, 2 dens in primary duplex; 2 bedrooms, 1 bath and 1 bedroom, in simplex units; 2 terraces, 1,500 sq. ft. of professional space on the ground floor; taxes $17,000, listed at $2 million, 2 months on market (Brokers: Ambrose Mar-Elia; William B. May)  MADISON SQUARE  $347,500
5 East 22d Street  (Madison Green) 2-bedroom, 2-bath, 1,100-sq.-ft. condo in a 10-year-old building; 24-hr. doorman, dining area, balcony, 2 exposures; common charge $495; taxes $4,584, listed at $375,000, 1 month on market (Brokers: Kingman Associates; Newell &amp; Associates)  UPPER WEST SIDE  $202,000
310 West End Avenue (75th St.)  2-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 1,000-sq.-ft. prewar co-op; manned elevator, eat-in kitchen, 2 exposures; maintenance $875, 44% tax-deductible, listed at $225,000, 8 months on market (Brokers: Solarz Realty; Halstead Property Co.)  BRONX
KINGSBRIDGE HEIGHTS  $135,000
3809 Cannon Place  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 65-year-old, semi-attached brick house; dining room, semi-finished basement, rear deck, 1-car garage; taxes $1,420, listed at $148,000, 2 months on market (Broker: Charles G. Brophy &amp; Associates)  PARKCHESTER  $215,000
1434 Taylor Avenue  2-family semi-attached brick house; 3 bedrooms, 1 bath, dining room in each unit; finished basement, 1-car garage; taxes $1,400, listed at $225,000, 9 months on market (Broker: Marland Real Estate)  BROOKLYN
COBBLE HILL  $325,500
19 Cheever Place  3-family, 3-story, 100-year-old, brick house; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each unit; 7- by 30-ft. extension on ground floor; taxes $1,768, listed at $339,000, 3 months on market (Broker: Cobble Heights Realty)  DITMAS PARK  $259,500
329 Rugby Road  6-bedroom, 4-bath, 90-year-old Victorian; dining room, den, 2 fireplaces, rear deck, 2-car garage; taxes $1,800, listed at $259,500, 2 months on market (Broker: Wilk Realty)  WINDSOR TERRACE  $272,000
22 Sherman Street  2-family attached limestone; 3 bedrooms, 2 baths, eat-in kitchen, dressing room in primary duplex; 1 bedroom, 1 bath in simplex; den in each; taxes $1,800, listed at $315,000, 7 months on market (Broker: Frederick Palmer Real Estate)  QUEENS
FOREST HILLS  $177,000
67-03 Burns Street  2-family, 40-year-old attached brick house; 1 bedroom, 1 bath, eat-in kitchen in each unit; 1-car garage; taxes $1,350, listed at $195,000, 1 month on market (Broker: Kingdom Realty)  REGO PARK  $332,500
65-08 Bolsen Crescent  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 40-year-old detached colonial; front porch, family room, sunroom, 2-car garage; taxes $3,100, listed at $359,000, 3 months on market (Broker: F.H. Realty Executives)  STATEN ISLAND
STAPLETON  $115,000
50 Smith Terrace  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 150-year-old Victorian; fireplace, 2-car garage, 37- by 112-ft. lot; taxes $1,090, listed at $139,000, 4 months on market (Broker: Vitali-Sunshine Realty)  WARD HILL  $141,795
89 Tompkins Circle  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 5-year-old contemporary, dining area, 5 terraces, 3 skylights, oak floors, harbor view; taxes $584, listed at $199,000, 2 months on market (Broker: Gateway Arms Realty Corp) NEW JERSEY
FREEHOLD TOWNSHIP  $213,000
73 Overbrook Terrace  5-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 24-year-old colonial; upgraded kitchen, professionally landscaped, three-quarter acre lot, taxes $3,200; listed at $232,000, 9 weeks on market (Broker: Re/Max of Freehold Realtors)  HO HO KUS  $350,000
123 Ardmore Road
3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 60-year-old colonial; patio, fenced yard, fireplace, 2-car garage, taxes $5,196; listed at $379,900, 15 weeks on market (Broker: Prudential Higgins Realtors)  PATERSON  $125,000
14 George Street  6-bedroom, 2-bath, over 50-year-old renovated two family; separate utilities, new aluminum siding, close to shopping and mass transportation; taxes $3,067; listed at $137,000, 19 months on market (Broker: Weichert Realtors) .
SADDLE BROOK  $170,000
205 Grahm Terrace  3-bedroom, 1 1/2-bath, 30-year-old ranch; covered patio, 1-car garage, c/a, taxes $5,808; listed at $194,900, 17 weeks on market (Broker: T.P. Mabey Realtors)  WESTCHESTER
MOUNT VERNON  $173,500
37 Lexington Avenue  6-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 73-year-old Cape Cod; sunroom, terrace, fireplace, one-car garage; taxes $6,068, listed at $199,000, two weeks on market (Broker: Lindsey Real Estate) SCARSDALE  $399,000
44 Secor Road  3-bedroom, 3-bath, 63-year-old Mediterranean; den, playroom, office, fireplace; taxes $8,580, listed at $409,000, 11 weeks on market (Broker: Julia B. Fee)  WHITE PLAINS  $344,000
22 Maplemoor Lane  3-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old split-level; dining room, eat-in kitchen, family room; taxes $5,700, listed at $359,000, 11 weeks on market (Broker: Century 21 Wolff &amp; Son; Weikert Realtors)  YONKERS  $295,000
31 Brookside Circle  5-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 63-year-old colonial; modern eat-in kitchen, dining room, fireplace; taxes $4,400, listed at $325,000, 21 weeks on market (Broker: Houlihan Lawrence; Centennial Realty)  CONNECTICUT
NEWTOWN  $205,000
41 Swamp Road  3-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, 3-year-old colonial; dining room, family room, 2-car garege, 2.6-acre lot; taxes $3,389, listed at $219,900, 7 weeks on market (Brokers: William Pitt Real Estate; William Raveis Real Estate)  WESTPORT  $326,000
4 Weathervane Hill 4-bedroom, 2-bath, 38-year-old, ranch; skylight in master bedroom, hot tub on deck, 2-car garage, 1.19 acre lot; taxes $3,834, listed at $362,000, 11 months on market (Brokers: Weichert Realtors; Westport Realty)  WESTON  $505,000
9 Patcher Lane  4-bedroom, 3 1/2-bath, 6-year-old, cedar-sided contemporary; gourmet kitchen, marble master bath, rear deck with hot tub, 2-car garage, 2.61 acre lot; taxes $8,225, listed at $554,000, 10 months on market (Broker: Weichert Realtors)  LONG ISLAND
LEVITTOWN  $135,000
119 Greenbelt Lane  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 42-year-old Cape Cod; eat-in kitchen, den, deck, 2-car garage; taxes $4,300, listed at $139,500, 14 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential Long Island Realty; Levittown Equities)
ROCKY POINT  $115,990
6 Brightview Drive  4-bedroom, 2-bath, 25-year-old high ranch; dining room, eat-in kitchen, 1-car garage; taxes $4,800, listed at $115,990, 2 weeks on market (Brokers: ERA Hamlet Realty; ERA Linda Albo Agency).
ROSLYN HEIGHTS  $320,000
20 Donaldson Place  4-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath, new contemporary; dining room, eat-in kitchen, fireplace, den; estimated taxes $6,500, listed at $369,000, 4 weeks on market (Brokers: Prudential Galeria Real Estate, Brackett Realty)


Want Apple Trees for Spring? Order Now
If you want to plant apple trees next spring, order them this fall.
Thomas Christopher, an amateur apple grower, recommends these nurseries for their helpful advice, sturdy trees and rootstock: Southmeadow Fruit Gardens, Lakeside, Mich. 49116; Bear Creek Nursery, P.O.
Box 411, Northport, Wash. 99157, and Sonoma Antique Apple Nursery, 4395 Westside Road, Healdsburg, Calif. 95448.


ARNOLD GLIMCHER AND HIS ART WORLD ALL-STARS
Can I interest you in the work of a female artist, Mr.
Ovitz?
Or perhaps that of someone more colorful?
Probably not.


Pucker Up
The new wrinkle in fashion is one that is permanently pressed into the shirt, vest, blouse, jacket or pants ensemble.
The wrinkled look is part of a pleating explosion the designer Issey Miyake set off five years ago, opening up a whole new world of surface textures and decoration.
Many men are wearing Mr.
Miyake's abstractly wrinkled polyester shirts, which are often hidden under traditional jackets -- a subtle way of embracing a new style.
Occasionally, one can see a wool jacket, also permanently wrinkled.
Other men are wearing the designer's crinkly pleated polyester vest in stained-glass colors.


Los Angeles 'Fagins' Admit To Series of Bank Robberies
They were modern-day Fagins, training young boys not to pick pockets, as in Dickens's "Oliver Twist," but to invade banks with automatic weapons, terrorize patrons and tellers and flee with money in high-speed freeway getaways in stolen cars.
There was never any physical evidence to implicate these Fagins, Robert Sheldon Brown, better known as "Cas" on the streets of South-Central Los Angeles, and Donzell Lamar Thompson, or "C-Dog." For they stayed several blocks away, supervising sometimes as many as five bank robberies a day over four years, using boys as young as 13.


Looking for Love


Magical Threads
ONE day, Manolo left New York and a successful business making hats to live in a fishing hut on a deserted beach in Venezuela with his partner, Arnoldo Ferrara Ocanto.
The Cuban designer took some boxes of fabrics, a hand-operated sewing machine and a giant generator, because there was no electricity there, and sewed away in isolation for two years.
He also packed a trunk of books, among them "One Hundred Years of Solitude" and design histories of Yves Saint Laurent and Christian Dior.
Mr.
Ferrara's house near Cuyagua, where they lived from 1989 to 1991, has a tin roof, walls covered with bamboo, and at the doorstep, stones that washed up on the beach.
It leans against a mountain, with steps to the second floor carved into the rock.


Corrections
A report last Sunday in the "Playing in the Neighborhood" column referred incorrectly to the Highlawn branch library in Brooklyn.
It is part of the Brooklyn Public Library, not the New York Public Library.


ARNOLD GLIMCHER AND HIS ART WORLD ALL-STARS
Glimcher surely must be understating his appeal when he says that only one artist a week is knocking on his door.
Of course, he means certified Art Stars, but I can name at least a hundred artists who have expressed a willingness to be represented by him.
I myself have expressed my eagerness to contribute to his stable.
Alas, he has never acknowledged my missives.
Guess I'll just quit painting and try to sell him my screenplay.
DANNY DRIES New York, N.Y.


Sally A. Kennedy, Herbert Fanning
Sally A. Kennedy, an editor at the American College in Bryn Mawr, Pa., which trains insurance agents and financial planners, was married yesterday to Herbert H. Fanning, a research associate for the Marshall Laboratory in Philadelphia, an automotive research laboratory of the Du Pont Company.
The Rev.
Bradford Greeley performed the ceremony at the Main Line Unitarian Church in Devon, Pa.
The bride, who is keeping her name, and the bridegroom are both 60 and are graduates of Swarthmore College.
She is a daughter of the late John and Eleanor Kennedy.


HAITIAN MILITARY CONDEMNED BY U.N.
Still hoping that a solution can be brokered in Haiti, the Security Council condemned the Haitian military today for blocking the return of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide but stopped short of even repeating its warnings of a tighter trade embargo.
The statement was issued by the Security Council President, Ronaldo Mota Sardenberg of Brazil, on the day originally set for the exiled President to be restored to office under an agreement signed in July.


Matt Dillon May Look Tough, But Don't Get Him Wrong
If face dictates function in Hollywood, then Matt Dillon's bristling black eyebrows, bottomless pit of a gaze and stubborn jaw have stamped him for the moody, explosive rebel roles; he has even said admiring things about Mickey Rourke.
And, with a few exceptions, surly, street-smart guys are the sort of roles that find him, in films like "Drugstore Cowboy," "Over the Edge," "My Bodyguard," "The Outsiders" and "A Kiss Before Dying." For years the press has suggested that Mr.
Dillon has been merely playing extreme versions of himself, and interviewers repeatedly have found him tardy, coy, arrogant, withholding.
But Mr.
Dillon is the first to arrive for a drink at a neighborhood bar on the Upper West Side in Manhattan, and his grin is genial, even expansive.
Then he flops back in his chair, long legs sprawling and, throwing up his hands, says by way of an opener, "So, like, what's with Mogadishu, huh?"


Tonight's the Night, or It Isn't


Oct. 24-30: Cloning Humans; A Genetic Experiment Ignites a Bioethical Debate
Scientists who want to try genetic engineering, the insertion of genes into human cells to cure disease, must go through endless red tape.
But, as the public learned last week, two scientists who wanted to try the ultimate genetic experiment, cloning human embryos, needed approval only from their hospital's ethics advisory board.
Dr.
Jerry Hall and Dr.
Robert Stillman of George Washington University easily got permission to divide human embryos into identical twins or triplets.
The researchers worked only with abnormal embryos, which never would have developed into babies.
All died within a week.
Now, they say, it is up to others to decide whether to make cloning, artificially creating identical twins, triplets or quadruplets, a practical reality.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THE MOLES AND THE MIREUK A Korean Folktale.
Retold by Holly H. Kwon.
Illustrated by Woodleigh Hubbard.
Unpaged.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin Company. $14.95. (Ages 3 to 7)  SIR WHONG AND THE GOLDEN PIG Adapted by Oki S. Han and Stephanie Haboush Plunkett.
Illustrated by Oki S. Han.
Unpaged.
New York: Dial Books for Young Readers. $13.99. (Ages 4 to 8)  THE KOREAN CINDERELLA  By Shirley Climo.
Illustrated by Ruth Heller.
Unpaged.
New York: HarperCollins Publishers.


Designers Turn New York Into a Fashion Big Top
The New York fashion industry begins its week of runway shows today, but this time, along with the new clothes, there is a brand-new showcase.
For the first time, virtually the entire New York fashion establishment is presenting spring collections in big white tents in Bryant Park, behind the New York Public Library, under the auspices of the Council of Fashion Designers of America.
A centralized approach, a longtime objective of Seventh Avenue, is standard in the two other fashion capitals, Paris and Milan.
The hope is that slick, world-class presentations will attract more international media attention and more fashion buyers, spurring exports.


UNIVERSITY PRESSES -- IN SHORT: FICTION
POLITICAL PARABLE PLAN B  By Chester Himes.
Edited, with an introduction, by Michel Fabre and Robert E. Skinner.
University Press of Mississippi, $20.


Jury Rules Lilco Dismissal Was Illegal Age Bias
The Long Island Lighting Company engaged in age discrimination when it dismissed a 57-year-old nuclear engineer, a Federal jury has concluded.
The company has been ordered to pay the engineer more than $2 million in lost wages and damages.
The jury found that Lilco harmed Donald Binder, a 31-year employee, when it dismissed him in February 1987 without offering him another job.
It also found that Lilco "willfully" violated the rules and regulations of the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in dismissing Mr.
Binder.


Best Way to Play Depends on Objective
ONE can start a pretty good argument by asking players to identify the "best" form of bridge and the reasons for their choices.
Some traditionalists will argue for traditional rubber bridge or its modern equivalent, Chicago, pointing to the flexibility of playing times, the comfort of the chairs, the challenge of a money stake and the absence of confusing conventions.
Most experts will select head-to-head team play scored by imps, which is the norm in serious competition at all levels.
But they will admit, if pressed, that board-a-match scoring, with its emphasis on overtricks, is a better measure of ability, though virtually obsolete: the weaker players dislike it because they never win.


Faye Weitzman And James Rubin
Faye Ilsa Weitzman, a senior vice president in investment banking at Lehman Brothers, was married last evening to James Alan Rubin, an owner of the Leebar Management Corporation, a real estate investment concern.
Both work in New York.
Rabbi Chaim Shapiro officiated at the Touro Synagogue in Newport, R.I.
Ms.
Weitzman, 32, graduated from Bowdoin College and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
She is the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Jack Weitzman of New Bedford, Mass.
Her father is a lawyer there.


THE 1993 CAMPAIGN: Housing -- The Agenda; Housing's Waiting List Includes Policy for Growth
Choosing to focus on one of the more visible aspects of New York City's chronic housing shortage -- homelessness -- the mayoral candidates have given scant campaign attention to housing preservation and redevelopment issues.
But the challenge to the city's next mayor -- the Democratic incumbent, David N. Dinkins, or Rudolph W. Giuliani, a Republican-Liberal -- will remain how to best use city housing resources in the face of shrinking revenues, and how to balance complex redevelopment needs with conflicting social and political interests.


Neighborhood Reports: Sheepshead Bay; Residents Cry Foul Over Air
The gentlest breeze wafting inland off the Atlantic is like a deadbolt that renders hundreds of residents in Sheepshead Bay prisoners in their own homes -- stunk in, so to speak, by odors emanating from the 100 million gallons of raw sewage processed each day at a nearby treatment plant.
"There's no delicate way to describe it: the plant constantly reeks of toilet odors," said Bernie Leitner, 63, who lives with his wife, Sondra, in the Kings Bay Cooperative Apartments.
The building where the Leitners live is directly across Avenue Y from what is officially called the Coney Island Water Pollution Control Facility, though the plant is actually in Sheepshead Bay.


A Line of Clothing For the Office
To the Editor:
I appreciated Liz Logan's Oct. 24 article, "Our Ms. Brooks (Brothers)," because it focused on a source of comfortable officewear for women.
But your characterization of J. Crew as focusing on leisure-time clothing is not entirely true.
In fact, our Collection line offers professional women clothes that are decidedly more sophisticated and chic than the "Miss Hathaway" styles that Ms.
Logan refers to in her piece.
GARY SHEINBAUM  President J. Crew Retail New York


Last-Minute Look At the Candidates
WESTCHESTER voters will participate in a major changing of the guard on Tuesday, Election Day, filling the soon-to-be-vacant posts of district attorney and county clerk.
Voters will also decide whether to replace the incumbent County Executive.
After one of the most bitterly contested political campaigns in recent memory, voters will also select a new Board of Legislators as well as host of mayors, supervisors, council members, judges and other municipal officials.


Anne Handwerger, Curtis Large
Anne Chapman Handwerger, a daughter of Gretchen M. Handwerger of Paris and Joseph Handwerger of Washington, was married in Washington yesterday to Curtis Eugene Large, a son of the Rev. and Mrs.
Wayne T. Large of Ann Arbor, Mich.
The bridegroom's father, a United Methodist minister, performed the ceremony at the Washington National Cathedral.
Mrs.
Large, 25, and her husband, 23, Yale University graduates, work at Bain &amp; Company, a management consulting firm in Boston, where she is a senior associate consultant and he is an associate consultant.


Is It Too Late For the Civil?
To the Editor:
What an excellent, though saddening, article on the demise of civility in our culture.
I was especially stuck by the part about "getting even" with middle-management weenies and jerks who hand out layoff slips, etc., as a blue-collar art form.


The Executive Computer; Microsoft Springs Forward in Word Processing Software
THERE is no such thing as the final word in word processing software.
The three leading programs for Windows computers -- Microsoft Word, Wordperfect and Ami Pro -- regularly leapfrog one another with new and better features.
This month, after two years of development, both Microsoft Word and Wordperfect hopped up with new versions.
It is always difficult to choose a winner in word processing software, simply because all three of the leading programs are so good.
In this latest round, the good get better.


Susan Powter
Here, at 7:45 A.M., near Madison Square Garden, the men with the coffee carts are everywhere.
They look so innocent, sliding napkins into bags, while their golden slices of poundcake gleam in their wrappers.
Thick swirls of icing circle their Danish, and the powdered sugar on their doughnuts beckons like fresh fallen snow.
But the women stride past, resolute, looking ahead, at each other, at their watches.


Maria C. Pavlis, Steven Glasser
Dr.
Maria Christina Pavlis, a resident in internal medicine at Greenwich (Conn.) Hospital, was married yesterday to Dr.
Steven Joel Glasser, an internist in Greenwich.
The Rev.
Richard H. Stearns officiated at the First Presbyterian Church in Greenwich.
The bride graduated magna cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania and received her M.D. degree from the University of Miami.
She is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Anthony G. Pavlis of Jacksonville, Fla.
Her father, now retired, was the president of Transoceanic Marine Inc., a shipping company in New York.


Where Dinner Is a Scream
NAME: D. R. Finley.
IDENTITY: Mr.
Finley, 31, owns three horror-theme restaurants: Jack the Ripper Pub, 228 West Fourth Street; Jekyll &amp; Hyde, 91 Seventh Avenue South, and the Slaughtered Lamb Pub, 182 West Fourth Street.
And he is preparing to open the Jekyll &amp; Hyde Club early next year at 1409 Avenue of the Americas, near 57th Street.


Victoria Lasdon, Donald J. Rose
Mrs.
Julian Coleman and Stuart Lasdon, both of New York, have announced the engagement of their daughter, Victoria R. Lasdon, to Dr.
Donald J. Rose, a son of Mrs.
David Rose of New Rochelle, N.Y., and the late Mr.
Rose.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
Lasdon, a graduate of Skidmore College, is the publisher of YM in New York, a magazine directed at girls and young women.


FERMAT'S THEOREM
The announcement that Andrew Wiles has in hand, at long last, the proof of Fermat's Last Theorem is justifiably cheered by mathematicians everywhere ("Fermat's Theorem," by James Gleick, Oct. 3).
Like many of my contemporaries, I was bored by the problems presented in grammar school math texts: Mary's problem measuring lengths of gingham for a dress or Dick's dilemmas in garden geometry.
However, Fermat's conjecture was plain enough to be minimally understood by adolescent minds.
And the happy fact that it had stumped great mathematicians for over three centuries was added romance.


Traffic Alert
TODAY
VILLAGE HALLOWEEN PARADE Avenue of the Americas will be closed between Spring and 22d Streets from 6 P.M. until completion.
IRVING PLACE FESTIVAL Irving Place will be closed between 14th and 20th Streets from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M.


Richard Glosser, Catherine Hoffman
Catherine Anne Hoffman, a daughter of Anita V. Hoffman of New York and David L. Hoffman Sr. of Greenwich, Conn., was married last evening to Richard Marc Glosser, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Paul L. Glosser of Johnstown, Pa.
Rabbi Bert Siegel officiated at the St.
Regis Roof in New York.
Mrs.
Glosser, 27, graduated from the University of Vermont.
She is an account executive at the Imagination Factory, a licensing and merchandising company in Los Angeles.
Her father is an owner of Sealy, Hoffman &amp; Sheehan, a commercial real estate firm in Manhattan.
Her mother is a vice president of Bowne &amp; Company, financial printers in Manhattan.


Worried Anew, Europe Asks How Best to Keep the Peace
EUROPEAN nation states have always been each other's worst enemies.
After the convulsion of World War II the Western European nations agreed to start over.
The European Community and the American-led NATO alliance guaranteed that they would never fight each other again and formed a bulwark against the new external threat from the Soviet Union.
But that is now gone, and where Communism used to be, history has fallen back into the old fratricidal patterns.


Swedes Move Tourism To Private Sector
In an effort to save money, Sweden has become one of the first countries to end Government operation of its tourist offices and let private industry do the job.
The Swedish Tourist Board is now the Swedish Travel and Tourism Council, using the phrase Next Stop Sweden for its marketing program in 11 countries besides Sweden.
The Swedish Travel and Tourism council is owned by more than 300 shareholders, including travel-related companies like Scandinavian Airlines System and the Swedish National Railroads, but the Swedish Government continues to provide funds, said Torborg Fagerlund, the press officer who is running the New York office until a director is named.
The Government will pay 72 percent of the program's expenses in the first year, 63 percent in the second and 47 percent in the third.


In the Region/Westchester; 73 Estate Homes (Maybe); Golf Course Is Included
WHEN Jack Nicklaus dug a shovelful of dirt at a recent groundbreaking for a residential-golf-course development in Purchase, he quipped that the hole should be filled in immediately, "otherwise, it might be declared a wetland tomorrow."
Those at the ceremony laughed, realizing that he was alluding to the long and convoluted history of the project.
The Country Club of Purchase had to overcome myriad environmental challenges before getting final approvals last summer.


Daniel Bernstein and Beth Goldstein
Dr.
Beth Lynn Goldstein, a pediatric resident at Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York, was married in Omaha last evening to Daniel Mark Bernstein, a lingerie manufacturer in New York.
Rabbi Aryeh Azriel performed the ceremony at Temple Israel.
The bride, 31, is the daughter of Gary Goldstein of Omaha and Phyllis Angrisane of Las Vegas, Nev.
She graduated from Colorado State University and received a Ph.D. in biochemistry from Boston University and an M.D. from the University of Nebraska.
Her father is a partner in Bahr, Vermeer &amp; Haecker, an architectural firm in Omaha.


The Little Movie Company That Might
Like the little engine that could, Gramercy Pictures is trying to pull a heavy load of toys up a mountain.
"At Tri-Star and Columbia, we made pictures with sex, violence, Barbra Streisand, Warren Beatty and Arnold," says Corin Nelson, director of publicity at the small new distributor.
"At Gramercy, we get all the movies that are hard to market."


Political Memo; Farrakhan Posing a Difficult New Challenge for Black Officials
Nearly a decade after Louis H. Farrakhan became a symbol of ethnic tension, he has re-emerged in the 1993 campaigns, again forcing politicians to confront the raw power of race in politics.
Mr.
Farrakhan, the militant minister of the Nation of Islam, is trying to soften his image and deflect attention from his attacks on Jews and on mainstream black politicians by emphasizing his concern for the troubles of inner cities.
But he has still managed to put many black candidates in an uncomfortable position.


Corrections
A chart in the Neighborhood Report last week gave 1992 crime statistics, rather than the 1993 figures, for the 68th Precinct in Brooklyn.
A corrected version appears today on page 10.


Tigers Slip And Slide One Step Closer
It will be as big as Florida State-Notre Dame.
That's what the Ivy League folks are saying, anyway.
Princeton defeated Columbia, 14-3, today in front of 5,176 fans who struggled with upturned umbrellas at Palmer Stadium.
The Tigers' victory set up a conference showdown at Penn on Saturday, with both teams 7-0 over all, 4-0 in the conference.


Votes in Congress
Tally Last Week in Connecticut, New Jersey and New York
Senate
1.
Taxes: Procedural vote that attempted to roll back the retroactive tax increases included in President Clinton's deficit reduction bill.
Failed, with 50 in favor and 44 opposed (10 short of teh 60 needed), Oct. 26.
2.
Jobless Aid: Vote on an amendment to a bill providing emergency unemployment benefits that would deny additional benefits to any jobless workers who had reported a taxable income in 1992 of more than $120,000.
Approved 52 to 43, Oct. 27.


UNIVERSITY PRESSES -- IN SHORT: NONFICTION
PSYCHOANALYSIS THE COMPLETE CORRESPONDENCE OF SIGMUND FREUD AND ERNEST JONES 1908-1939 Edited by R. Andrew Paskauskas.
Belknap/Harvard University, $39.95.


Shari Stumacher And Philip Kwait
Shari Beth Stumacher, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Stumacher of Forest Hills, Queens, was married last evening to Dr.
Philip S. Kwait, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Herbert Kwait of New York.
Rabbi Robert Benjamin performed the ceremony at Temple Emanuel in New Hyde Park, L.I.
Mrs.
Kwait, 26, is the case manager in New York for Selectcare, a home health-care agency.
She graduated from George Washington University and received a master's degree in organizational psychology from Teachers College of Columbia University.


Tanya Gibson, Brian Clark
BRIAN CLARK, 33, grew up on a farm in Palmyra, Pa., and spent most autumn nights on his back porch, listening to crickets, cows and Phillies games on the radio.
After working at a radio station in Harrisburg, Pa., for several years, he moved to Manhattan in 1990, taking a job as the chief research editor at Lear's magazine.
At first, his dating life was about as slow as the airport in Palmyra.


Reeves Doesn't Worry About a Once-in-a-While Rivalry
Dan Reeves usually greets reporters with a smile and a howdy.
Every now and then, he tells a homespun story about his days in Georgia or when he was playing with the Dallas Cowboys.
He makes fun of reporters' clothes, tries to remember their names.
His easy style has made the Giants' camp more like a smoothly run business.
Camp Giants is Camp Happy Face.
Then there is Jets Coach Bruce Coslet, who is holed up in his bunker, waiting for reinforcements.
Say the wrong thing to Coslet and you might get this kind of response: "You talking to me? Do I amuse you?"


Susan O'Rourke, Beau Barry Ryan
Mr. and Mrs.
Paul O'Rourke of Lincoln, Mass., have announced the engagement of their daughter Susan Elizabeth O'Rourke to Beau Barry Ryan, the son of John B. Ryan 3d and Dorinda D. Ryan, both of New York.
A June wedding is planned.
Ms.
O'Rourke is a candidate for a master's degree in social work at New York University.
She graduated from Syracuse University.
Her father is the president and owner of the Paul K. O'Rourke Company, a manufacturer's representative in Wellesley, Mass.


A Word to the Wise Diarist: Enter With Caution
GIVEN the uproar over Senator Bob Packwood's diaries, which the Senate ethics committee has voted to subpoena, one is tempted to wonder why he kept the journals in the first place and why he disclosed their existence.
Why, in these post-Watergate years, would any politician maintain -- and reveal -- a potentially damaging record of his public and private affairs?
The question goes to the heart of both diary-keeping and our fascination with diarists.
Every morning for 25 years, Mr.
Packwood has apparently made notes on the previous day's events.
Unlike those writers who use their diaries as strictly private therapy sessions, the Senator seems to have written with an audience in mind: He has willed the diary, he says, to the Oregon Historical Society, for release "years" after his death.


Hitler's Handmaiden
To the Editor:
Kudos to John Simon for a balanced review.
Unlike others who have written on Leni Riefenstahl's career, Mr.
Simon is able to discern the difference between ideological naivete and artistic integrity.
Like Ezra Pound, Celine, G. W. Pabst and Knut Hamsun, Leni Riefenstahl never compromised her art, whatever unfortunate lapses of judgment she may have made.
HERBERT C. ROSEMAN  Brooklyn


Commercial Property: Upgraded Services; Using Fiber Optics to Attract -- or Keep -- Tenants
TO most of the world, fiber optic technology is the gateway to grandiose telecommunications setups.
Superhighways of information, massive computer networks, these are the things of which fiber optics dreams -- and news headlines -- are made.
But to landlords and leasing agents, the hair-thin wires, which transmit data at almost unimaginable speeds, have a more narrowly defined role: They get tenants.


Touche
To the Editor:
As an architect, I especially enjoyed Herbert Muschamp's article on Philip Johnson  [ "A Man Who Lives in Two Glass Houses," Oct. 17 ] .
It put me in mind of a true story about Mr.
Johnson, told to me by a former staff member of Frederick Kiesler's office during the 1960's.


Late Scoring Spree Rallies Dartmouth Over Harvard
Dartmouth 39, Harvard 34
Dartmouth overcame a 28-11 Harvard lead to beat the Crimson, 39-34, yesterday in Hanover, N.H.


Voters Guide; After All the Talk, It's Decision Time
AFTER thousands of handshakes, tons of chicken dinners and millions of dollars in nasty and overblown television commercials, the big day is now just two days away, and for better or worse it's time to decide.
You can be forgiven for thinking the main thing that has divided the incumbent Mayor, David N. Dinkins, and and his Republican-Liberal challenger, Rudolph W. Giuliani, is whether George J. Marlin, the Conservative Party candidate, should have been included in their debates.
But as the chart at right shows, there are some real distinctions between the men who would be Mayor.
At the same time that you are being asked to decide who should spend the next four years in City Hall, you will get to weigh in on whether eight years in office is enough for anyone.
If it is approved, ballot proposal No. 4 would force candidates who win on Tuesday and are re-elected in four years to be out by 2001.
Meantime, voters on Staten Island will take the next step in deciding whether what Gotham joined together man should put asunder.
Finally, you may just have a hot race for the City Council in your neighborhood.
So go see.
You have nothing to lose but your vote.
TODD S. PURDUM


An Emergency Unit With Children in Mind
MARQUIS JONES'S mouth drooped as he lay on an examining table in the emergency room of the children's unit of Yale-New Haven Hospital.
"Show me where it hurts," the doctor said to the 7-year-old as her hands gently probed his belly.


SUNDAY, October 31, 1983; UPWARD MOBILITY
A dog to watch: the lurcher.
Favored by poachers in days gone by, the lurcher was usually a cross between a greyhound and a collie or terrier of some sort.
It was bred and trained to hunt quietly, stealthily and illegally for its criminal owners, and scorned by gentlefolk.
Not anymore.
For some time now the lurcher has been rising in social status.
Princess Anne has one, and the dogs appear often at the side of estate owners and horsey gentry in the United States and in Britain.
The lurcher has thus leaped (lurched?) over the vast golden-retrievered middle class to become a dog prized by precisely the folks (fancy) who used to hang the folks (lowly) who bred it.


Clinton at Work: Is Motion the Same Thing as Action?
"REMEMBER," said the silver-haired Democratic elder, one of the members of the capital's permanent establishment that watches them come and watches them go, "remember that Clinton is trying to do a lot, and that what he's trying to do is very difficult, and that he starts from a position of weakness."
Except from the true believers, that is the best one hears about Bill Clinton in political Washington these days.
Cut him some slack, people say.


Chamber Groups Vie With Folk
CHAMBER and folk music are prominent in the musical scene this week, beginning today at 3 P.M., when the clarinet-piano duo of Jean Kopperud and Cameron Grant bring Brahms, Bernstein, Vaughan-Williams and Gershwin to Wave Hill in the Riverdale section of the Bronx.
For driving directions, the number to call is (718) 549-3200.
Today at 4 P.M., members of the North Country Chamber Players -- the pianist Bernard Rose, the clarinetist Allan Bluestine and the cellist Chris Finckel -- give a recital in Reisinger Auditorium on the Yonkers campus of Sarah Lawrence College.
The program includes Elliott Carter's Cello Sonata, six weeks ahead of the composer's 85th birthday, and the rarely heard Trio of Alexander von Zemlinsky.
To make reservations, call 395-2411.


Neighborhood Report; Flushing Airport, an Airport No More


As Aristide Fails to Return, His Foes Celebrate in Haiti
Starting at sundown on Friday and lasting through the night, the streets of the capital echoed with gunfire as far-right groups and soldiers opposed to the return of the nation's exiled President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, celebrated their success in defying the international effort to bring about his return by today.
By dawn, the desolate scene left by the revelry and spent gunpowder spoke volumes about the mood of this country, and of the price it has paid for the army coup 25 months ago that overthrew Haiti's first democratically elected Government.


Security Blankets
The moment I opened my door to scoop up The Times, my eye landed on it: a picture of the new Supreme Court Justice, Ruth Bader Ginsburg, confident and composed in a trim jacket.
Justice Ginsburg is no slouch when it comes to putting herself together.
Her tightly combed hair is held in place with a chic ribbon bow.
Her glasses are stylishly big.
When she turned up at the Senate last summer in a swingy pleated skirt and striped tunic-length top with a string of beads, she looked more pulled together than any woman in the Washington eye since Jackie Kennedy Onassis.
The jacket?
It happened to be an Armani, but the label is not important.
The point is that for her first official day on the job, the woman just knew she needed a well-fitting jacket.


In Times Square, Turning Profits From 'Gin Mills'
AT 9 A.M. in Rudy's Bar, Ernest Schroeder sits on a stool counting money.
There are many $100 bills, rolls and rolls of quarters, and everything in between.
The cash, around $12,000, represents the weekend take from his four Times Square bars.
At a time when saloons everywhere are struggling, Mr.
Schroeder says that his establishments -- Rudy's, the Full Moon Saloon, the Holland Bar and the Savoy -- are doing well.
The bars are loud, the beer cheap, the food almost free -- and the clientele of a class that would not be terribly affected if the stock market crashed.


Keep Romance Out of Bookstores
To the Editor:
I've just finished a week and a half of work (at Classic Books) made especially annoying by your article on finding "romance" at bookstores  [ "You Read? Me Too!" Oct. 3 ] .


Neighborhood Repots: Upper East Side; After Fire, Church Seeks Aid
The Church of the Heavenly Rest on Fifth Avenue at 90th Street is starting a million-dollar fund-raising campaign this week to help restore the church, which was badly damaged by a three-alarm fire on Aug. 7.
Fire destroyed half the chancel area of the Gothic stone building, with damages estimated at more than $3 million.
Perhaps the biggest loss was an enormous, elegant Austin organ, considered one of the finest in the city.
The Episcopal church had long been noted for the quality of its musical offerings.


Lyrics Grew on Plum Trees
SEEDS IN THE HEART Japanese Literature From Earliest Times to the Late Sixteenth Century.
By Donald Keene. 1,265 pp.
New York: Henry Holt &amp; Company. $50.


Neighborhood Report: Morrisania; An Officer's Eyes and Ears
This summer, Jeff King, a community police officer at the 42d Precinct in the South Bronx, was finally overwhelmed by his beat: nine square blocks of apartment buildings and cavernous housing projects too sprawling for one person to handle.
But he and his supervisors found a solution in a basement office of the precinct station house: a band of eager auxiliary officers who were more than happy to assist Officer King.


And Don't Forget . . .
To the Editor:
ROBERT J. ROBBINS  Broomall, Pa.


Anita Hendricks, Robert Buckman
Anita Marie Hendricks, a daughter of Robert W. Hendricks of West Orange, N.J., and the late Mary U. Hendricks, was married yesterday to Robert Buckman, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Karl R. Buckman of Toms River, N.J.
The Rev.
Victor Kennedy performed the ceremony at St.
Joseph's Roman Catholic Church in West Orange.


Business Diary: October 24 - 29
THE ECONOMY A Plan Is Born.
Now, Watch Out!
O.K., it's 1,342 pages, and it's so complicated that to try to understand it all could put you in need of some heavy-duty health care.
But look at it this way, President Clinton said, as he plunked his mammoth health care plan in Congress' lap last week: "None of us could devise a system more complex, more burdensome, more administratively costly than the one we have now." He's got a point there.
But then again, the present system wasn't built in a day, and he's trying to create a brand new labyrinth in a single stroke.
The plan has evolved during its months of gestation, notably in new limits on Government subsidies -- an attempt to allay fears that Big Government will take on an unworkable burden.
But for all the talk of his waffling, all the plan's revisions, he's stuck to one razor-sharp goal: "health care security for all Americans."


In America; Mayoral Homestretch
It's almost over, and for that we should be grateful.
With the poll numbers exceptionally close, the endgame of Dinkins-Giuliani II is at the mercy of the intangibles -- momentum, turnout, the honesty of poll respondents and the weather.
A nor'easter on Tuesday, depressing the turnout in poor neighborhoods, would likely blow the incumbent out of City Hall.
Balmy weather and a huge turnout by blacks and women could keep him there for four more years, which would mean, of course, four more years of extraordinary personal abuse.


How My Aunt Charlie Pioneered the Sit-In Era
To the Editor:
The site of the first sit-ins against segregated lunch counters, the Woolworth's in Greensboro, N.C., will soon close its doors.
Imagine my surprise to discover that there is no record that the first sit-ins actually occurred in Waukegan, Ill., long before the Greensboro sit-ins of the 1960's.


Sound Bytes; Real Scares in Real Time, Courtesy of Lord British
HALLOWEEN is a special time of year for Richard (Lord British) Garriott, one of the most successful computer game designers in the world.
Origin Systems Inc., the company he co-founded with his brother, Robert, merged last year into Electronic Arts Inc. in a deal valued at $30 million.
Origin produces the Ultima series of fantasy role-playing games.


LAST CALL
If Berg's husband is "50 percent of this relationship," he should take 50 percent of the responsibility for preventing an unwanted pregnancy.
He says he had "no doubt at all" about not wanting to father another child, so the obvious choice would be vasectomy.
VERA COOLEY West Haven, Conn.


Of Love and Loneliness
ON Monday, in the gilded rococo dream of a living room of her Trump Tower triplex, Ivana Trump was chattering away at a cocktail benefit for the Muscular Dystrophy Association.
She was wearing earrings as bold as her chandeliers and a tight red cocktail dress with some give to it so that she could really work the party, which was also in celebration of the publication of her second novel, "Free to Love," and the model Fabio's first novel, "Pirate."


Olivetti Firm Chief Faces New Charges In Italy Corruption
Magistrates ordered the arrest today on bribery charges of Carlo De Benedetti, head of the Olivetti computer company and among the most senior and best-known Italian tycoons to be ensnared in the country's huge corruption scandal.
The industrialist, once a symbol of Italian business self-confidence and energy, was travelling outside Italy when Rome magistrates issued the arrest warrant.
A spokesman for his holding company, Compagnie Industriali Riunite, said he was expected to return to the country on Tuesday.


LAST CALL
Do we have a problem with legalized abortion?
I would say, yes!
Elizabeth Berg is discussing whether to continue her pregnancy as casually as she might discuss returning a gift to a store.
GUSTAVO DE LOS REYES Fair Haven, N.J.


BEST SELLERS: October 31, 1993
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Fiction
1
1
64
THE BRIDGES OF MADISON COUNTY, by Robert James Waller. (Warner, $16.95.) A photographer and a lonely farmer's wife in Iowa.
2
2
3
NIGHTMARES &amp; DREAMSCAPES, by Stephen King. (Viking, $27.50.) Twenty stories (mostly about the macabre), a teleplay, an essay and a poem.
3
3
5
LASHER, by Anne Rice. (Knopf, $25.) The demon Lasher pursues the witch Rowan and their child; a sequel to "The Witching Hour."
4
5
10
WITHOUT REMORSE, by Tom Clancy. (Putnam, $24.95.) John Kelly becomes involved in a Pentagon project to rescue prisoners held in North Vietnam.
5
4
5
SACRED CLOWNS, by Tony Hillerman. (HarperCollins, $23.) Two Navajo tribal policemen undertake to unravel a web of politics and murder.
6
9
2
A DANGEROUS FORTUNE, by Ken Follett. (Delacorte, $23.95.) A young student's mysterious drowning has repercussions in Victorian England's high society.
7
7
29
LIKE WATER FOR CHOCOLATE, by Laura Esquivel. (Doubleday, $17.50.) Frustration, love, hope -- and recipes -- sampled by a woman on a Mexican ranch.
8
1
THE FIRES OF HEAVEN, by Robert Jordan. (Tor/Doherty, $24.95.) The fifth volume of "The Wheel of Time," a fantasy saga.
9
6
8
THE GOLDEN MEAN, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) Concluding the "Griffin &amp; Sabine" trilogy.
10
8
33
THE CLIENT, by John Grisham. (Doubleday, $23.50.) A deadly secret, revealed by a lawyer just before he kills himself, presents problems for an 11-year-old boy.
11
1
DECIDER, by Dick Francis. (Putnam, $22.95.) An architect-engineer gets caught between the warring factions of a clan that owns an English racecourse.
12
1
GONE, BUT NOT FORGOTTEN, by Phillip Margolin. (Doubleday, $22.) The wives of several Portland, Ore., businessmen disappear without a trace.
13*
13
12
VANISHED, by Danielle Steel. (Delacorte, $23.95.) The abduction of their young son creates a crisis for a New York man and woman and for the woman's first lover.
14
10
41
GRIFFIN &amp; SABINE, by Nick Bantock. (Chronicle Books, $17.95.) The romance of an artist and a secret admirer, told through illustrated cards and letters.
15
12
5
POT OF GOLD, by Judith Michael. (Poseidon, $23.) A single mother and her teen-age daughter go on a spree after winning $60 million in a lottery.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Nonfiction
1
1
2
PRIVATE PARTS, by Howard Stern. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $23.) The memoirs of the radio and television personality.
2
2
8
SEINLANGUAGE, by Jerry Seinfeld. (Bantam, $19.95.) Observations on life's pleasures and ordeals by the star of the television show "Seinfeld."
3
3
25
EMBRACED BY THE LIGHT, by Betty J. Eadie with Curtis Taylor. (Gold Leaf Press, $14.95.) A woman's near-death experience.
4
5
4
WOULDN'T TAKE NOTHING FOR MY JOURNEY NOW, by Maya Angelou. (Random House, $17.) Essays about life and death, good and evil.
5
4
10
THE HIDDEN LIFE OF DOGS, by Elizabeth Marshall Thomas. (Davison/Houghton Mifflin, $18.95.) An analysis of canine behavior.
6
15
4
FURTHER ALONG THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $21.) Discussions of love, self-esteem, relationships and spiritual growth.
7
10
16
LISTENING TO PROZAC, by Peter D. Kramer. (Viking, $23.) A psychiatrist reflects on mood-changing medications and their effects on a person's self.
8
12
2
STAR TREK MEMORIES, by William Shatner with Chris Kreski. (HarperCollins, $22.) Reminiscences from the man who played Capt.
James Tiberius Kirk.
9
9
64
WOMEN WHO RUN WITH THE WOLVES, by Clarissa Pinkola Estes. (Ballantine, $23.) How myths and folk tales can enable women to understand their psyches.
10
8
5
THE FOUNTAIN OF AGE, by Betty Friedan. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25.) A call for men and women to regard life after age 60 as an exciting adventure.
11
7
4
A MARRIAGE MADE IN HEAVEN ...
OR TOO TIRED FOR AN AFFAIR, by Erma Bombeck. (HarperCollins, $20.) Reflections on 43 years of marriage.
12
11
21
REENGINEERING THE CORPORATION, by Michael Hammer and James Champy. (Harper Business, $25.) A manifesto for business innovation.
13
6
11
MAYBE (MAYBE NOT), by Robert Fulghum. (Villard, $19.) Essays suggesting that inspiration can be found in most unexpected ways and places.
14
2
BLACK HOLES AND BABY UNIVERSES, by Stephen Hawking. (Bantam, $21.95.) The Cambridge physicist ruminates on his life and the cosmos.
15
4
MORE MEMORIES, by Ralph Emery with Tom Carter. (Putnam, $21.95.) Stories about country music stars from the host of the "Nashville Now" television show.
Weeks
This
Last
On
Week
Week
List
Advice, How-to and Miscellaneous
1
1
3
STOP THE INSANITY! by Susan Powter. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $22.) A prescription for women to achieve physical and psychological health and fitness.
2
2
24
MEN ARE FROM MARS, WOMEN ARE FROM VENUS, by John Gray. (HarperCollins, $20.) Communicating.
3
3
14
AGELESS BODY, TIMELESS MIND, by Deepak Chopra. (Harmony, $22.) A physician's advice about aging.
4
4
18
EAT MORE, WEIGH LESS, by Dean Ornish. (HarperCollins, $22.50.) Counsel from a physician about diet and nutrition.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 16, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 28,000 other retailers (gift shops, department stores, newsstands, supermarkets), statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.
THE ARABISTS: The Romance of an American Elite, by Robert D. Kaplan. (Free Press, $24.95.) A thoughtful, balanced view of the inbred State Department specialists whose fluffs (like their dealings with Saddam Hussein) have received more attention than their successes (like the exodus of the Ethiopian Jews).
BEFORE NIGHT FALLS, by Reinaldo Arenas. (Viking, $25.) Arenas, a Cuban writer and exile who suffered from AIDS, killed himself in New York in 1990.
His passionate autobiography turns the usual circumstances -- persecution, betrayal, coerced confessions, forced labor, attempts to "reform" him -- into something exalted.
THE BEGINNING OF THE JOURNEY: The Marriage of Diana and Lionel Trilling, by Diana Trilling. (Harcourt Brace, $24.95.) A conversational, direct, dignified memoir that perforates the hygienic Trilling package; the Trillings, once revered for their reasonableness, also deserve high marks for coping with the irrational.
THE COST OF TALENT: How Executives and Professionals Are Paid and How It Affects America, by Derek Bok. (Free Press, $22.95.) Mr.
Bok documents and analyzes the trends that have given David Letterman an income more than 50 times that of President Clinton.
FIMA, by Amos Oz. (Helen and Kurt Wolff/Harcourt Brace, $22.95.) A novel whose idealistic hero lives mostly in his head, daydreaming about seizing power or bringing peace to Israel, while barely able to cope with his own life.
THE GIRL WHO TROD ON A LOAF, by Kathryn Davis. (Knopf, $23.) A heated, dramatic novel narrated by Francie, an underachieving composer who finds redemption by completing an inherited unfinished opera.
MARGUERITE YOURCENAR: Inventing a Life, by Josyane Savigneau. (University of Chicago, $25.) Yourcenar (1903-87), author of "Memoirs of Hadrian," intense, cerebral, fascinated by sexual ambiguity, has found a perfect biographer in the patient, wise, industrious Ms.
Savigneau.
PRESIDENT KENNEDY: Profile of Power, by Richard Reeves. (Simon &amp; Schuster, $30.) A journalist's judicious appraisal that casts Kennedy as a pragmatic cold-war power broker and a manager of international confrontation.
REMEMBERING BABYLON, by David Malouf. (Pantheon, $20.) Mr.
Malouf's adroit seventh novel confronts a band of settlers in Australia with Gemmy, a boy born white and raised by aborigines; they dread that their own identities might be compromised like his.
TRAVELS WITH LIZBETH, by Lars Eighner. (St. Martin's, $19.95.) A writer who until very recently made homelessness his full-time job has found a strikingly unconventional voice and form to deal with life as the literate don't normally live it.
THE WARBURGS: The Twentieth-Century Odyssey of a Remarkable Jewish Family, by Ron Chernow. (Random House, $30.) Mr.
Chernow's saga follows the fates of a rich German Jewish family betrayed by the nation they loved.


7 DIE, 11 WOUNDED IN ULSTER ATTACK
The wave of sectarian violence that has accelerated in Northern Ireland in the last eight days continued Saturday night when two gunmen shot and killed at least seven people in a bar in a village in the western part of the British Province, police said.
A Protestant paramilitary organization, the Ulster Freedom Fighters, claimed responsibility for the killings, which it said were in retaliation for the deaths last Saturday of nine Protestants in a bomb detonated by the Irish Republican Army in Belfast.
Police said early this morning that at least two of the dead in the Londonderry County shooting last night were Protestants, and that 11 people had been hospitalized.


Unwanted Poem Tendencies
MONDAY Thought of joining the Navy today, but realize I must first resolve my closet unwanted-poem tendencies.
The Navy's one-page guide to sexual harassment, which defines harassment in terms of traffic lights (red for rape, green for "hi"), specifically lists "unwanted poems" in the yellow-light category.
But which poems are unwanted?
Perhaps the Department of the Navy is preparing a follow-up guide.
In the meantime, what will I do?
Just bought a collection of William Carlos Williams poems.
Have I made a terrible blunder, destroying my chances for a promising Naval career?
TUESDAY My father was in the Navy.
My cousin was, too, on a submarine, and used to bring exotic gifts from faraway ports.
I am drawn to the Navy, but still I worry about my poetic orientation.
Someone did send me a poem recently.
That's what led me to experiment with the William Carlos Williams volume.
A friend sent a poem by Kenneth Koch that is a parody of a Williams poem about plums in the refrigerator.
It wasn't that I wanted the Koch poem.
Not at first.
I mean, I didn't ask for it or anything.
But once it arrived, a photocopied sheet folded smoothly in a crisp white envelope, I wanted it very much indeed.
Should I have resisted temptation?
I enjoyed it extravagantly.


Corporate America's Diagnosis of the Clinton Health Plan
A BIT like prophets whose message has finally been heeded after long years of being ignored, many employee benefits executives said "amen" when President Clinton trumpeted the need to bring health costs under control and make care universally available.
But many business people fear that the changes the President sent to Congress last week may increase their costs, which are still rising at more than double the general inflation rate.


100 Years Of Design


Neighborhood Report; Hanging Baskets
Central Park employees last week began hanging the first of 140 new wastebaskets on lampposts.
The 20-gallon black steel baskets, raised four feet off the ground to discourage rodents, are part of a $27,000 project to improve trash collection.
Next month, the park's 55-gallon drums will be replaced with plastic covered carts that hold 100 gallons.
In the spring, blue carts for recycling bottles and cans are to be installed.
The new containers are for south of 72d Street; the program will be extended next year.
M.H.


Alternatives to Calling 911 for Help
In addition to ambulances operated by the Emergency Medical Service and by private hospitals, there are volunteer ambulance corps that serve many communities throughout the city.
Here is a look at them and the services they provide.
THE BRONX  KINGSDALE VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 543-2222.
Serves the northwest Bronx.
Operates Monday through Friday, 7 P.M. to midnight; Saturday and Sunday, 9 A.M. to midnight.
Emergency cardiac care.
RIVERBAY COMMUNITY VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 671-4220.
Serves Co-Op City and outskirts.
Operates Monday through Thursday, 8 P.M. to 6 A.M., and continuously from 8 P.M.
Friday to 6 A.M.
Monday.
Emergency cardiac care.
THROGS NECK VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 430-9500.
Serves Throgs Neck, Pelham Bay, Silver Beach, Edgewater, Country Club.
Operates Monday through Thursday, 6 P.M. to midnight, and from 6 P.M.
Friday to midnight Sunday.
Emergency cardiac care.
BROOKLYN  BEDFORD-STUYVESANT VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 919-1919.
Serves Bedford-Stuyvesant.
Operates Tuesday through Thursday, 8 A.M. to midnight, and continuously from 8 A.M.
Friday to midnight Monday.
Emergency cardiac care.
BENSONHURST VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE SERVICE, (718) 256-1211.
Serves Bensonhurst.
Operates 24 hours a day, every day.
Emergency cardiac care.
BRAVO VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE SERVICE, (718) 680-1111.
Serves the Bay Ridge area, from 60th Street to 14th Avenue and to the shore.
Operates 24 hours a day, every day.
Emergency cardiac care.
GERRITTSEN BEACH FIRE VOLUNTEERS, (718) 332-3333.
Serves Gerrittsen Beach.
Operates 24 hours a day, every day.
Emergency cardiac care.
QUEENS  BAY COMMUNITY VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 352-1133.
Serves northern part of Bayside.
Operates overnights Monday through Thursday, 7:30 P.M. to 6 A.M., and from 7:30 P.M.
Friday to 6 A.M.
Monday.
Emergency cardiac care.
BROAD CHANNEL VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT AND AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 474-8888.
Serves Broad Channel.
Operates 24 hours a day, every day.
No emergency cardiac care.
FLUSHING COMMUNITY AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 353-4900.
Serves Flushing and northern section of Jamaica.
Operates 4 P.M. to midnight, every day.
Emergency cardiac care is temporarily unavailable.
GLEN OAKS VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 347-1637.
Serves eastern Queens.
Operates weekends 24 hours; weekdays, 8 A.M. to noon and 6 P.M. to midnight.
Emergency cardiac care.
GLENDALE VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 386-9898.
Serves Glendale.
Operates Monday through Friday, 7 P.M. to midnight, and variable hours on Saturday and Sunday.
Emergency cardiac care.
JACKSON HEIGHTS-ELMHURST VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 335-3222.
Serves Jackson Heights and Elmhurst.
Strives to operate 24 hours a day, every day, as staffing permits.
No emergency cardiac care.
JAMAICA ESTATES, HOLLISWOOD, SOUTH BAYSIDE VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 464-0300.
Serves Hollis Hills, Holliswood, and northern Queens Village, the southwestern section of South Bayside and eastern Jamaica Estates.
Operates Monday through Friday, 6 P.M. to midnight, and Saturday, 8 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Emergency cardiac care.
LINDENWOOD COMMUNITY VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 738-3029.
Serves Lindenwood, Ozone Park and South Ozone Park.
Operates Monday through Friday, 6 P.M. to 1 A.M., and variable hours on weekends.
Emergency cardiac care.
LITTLE NECK-DOUGLASTON COMMUNITY AMBULANCE, (718) 229-0400.
Serves Little Neck and Douglaston.
Operates overnights Monday through Thursday, 7 P.M. to 7 A.M., and from 7 P.M.
Friday to 7 A.M.
Monday.
Emergency cardiac care.
MIDDLE VILLAGE VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 894-6000.
Serves Middle Village, southern parts of Elmhurst and eastern sections of Maspeth.
Operates every day, 7 P.M. to midnight, and sometimes longer on weekends.
No emergency cardiac care.
QUEENS VILLAGE-HOLLIS-BELLEROSE VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 464-2424.
Serves Queens Village, northern half of Hollis and eastern half of Bellrose.
Operates Monday through Friday, 6 P.M. to midnight, and Saturday and Sunday, noon to 6 P.M.
Emergency cardiac care.
RIDGEWOOD VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 386-7229.
Serves Ridgewood and Wyckoff Heights and the western sections of Maspeth.
Operates every day, 6 P.M. to midnight, and sometimes from midnight to 6 A.M.
No emergency cardiac care.
ROCKAWAY POINT VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT AND AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 634-2727.
Serves Breezy Point.
Operates 24 hours a day, every day.
No emergency cardiac care.
ROSEDALE VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 276-7500.
Serves Rosedale and Laurelton.
Operates 24 hours a day, every day.
Emergency cardiac care when technicians on duty are licensed.
ROXBURY VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT, (718) 634-2727.
Serves Breezy Point Cooperative.
Operates 24 hours a day, every day.
Emergency cardiac care.
WEST HAMILTON BEACH VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT, (718) 843-1716.
Serves Howard Beach, Hamilton Beach and Rockwood Park.
Operates 24 hours a day, every day.
No emergency cardiac care.
STATEN ISLAND  VOLUNTEER HEART AMBULANCE, (718) 979-5850.
Serves Staten Island south of the expressway.
Operates 7 P.M. to midnight seven days a week.
Emergency cardiac care.
MANHATTAN  CENTRAL PARK MEDICAL UNIT, (212) 860-8024.
Serves all of Central Park.
Operates weekends and holidays.
Emergency cardiac care.
The following are unable to provide care because volunteers or financing are lacking: Astoria -- (718) 726-7000 Forest Hills -- (718) 793-7747 Flatlands Area Ambulance Squad -- (718) 338-0434 Peninsula -- (718) 474-7474 Rego Park -- (718) 459-5433 Woodside -- (718) 478-2050


Corrections
A chart in the Neighborhood Report last week gave 1992 crime statistics, rather than the 1993 figures, for the 68th Precinct in Brooklyn.
A corrected version appears today on page 10.


Pamela Kraus And Neal Bodner
Dr.
Pamela Kraus, a daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
David Kraus of Plantation, Fla., was married last evening to Dr.
Neal Bodner, a son of Philip L. Bodner of New York and the late Harriet Bodner.
Rabbi Philip Labowitz performed the ceremony at Temple B'nai Israel in Boca Raton, Fla.
The bride, 27, is a resident in anesthesiology in the hospitals of the Mount Sinai Medical Center in New York.
She graduated from Tulane University and received a medical degree from the University of Florida.


Synagogue Dispute In a Shore Community
Perhaps the most enlightening aspects of the Sept. 19 article on Deal, "Syrian Jews and Town at Odds Over Synagogue," are the parts that were not said.
There is mention of the Catholic church a few blocks from the proposed synagogue; St.
Mary's is a magnificent edifice, complete with bell tower and a crucifix high above, along with an announcement board facing Richmond Avenue.
What is not mentioned is that the Synagogue of Deal on the main thoroughfare has no identifying marks.
The most telling comment, paraphrased, was that there have always been large numbers of Catholics and Jews in the town, but they always got along until the Syrians moved in.
What was actually being said is that until Jews became discernible, everyone tolerated them.
Before the incursion of Syrian Jews, Deal did not have a Jewish house of worship.


An Artistic Safari for the Elephant
The african elephant, the largest land animal, means different things to people these days, but many contemporary attitudes were anticipated in the art of sub-Saharan people.
The beast's awesome size, aggressiveness, friendliness, exploitation and endangerment all come alive in "Elephant: The Animal and Its Ivory in African Art," an exhibition at the Metropolitan Museum of Art through March 27.
A potent symbol of power and royalty to Africans, the elephant has been depicted throughout the continent since antiquity on both humble and magnificent objects.
The images in the show, which focus on the animal's massive size, fanlike ears, huge tusks and wrinkled trunk, take the form of sculpture, masks, headdresses, stools and the prow of a boat.
Many of the works incorporate elephant ivory, bone, hair or hide.


In a Stream of Wagner, Glints of Gold
Remember when Wagner recordings were a precious rarity; when most of the operas weren't even available, and when their first appearance on long-playing vinyl disks was itself big news?
Many of you probably do not, since that era goes back nearly 30 years.
Today Wagner operas pop off the assembly line with all the frequency -- and, one sometimes fears, uniformity -- of mass-produced industrial artifacts.
The recent output of the Wagner recording industry has yielded five complete operas and an overture collection.
The most surprising release of the bunch is a Naxos recording of "Der fliegende Hollander" from Austrian Radio, with Pinchas Steinberg conducting mostly unknown or little-known singers (8.660025/6; two CD's).
The performance is completely respectable, full of idiomatic verve and solid singing.


Around the Town


Oct. 24-30: A New Network; 'Star Trek': Yet Another Generation
Normally, Paramount Communications Inc.'s announcement last week that it planned a fifth national network would have sent an electric shock through the broadcast business.
But coming in so turbulent a period in the industry's history, the announcement barely curled the toes in TV executives' Armani loafers.


Russians' Freewheeling Spirit Defies the Burden of History
THERE is probably no better indicator of recent arrivals in the United States than the cabdrivers in New York City.
During the late 1970's and early 1980's, it seemed that the Russians, whose arrival had been humorously prophesied in the 60's by the film "The Russians Are Coming! The Russians Are Coming!" had taken command of almost all of the yellow chariots.
Unlike other influxes, this one was also making itself felt in the galleries.
The latest manifestation in Westchester is "From Chaos to Creation: Russian Art From 1972 to 1992" at the Rye Arts Center.
It is a sign of an improved -- if more confused -- world situation that, while most of the 17 individuals and partnerships represented live wholly or partly in the United States, at least three have chosen to remain in the motherland, and all have had exposure in fashionable Manhattan galleries.


Retiree Group Backs Most of Clinton Plan
To the Editor:
The headline on an Oct. 24 front-page article states that the American Association of Retired Persons objects to the President's health plan because it "slights the aged." This does not reflect our position on health care reform.
The American health security bill, would on balance, substantially help most older Americans.


Correction; Crime Report: South Brooklyn
A chart in the Neighborhood Report last week gave 1992 crime statistics, rather than 1993 figures, for the 68th Precinct of Brooklyn.
This is a corrected chart containing figures through May 1993.
Chg.
from
Complaints
1992
68th Precint
Rapes
10
25.0%
Felony assaults
100
0.0
Grand larceny:
motor vehicles
844
-15.0
Burglaries
450
-6.0
NEW YORK CITY
Rapes
1,174
-0.1
Felony assaults
15,768
-4.0
Grand larceny:
motor vehicles
46,735
-8.0
Burglaries
40,404
-7.0


Una M. Kearns, Keith L. Murray
Una Marie Kearns, the daughter of Peter and Sheila Kearns of East Atlantic Beach, L.I., was married yesterday to Keith Louis Murray, the son of Donald and Gail Murray of New York.
Msgr.
George Bardes performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at St.
Thomas More Church in New York.


Melville the Poet
THE CIVIL WAR WORLD OF HERMAN MELVILLE By Stanton Garner.
Illustrated. 544 pp.
Lawrence: University Press of Kansas. $29.95.


The Road Is a Test of a Driver's Character
The article on the "Scenic Road" designation of the Merritt Parkway (Sept. 26) should include the severe character tests that this summer's road repairs have imposed upon all drivers.
Not a day, not even a holiday, has gone by when every citizen has not had to consider who he or she is or wants to be.
The problem looks simple.
"Right lane closed 1/2 mile ahead," tells you what's coming.
But do you stay in the right lane until the barrier itself is reached and then try to squeeze yourself left?
Or do you go demurely left a good half mile away to enter slow-moving traffic in single file?
If you do, how do you feel about those still speeding by on your right, who expect you to let them in ahead of you later?
Do you cut them out by staying grimly bumper to bumper until two lanes open again?


ARNOLD GLIMCHER AND HIS ART WORLD ALL-STARS
The implication in your article that Arne Glimcher is in any way ashamed of his Jewishness was offensive.
I have always found him to be comfortable and proud of his Jewish identity.
His name was not changed from a "WASP-ish" Arne to a Hollywood-pandering "Jewish" Arnie.
His credit on "The Mambo Kings" is the same Arne that he uses everywhere.
Further, the notion that he would cultivate important relationships with the Jewish community for purely personal gain is grotesque.


New Horror for Sarajevo: Muslims Killing Muslims
After a 19-month siege by Serbian forces that has killed at least 12,000 people here, many in this city felt that they had reached the limits of their capacity to be shocked by bloodshed.
But this week there was a fresh sense of horror over a bizarre turn of events that grew out of a crackdown by the Bosnian Army and police on gang leaders who had threatened virtually to take over the city in a campaign of black marketeering, robbery, rape and killing.


Bangkok to Singapore, Bumps and All
AS he gathered up my bags in the soggy heat of Bangkok's Hualamphong Railway Station, the aging Thai porter made a couple of quick assumptions about this American traveler who was standing -- and sweating -- before him.
"I think you go Oriental Express, O.K., O.K.?" he said, noticing in my shirt pocket the jade-green ticket jacket printed with an ostentatious logo and the initials E &amp; O, for Eastern &amp; Oriental Express, the new luxury train that has been running between Bangkok and Singapore since Sept. 19 and bills itself as Asia's answer to the fabled Orient Express of Europe.


Tarot Goes 'Po Mo'
JAMES WANLESS, a tarot authority from California, has offered to read your cards.
You will experience "great aha's!" he says.
It's been a while since you've had an aha! of any dimension.
So, after giving your aura a quick rinse, you head for the Ramada Hotel Pennsylvania in Manhattan.
Mr.
Wanless is staying in Room 515. (Remember that number.)


Shooters


Oct. 24-30; California Burns


Streetscapes/The Ansonia; Changes for the Better, but Still a Long Way to Go
"BARBARIANS Rape Ansonia," ran the headline in The Village Voice in 1980, as the residents protested interior alterations on what was one of New York's most prominent and troubled apartment houses.
Considering the magnitude of their task, the "barbarians" have done a passable job of improving the florid Ansonia Hotel on Broadway from 73d to 74th Streets.
The building has slowly improved over the intervening years, though it still has a long way to go before it returns to the confection it was when it opened in 1904.


If You're Thinking of Living in/Monroe Township; Split by Phone and Mail, but Not in Spirit
ACCORDING to the United States Postal Service, no one lives in Monroe Township, N.J.
The Mayor's address is listed in neighboring Spotswood; a Monroe Township retirement community with nearly 3,000 residents has a Cranbury address, and Monroe's championship golf course supposedly is in Jamesburg.
Although it is nearly 44 square miles and has a larger population than nearly all the surrounding communities, Monroe has no postal identity.
Not only that, it is also plagued by a pair of telephone area codes, forcing residents to pay long-distance charges to phone from one side of town to the other.


Neighborhood Report: Morrisania; FREEING PARENTS TO STUDY


Devils Back on Winning Track
The question that lingered in the mind of Devils supporters for the past four days was how the team would respond to the loss to Montreal that ended its seven-game winning streak Tuesday night.
Although they squandered a three-goal lead, the Devils answered that question this afternoon with a 5-3 triumph over the Flyers that came with help from the videotape and some good goaltending from Chris Terreri.


Rebecca Banks, Charles Zakin
Nan and Allen Banks of Ossining, N.Y., have announced the engagement of their daughter Rebecca Banks and Charles Steven Zakin, a son of Rita and Noel Zakin of Mendham, N.J.
A May wedding is planned.
Miss Banks, 24, is the editor of House Beautiful's Houses and Plants magazine, a Hearst publication in New York.
She graduated from Northwestern University.
Her father is an executive vice president of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi Advertising Worldwide in New York.


Wanted: Actress to Play Pakistani, Chilean or Indian
Sarita Choudhury is decked out in navy warm-up pants, a tatty blue T-shirt and worn Army boots -- all topped by a leonine mane of unbrushed hair.
She appears worlds away from the traditional, sari-wearing Mina, the character she played in her first film, "Mississippi Masala." But after ordering a cappuccino at a restaurant in Greenwich Village and lighting up the first of several Marlboros, it becomes apparent that Ms.
Choudhury has at least one thing in common with her fictional counterpart.
"Don't write how much I smoke," she says in a throaty baritone.
"My parents will kill me!"


Corrections
A report last Sunday in the "Playing in the Neighborhood" column referred incorrectly to the Highlawn branch library in Brooklyn.
It is part of the Brooklyn Public Library, not the New York Public Library.


Hold the Wine And Pass the Beer
BEER is big: there are more varieties of beer than ever on store shelves; new breweries are opening; restaurants are beginning to have beer lists, and many restaurants are designing special menus to accompany an assortment of beers.
The beer dinner is replacing the wine dinner.
And it can also happen at home.
At a restaurant beer dinner, an assortment of four or five beers are chosen, like wines, to accompany certain dishes.
Sometimes the dishes themselves are made with beer.


Prague: Lost Era
To the Editor: Even though I browse through the whole Travel section, few articles move me to write.
But Michael Chabon's "Prague: Lost Era" (Sept. 26) touched me in its poetic evocation of awakening from a "40-year dream . . ., a sigh of bereavement."
His article reminded me of my first visits there under Soviet occupation, but even more of 1987 when Prague began to preen in new hope.
Scaffolding hid the famous town clock, while young students and hopeful artists huddled in cheap bistros, house fronts were being repainted, the streets repaved and a few luxury restaurants offered delicious food at prices only tourists could afford.


Florida State Romps But Ward Is Injured
Florida St. 54, Wake Forest 0
Get ready for a few days of ticklish speculation about Charlie Ward's ribs.
Ward, a favorite to capture the Heisman Trophy, was knocked out of top-ranked Florida State's 54-0 homecoming victory yesterday over Wake Forest in Tallahassee, Fla.
He was tackled by several defenders as he attempted to scramble out of trouble at midfield on an aborted pass play.


Ewing Escapes Injury in Post-Game Scare
The Knicks received a major scare tonight when adoring fans forced a barrier to collapse on Patrick Ewing's left leg as the team was filing off the Thunderdome court after its 93-77 exhibition victory over the Los Angeles Lakers.
"Sure I was scared," Ewing said in the New York locker room.
"I saw my leg giving in. Thank God I still had my shoes on. I was able to move my leg out of the way a little bit."


It's All Relative


Good Eating; Packed House
LONDON LENNIE'S (Diner's Journal)  (718) 894-8084; 63-88 Woodhaven Boulevard, Rego Park; $; all major credit cards


Sign Language
After bicycling around Southeast Asia burdened with five dictionaries, Alan Stillman came up with Quickpoint, a laminated card printed with 390 pictorial symbols, from a telephone to a salt shaker with a red bar line .
The card is $5 from Gaia Publications, Box 239, Alexandria, Va. 22313; (703) 548-8794.


CONNECTICUT GUIDE
ABBA EBAN ON DIPLOMACY
Abba Eban, the former Israeli Ambassador to the United States and delegate to the United Nations, will give the second of his series of four lectures on Monday from 4 to 6 P.M. in the auditorium of the Whitney Humanities Center at 53 Wall Street on the Yale campus in New Haven.
The lectures, which have the umbrella title of "Diplomacy After the Cold War," are free to the public.
"The Illusion of a New International Order" will be the subject on Monday, followed on Feb. 7 by "Analogy in Diplomatic Practice" and on Feb. 14 by "New Visions in Conflict Resolution in the Post-Cold War Age."


David Gergen, Master of THE GAME
On Nov. 9, 1960, the day after John F. Kennedy defeated Richard M. Nixon to become the 35th President of the United States, a reporter for The Washington Daily News and a reporter for The Associated Press dropped by Nixon's house in Washington, looking for a interview with the loser.
The Vice President answered the door himself, and standing on the front stoop, the three men settled into a polite routine of questions and answers.
Suddenly, Pat Nixon appeared.
She was angry and, it was clear, not in control of her emotions.
She damned the reporters and their colleagues for favoritism toward Kennedy that she said cost her husband the election.
Nixon calmed her and led her away.
When he returned, he said nothing about his wife's outburst, and the reporters resumed their inquiry as if nothing unusual had occurred.
Neither reporter ever wrote about Mrs.
Nixon's behavior; it wasn't news.
This small, oddly dignified scene, remembered by one of the reporters, belongs to a world that has vanished utterly.
A journalist interviewing the losing candidate on the day after the 1992 election would have done so as a member of a large pack, covering a set piece of political theater -- a media event, as it is called.
The event would have been scripted down to the level of minor jokes, in an effort to insure that the candidate committed no gaffes before the cameras.
The reporters, hoping to shake things off-script, and aware of their own video presence, would have shouted self-consciously aggressive questions.
Had the defeated candidate's wife interrupted to scold the press, this would have been regarded by his handlers as a calamity (unless they had secretly arranged it) and by the reporters as the news of the day.


Good Eating; Ethnic Pleasures, Elmhurst to Astoria
ELIAS CORNER (Diner's Journal)  (718) 932-1510; 31st Street and 24th Avenue, Astoria; $; no credit cards accepted
This popular, tiny neighborhood spot serves some of the freshest seafood in New York City.
There is a glass fish counter at the entrance and a tiny square kitchen behind it.
The small dining room with a cooler for beer and wine, a plastic shark mounted on the wall, and the pale fluorescent lighting is convivial.
There are no menus.
Regulars walk over to the counter and pick their seafood.


Like Snowflakes, Holidays Issues Differ
OVER the last 11 days, the United States Postal Service has issued its usual collection of Christmas stamps: four secular designs and one Madonna and Child.
But the secular stamps, in particular the one showing a snowman with a carrot nose, come in enough different designs to keep sharp-eyed noncollectors grazing through their mail to identify each one.
The four secular stamps, called Christmas Contemporary, are Snowman, Toy Soldier, Jack-in-the-Box and Reindeer.
The stamps are sold in two formats, the usual perforated lick-'em-stick-'em strips and panes, and the peelable self-adhesives, which come mounted on small cards.


Don't Call The Oilers Insensitive Bosses
"Oh, baby!"
That has probably been the most popular cry over the last week regarding the David Williams situation.
As most sports fans and nonfans alike are aware, David is the Houston Oiler player who did not play in our Oct. 17 game against the New England Patriots in Foxboro, Mass., on the day after the birth of his son.
The incident has generated a lot of controversy, much of which could have minimized if the facts had been accurately reported from the outset.


Dining Facing Grand Central
To the Editor:
Very simply stated, a restaurant facing Grand Central Terminal  [ "Al Fresco Dining Facing Grand Central?," Aug. 22 ]  is the wrong use of this rare zone in a busy commercial and trasportation hub of the city.
Rather, the area cries out for a decent enclosed airport bus terminal and waiting room.
This could be worked into the existing space under consideration, without closing off lanes of traffic on Park Avenue, and without a costly renovation.


F.Y.I.
As a classroom assignment, seniors at Saint Agnes Boys High School on the Upper West Side of Manhattan sent in their questions about New York City.
Here are several.
Why Police Wear Blue
Q.
What is the history behind the color blue for uniforms for the New York City Police Department?
Why was it chosen?
A.
The department's official colors are blue, white and green.
Blue was chosen as the uniform color largely for practical purposes, said Officer Dominick Palermo, assistant curator of the Police Museum at the Police Academy in Manhattan.
"Sometimes you have to change a flat tire," he explained.
"It is much easier to get grease off of blue than white. Also, the color blue has meanings, such as courage and strength."
The uniform, modeled after that of the British police, was adopted in 1853.
New York officers resisted it at first, opting instead for street clothes and an eight-point star that identified them as police officers, because they thought the uniforms looked too British (not such a popular group in New York at that time).
On the Beam
Q.
What is the purpose of the big point at the top of the Empire State Building?
A.
The top part of the "point" is an antenna used by 13 major FM radio stations as well as Channel 41, a Spanish-language television station.
The tippy-top of this antenna transmits the Home Shopping Network's signal.
Map Help
Q.
Why is it that even though 12th Avenue and the Henry Hudson Parkway connect, they still remain separate streets on maps of the city?
A.
Lisa Daglian, spokeswoman for the City Department of Transportation, says the Henry Hudson Parkway is also known by three other names south of 57th Street: West Street, West Side Highway and 12th Avenue.
The map you have may be trying to let you know that and telling you to look for signs accordingly.
A Lot of Tokens
Q.
How much does it cost to run the New York City subway system?
A.
Some $2 billion a year, with half from fares and half from government subsidies, which the Transit Authority began receiving in 1964.
Cabby Specifications
Q.
What type of training do New York cabdrivers need and what type of license are they required to have?
A.
All New York City taxi drivers -- there are now 40,000 -- must be at least 19 years old and "proficient" in English, hold a valid driver's license from any state, have a good driving record and be felony free.
They must get a license from the Taxi and Limousine Commission ($62) and go to taxi school for 20, 40 or 80 hours, depending on their language skills and knowledge of city geography.
No More Duck Intrigue
Q.
I am reading "The Catcher in the Rye," which poses the intriguing question that no one really answers -- where do the ducks in Central Park go during the winter, or does someone take care of them there?
A.
About 15 types of waterfowl pass through Central Park during the year.
Most migrate south, but many Canada geese and mallards stay all year, fending for themselves or relying on the kindness of strangers.
Ebbets Neighborhood
Q.
What section of Brooklyn was Ebbets Field located in?
A.
Ebbets Field was built in 1913 in the Flatbush section of Brooklyn, so desolate at the time that the area was also known as Pigtown, Goatville, Tin Can Alley and Crow Hill.
Ebbets Field's first game, an exhibition match between the Dodgers and the Yankees, was that same year.
Man on a Horse
Q.
On 59th Street by Central Park is a statue of a golden man on a horse.
Who is he and what is he pointing at?
A.
The statue is of Gen.
William Tecumseh Sherman with Victory, dedicated on May 30, 1903.
In fact, he isn't pointing, Victory is.
But the way it was designed by the sculptor, Augustus Saint-Gaudens, their motions are meant to look as one, according to "Manhattan's Outdoor Sculpture" by Gayle Cohen (Prentice Hall, 1988).
The statue had lost its golden sheen over the years, but around 1990 the Victorian Society in America spiffed it up.
As for whom or what Victory is pointing at, Abbey Lavine, a reference assistant at the New-York Historical Society, said, "Well, at whatever Victory would be pointing at." JENNIFER STEINHAUER


Hitler's Handmaiden
To the Editor:
John Simon, in his review of "Leni Riefenstahl: A Memoir" (Sept. 26), wonders how one assesses the veracity of any memoir.
First, deal at arm's length with a memoir that quotes verbatim the words of Hitler, Goebbels, Ferruccio Busoni, you name it, all at a distance of at least 50 years.
Then let some common-sense tests be made as to the accuracy of names and dates.
Mr.
Simon mentions Miss Riefenstahl's claim that Busoni composed a piece for her.
But Helmut Wirth makes no mention of this piece in his list of Busoni's compositions.
Leni Riefenstahl was but 5 or 6 when Busoni was giving concerts she claims to have attended.
Where is the piece, and where is the evidence of his friendship?


Medellin Wins Battles in Campaign for Peace
After a decade of violence and drug-related terrorism, Medellin is trying to find peace.
Under the leadership of Msgr.
Fabio Henao, the city's archdiocese has organized demonstrations and meetings in which diverse groups of people tackle the city's problems in confrontations with one another.


Ambulance Service: A User's Guide
YOU are sailing around the loop in Central Park on your new Rollerblades when suddenly your skate catches in a pothole -- or was it some horse droppings -- and you are catapulted through the air. @$#%&amp;$ X&amp;!
The world goes black.
The next thing you know, you open your eyes to find yourself flat on your back, with two people in green uniforms sliding you into a dark, gadget-filled van.
You try to sit up but discover that an array of thick orange belts have you pinned to a wooden board.
You open your mouth to yell but find that your neck is bound in some stiff plastic contraption that is cradling your chin and a clear plastic mask covers your mouth.


Senators Battle Over Foreign Broadcast Cuts
A plan to consolidate United States international broadcasting operations, touted by the Clinton Administration as a step toward streamlining the Government, seems to be coming apart.
The main element of the package presented last June by President Clinton envisioned combining the Voice of America with Radio Free Europe and Radio Liberty, the stations based in Munich that broadcast to the Soviet Union and its European satellites starting in the early 1950's.


Kyle A. Belford, Matthew Platnico
Kyle Alexandra Belford, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Lloyd E. Belford of Fall River, Mass., was married last evening to Matthew Eric Platnico, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Milton Platnico of St.
Louis.
Rabbi Peter Rubinstein officiated at the Waldorf-Astoria in New York.
Mrs.
Platnico, an interior designer in New York, graduated from Adelphi University and the Parsons School of Design.
Her father is a partner in Belford &amp; Belford, a law firm in Fall River.
Her mother, Justice Aileen H. Belford, is an associate justice of the New Bedford (Mass.) District Court.


Making It Work; On the Garbage Team
IT was an ungodly 2:48 on a Wednesday morning when a yellow-and-black-striped heap of a subway train puffed and jerked into the station at 59th Street and Lexington Avenue.
On the platform, a woman who seemed to have had a long evening, judging by her scowl and the wig that sat askew atop her head, began to yell.
"Move this thing faster," she ordered, clearly grasping the fact that her train would not arrive until this thing was gone.
"Get this out of here!"


UNIVERSITY PRESSES -- IN SHORT: NONFICTION
HOLOCAUST MEMOIR TO TELL AT LAST  Survival Under False Identity, 1941-45.
By Blanca Rosenberg.
University of Illinois, $19.95.


Gunman Was a Murder Convict
A Queens man who shot and wounded three police officers last Wednesday before being shot to death had served 15 years in prison after killing his wife and two children, the police said.
The criminal record of Raul Figueroa, who was 63 years old, was discovered by matching his fingerprints with those recorded under a system abandoned in the 1970's, said Sgt.
Anthony Barlanti, a police spokesman.


Upstart Airline Staying on Course
IT is half past noon on a busy Monday at Newark International Airport.
From his office across the road from the runway, Robert Iverson surveys the jets lining up for takeoff and consults his watch.
It is almost departure time for Flight 9 to Orlando, Fla., on Kiwi International Airlines, the upstart airline he founded.
What Mr.
Iverson, Kiwi's chairman, sees from his window, though, is a sobering view of his competition.
In the last year, he has witnessed other newcomers open for business across the way, only to close down shortly thereafter.
And the dozens of Continental Airlines jets parked on the tarmac at Newark are more evidence of the odds against Kiwi.


Right On With the Fund Tables
To the Editor:
Let me add to the cheers for the new information provided on mutual funds in recent weeks.
The naysayers seem to be more energetic than we who appreciate what you have done, but, like another letter writer, I anticipate the saving of newsletter costs, thanks to the new Times format -- particularly since the net asset values are back in.
DANA STEVENSON  Jamesburg, N.J., Oct. 18


Neighborhood Report: Central Park; A Rebirth For Upper Park
It was like an outing at a romantic 19th-century English lakeside home: on a recent weekend afternoon, visitors sunned themselves on the terrace while taking in a concert by the Harbor Jazz Ensemble.
Others sat on newly installed benches overlooking the lake.
Nearby, toddlers clambered around the swings and slides in the playground, opened last year.
Long neglected, the northern end of Central Park is enjoying something of a renaissance since the opening this month of the Charles A. Dana Discovery Center, gateway to the Harlem Meer and the wild North Woods.


Neighborhood Report; Flushing Airport, an Airport No More


Penn Wins Big at Yale To Set Up Title Game
Penn trounced Yale today, 48-7, in the cold and rain at the Yale Bowl for the undefeated Quakers' seventh straight victory this season.
It was the most decisive Yale loss to an Ivy opponent since the league began competition 37 years ago.
Coupled with Princeton's victory over Columbia, Penn's defeat of Yale set the stage for a clash of the undefeated Tigers and Quakers next Saturday at Franklin Field in Philadelphia with the Ivy League championship the likely prize.


Alfie, Oh Alfie, What Can We Do With Ye?
To the Editor:
Alfie Kohn may be right when he says that incentives are manipulative and in the long run ineffective, but there is a danger of throwing the baby out with the bath water.


Jolie H. Fries, Richard E. Singer
Jolie Hana Fries, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Stuart Fries of Brooklyn, was married last evening to Richard Evan Singer, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Ronald Singer of River Vale, N.J.
Rabbi Leonard Goldstein performed the ceremony at the Sephardic Temple in Cedarhurst, L.I.
Mrs.
Singer, 29 is a senior planning associate for the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center.
She graduated from Cornell University and received a master's degree in public health from Yale University.
Her father is an owner of Nussbaum-Brunell Associates, an insurance firm in Valley Stream, L.I.
Her mother, Eleanor Fries, is the director of education of the New York Aquarium in Brooklyn.


Corrections
A chart on Oct. 17, with the What's Doing column about Toronto, misstated average temperatures for October.
The average high is 56 degrees, the average low is 40 and rainfall averages 11 days; the figures given were for September.


Agencies Respond to Call for Social Services on East End
TWO years ago the United Way on Long Island, which operates a telephone referral service to more than 150 social-service agencies, added a number with an East End exchange.
The number, 727-0889, rings at the Deer Park office of the charity group, with callers paying just for local calls.
The new number illustrates a growing demand on the East End for health and social services.
In two years service offices have markedly increased, particularly by agencies delivering services that had been unavailable or difficult to obtain.


Not at the Opera


Alison L. Rosen, David L. Vogel
Alison Leigh Rosen, the daughter of Deborah and Lester Rosen of Winnetka, Ill., was married last evening to David Leigh Vogel, the son of Harriet and Herbert Vogel of Morristown, N.J.
Rabbi Herbert Bronstein officiated at the North Shore Congregation Israel in Glencoe, Ill.
Mrs.
Rosen-Vogel, 28, and her husband, 29, graduated from Hobart and William Smith Colleges.
She received a master's degree in developmental psychology from Columbia University and is a doctoral candidate in clinical psychology at the New School for Social Research.


On Pushing (Not Cranking) the Mower
MANY gardening trends have been displacing the traditional ways, but plant tenders have probably been so busy they haven't noticed.
Now that the season is slowing down to a saner pace, there is time for reflection.
The suburbs are becoming quieter.
There is less of that deafening noise from the power mowers and more of that gentle hum from the old-fashioned push 'em yourself reel mowers.
The older models are coming back!


UNWINDING THE CALIFORNIA WAY
MAKING a reservation for a weekend at Two Bunch Palms provided the first clue about the desert spa, so popular with the Hollywood crowd.
"Is there a dress code in the evening?" I asked.


Bafflement at Yonkers Official's Death
Whether they sided with him or not, what struck most people about Nicholas C. Wasicsko was a pit bull's tenacity in the face of ferocious opposition, particularly the hostility he faced as a young Mayor from much of this rough-and-tumble city over his decision to comply with a housing desegregation order.
"He was a Mayor in the eye of a national hurricane," said Neil J. DeLuca, a former city manager who is now deputy county executive of Westchester County.


Neighborhood Reports: Upper West Side; Yes, Broadway Malls Can Blossom Too
The unhappy state of Broadway's median strips may be most obvious to the people living above them.
"When you walk by the malls, you see one piece of garbage," said Eugene Hide, the president of the Broadway Mall Association.
"When you live on the 10th floor and look down, you see a hundred pieces."
But this year, merchants, co-op boards and condominium owners on Broadway and West End Avenue contributed to clean up the malls in a pilot area from 86th to 96th Streets.


To Some It's Only Firewood, but to an Artist It Is Sculpture
IT was a raw autumn afternoon at the city-owned Wildcliff Center for the Arts here, but the artist Alexander Rutsch exuded energy and warmth.
This was his 12th day of feverish work in the front yard of the 138-year-old house on Long Island Sound, where a humble pile of firewood had kindled mythological visions.
"I walk in and I see wood, wood, wood!" said the Austrian-born Mr.
Rutsch, explaining how his impromptu sculpture garden had emerged from logs and branches after his visit to a recent exhibition of his paintings here.


Corrections
A headline on the Wall Street page last Sunday about a class action suit against Prudential Securities misstated the company's potential liability.
The total of the Prudential Utility Fund's assets is $5.3 billion; there was no estimate of liability in the lawsuit, which contends that some investors were charged excessive fees.


Oct. 24-30: Cowboy Politics; A Senate Showdown Over Grazing Fees
Edward Abbey once called cattle ranching on public land "the most sacred form of welfare in the United States." His contention seemed to be borne out last week by Western Senators in a last stand against a plan to raise grazing fees on Federal land to a level still barely one-third of the rate charged by private landowners.
About 28,000 people and corporations hold permits to graze livestock in the West.
With enough reliable allies in the Senate, they have been able to block fee-raising attempts by at least three administrations over the last decade.


Bookshelf
DRAGON'S HALLOWEEN.
Written and illustrated by Dav Pilkey.
Orchard. $12.95. (Ages 6 to 8) In his fifth delightful appearance, the jolly blue dragon celebrates pumpkins, parties and other elements of the season in short, short stories with ebullient illustrations.
RAGGED SHADOWS: Poems of Halloween Night.
Selected by Lee Bennett Hopkins.
Illustrated by Giles Laroche.
Little, Brown. $15.95. (Ages 4 to 7) Cut-paper collages illustrate a selection of short, happily benign seasonal poems ending with one set after midnight, when it's turned November.


Alternatives to Calling 911 for Help
In addition to ambulances operated by the Emergency Medical Service and by private hospitals, there are volunteer ambulance corps that serve many communities throughout the city.
Here is a look at them and the services they provide.
THE BRONX  KINGSDALE VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 543-2222.
Serves the northwest Bronx.
Operates Monday through Friday, 7 P.M. to midnight; Saturday and Sunday, 9 A.M. to midnight.
Emergency cardiac care.
RIVERBAY COMMUNITY VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 671-4220.
Serves Co-Op City and outskirts.
Operates Monday through Thursday, 8 P.M. to 6 A.M., and continuously from 8 P.M.
Friday to 6 A.M.
Monday.
Emergency cardiac care.
THROGS NECK VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 430-9500.
Serves Throgs Neck, Pelham Bay, Silver Beach, Edgewater, Country Club.
Operates Monday through Thursday, 6 P.M. to midnight, and from 6 P.M.
Friday to midnight Sunday.
Emergency cardiac care.
BROOKLYN  BEDFORD-STUYVESANT VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 919-1919.
Serves Bedford-Stuyvesant.
Operates Tuesday through Thursday, 8 A.M. to midnight, and continuously from 8 A.M.
Friday to midnight Monday.
Emergency cardiac care.
BENSONHURST VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE SERVICE, (718) 256-1211.
Serves Bensonhurst.
Operates 24 hours a day, every day.
Emergency cardiac care.
BRAVO VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE SERVICE, (718) 680-1111.
Serves the Bay Ridge area, from 60th Street to 14th Avenue and to the shore.
Operates 24 hours a day, every day.
Emergency cardiac care.
GERRITTSEN BEACH FIRE VOLUNTEERS, (718) 332-3333.
Serves Gerrittsen Beach.
Operates 24 hours a day, every day.
Emergency cardiac care.
QUEENS  BAY COMMUNITY VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 352-1133.
Serves northern part of Bayside.
Operates overnights Monday through Thursday, 7:30 P.M. to 6 A.M., and from 7:30 P.M.
Friday to 6 A.M.
Monday.
Emergency cardiac care.
BROAD CHANNEL VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT AND AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 474-8888.
Serves Broad Channel.
Operates 24 hours a day, every day.
No emergency cardiac care.
FLUSHING COMMUNITY AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 353-4900.
Serves Flushing and northern section of Jamaica.
Operates 4 P.M. to midnight, every day.
Emergency cardiac care is temporarily unavailable.
GLEN OAKS VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 347-1637.
Serves eastern Queens.
Operates weekends 24 hours; weekdays, 8 A.M. to noon and 6 P.M. to midnight.
Emergency cardiac care.
GLENDALE VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 386-9898.
Serves Glendale.
Operates Monday through Friday, 7 P.M. to midnight, and variable hours on Saturday and Sunday.
Emergency cardiac care.
JACKSON HEIGHTS-ELMHURST VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 335-3222.
Serves Jackson Heights and Elmhurst.
Strives to operate 24 hours a day, every day, as staffing permits.
No emergency cardiac care.
JAMAICA ESTATES, HOLLISWOOD, SOUTH BAYSIDE VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 464-0300.
Serves Hollis Hills, Holliswood, and northern Queens Village, the southwestern section of South Bayside and eastern Jamaica Estates.
Operates Monday through Friday, 6 P.M. to midnight, and Saturday, 8 A.M. to 4 P.M.
Emergency cardiac care.
LINDENWOOD COMMUNITY VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 738-3029.
Serves Lindenwood, Ozone Park and South Ozone Park.
Operates Monday through Friday, 6 P.M. to 1 A.M., and variable hours on weekends.
Emergency cardiac care.
LITTLE NECK-DOUGLASTON COMMUNITY AMBULANCE, (718) 229-0400.
Serves Little Neck and Douglaston.
Operates overnights Monday through Thursday, 7 P.M. to 7 A.M., and from 7 P.M.
Friday to 7 A.M.
Monday.
Emergency cardiac care.
MIDDLE VILLAGE VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 894-6000.
Serves Middle Village, southern parts of Elmhurst and eastern sections of Maspeth.
Operates every day, 7 P.M. to midnight, and sometimes longer on weekends.
No emergency cardiac care.
QUEENS VILLAGE-HOLLIS-BELLEROSE VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 464-2424.
Serves Queens Village, northern half of Hollis and eastern half of Bellrose.
Operates Monday through Friday, 6 P.M. to midnight, and Saturday and Sunday, noon to 6 P.M.
Emergency cardiac care.
RIDGEWOOD VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 386-7229.
Serves Ridgewood and Wyckoff Heights and the western sections of Maspeth.
Operates every day, 6 P.M. to midnight, and sometimes from midnight to 6 A.M.
No emergency cardiac care.
ROCKAWAY POINT VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT AND AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 634-2727.
Serves Breezy Point.
Operates 24 hours a day, every day.
No emergency cardiac care.
ROSEDALE VOLUNTEER AMBULANCE CORPS, (718) 276-7500.
Serves Rosedale and Laurelton.
Operates 24 hours a day, every day.
Emergency cardiac care when technicians on duty are licensed.
ROXBURY VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT, (718) 634-2727.
Serves Breezy Point Cooperative.
Operates 24 hours a day, every day.
Emergency cardiac care.
WEST HAMILTON BEACH VOLUNTEER FIRE DEPARTMENT, (718) 843-1716.
Serves Howard Beach, Hamilton Beach and Rockwood Park.
Operates 24 hours a day, every day.
No emergency cardiac care.
STATEN ISLAND  VOLUNTEER HEART AMBULANCE, (718) 979-5850.
Serves Staten Island south of the expressway.
Operates 7 P.M. to midnight seven days a week.
Emergency cardiac care.
MANHATTAN  CENTRAL PARK MEDICAL UNIT, (212) 860-8024.
Serves all of Central Park.
Operates weekends and holidays.
Emergency cardiac care.
The following are unable to provide care because volunteers or financing are lacking: Astoria -- (718) 726-7000 Forest Hills -- (718) 793-7747 Flatlands Area Ambulance Squad -- (718) 338-0434 Peninsula -- (718) 474-7474 Rego Park -- (718) 459-5433 Woodside -- (718) 478-2050


Look Who's Saving Elm
Without question, the dinkiest plant in my garden these last few seasons has been the American elm tree my father-in-law gave me three years ago.
I realize that "dinky" is not a word often attached to elm trees -- "graceful" or "venerable" or even, in recent years, "dead" are a lot more like it.
But there is no getting around the fact that the leafless, 14-inch chopstick that arrived in the mail from the Elm Research Institute in Harrisville, N.H., was a poor excuse for a tree.
Swaddled in a sheet of The Manchester Union Leader, it had not even a single branch -- just a couple of bud-eyes at one end and a straggle of root hairs at the other.
I had formed a somewhat grander picture of my tree when Roy had first called to tell me it was on the way.
He'd read a magazine article about the institute's American Liberty elm, a new strain bred for resistance to Dutch elm disease, the fungus that has brought down so many of America's elms over the past 60 years, and he thought I might like one.
In the days before its arrival, I deliberated where in my yard an elm tree should go, and imagined its trunk climbing swiftly beside my driveway and then, as is the habit of American elms, opening all at once its tall, leafy canopy.


Innovative Designs That Reflect Nature
MINUSCULE versions of dinosaurs and endangered animals are set in silver alongside the highly polished stones of Jan Palombo's pendants and pins.
In a crafts display at the Bergen Museum of Art and Science, they become a metaphor for the museum itself, which contains a huge cage of twittering birds next to the gallery and mastodon bones, discovered years ago on the original site of the museum, piled up behind glass nearby.
The director of the Paramus museum, David James Messer, says an important part of his mission is to show the relationship of art to science.
"Crafts are close to the earth and to nature," he said.


Pop's Patriarch Makes Music Along With His Heirs
The most remarkable moment in "Frank Sinatra Duets," the new album that returns the 77-year-old singer to the mainstream of popular music with a startling force and authority, is a rendition of "I've Got You Under My Skin" in which the Chairman of the Board is joined by Bono of U2.
After Mr.
Sinatra punches out the opening phrases of Cole Porter's standard, Bono slips into the song, crooning the words, "so deep in my heart, you're really a part of me," in a soft, sexy growl.
From here, the two singers, who sound as though they are sitting elbow to elbow in a bar comparing notes about love and life, trade the song back and forth, with the 33-year-old Irish rock star occasionally drawing back to interpolate high, plaintive vocal doodles around his companion's gruff assertions.


Man, 52, Found Dead
A 52-year-old Queens man who was discovered dead in his apartment yesterday, apparently of a drug overdose, had constructed as many as 10 rudimentary bombs by placing gunpowder in jars and attaching paper fuses, the police said.
A bomb squad unit responded to 63-61 99th Street in Forest Hills, Queens, after the man, whose name was not released, was discovered by police officers from the 112th Precinct.
The police were called by a woman who lived nearby and had noticed a foul odor.
The police found three revolvers, a rifle and a shotgun in the apartment, said Officer Merri Pearsall, a police spokeswoman.
She said the revolvers and the rifle appeared to be antiques that might require black powder to fire.


Neighborhood Report: Washington Heights; Editor's Apologies Quell Fury Over Article
An article about Hispanic culture, children and sex abuse that appeared in the first issue of a new neighborhood newspaper in Washington Heights hit a raw nerve with so many readers that the editor dedicated much of the second issue to apologizing for the furor.
The article, by Antonio Mendez, titled "Hispanic Culture Translated: More Than Just Language," appeared in Manhattan Heights Forum, a monthly newspaper started last month by Joyce M. Perry, a writer and teacher who lives in Washington Heights.
Ms.
Perry said she started the paper to give the community a sounding board for serious issues, including one that is close to her own heart: the plight of children in the city.


An Emergency Unit With Children in Mind
MARQUIS JONES'S mouth drooped as he lay on an examining table in the emergency room of the children's unit of Yale-New Haven Hospital.
"Show me where it hurts," the doctor said to the 7-year-old as her hands gently probed his belly.


Alene Hokenstad, Bruce L. Kluger
Alene Anne Hokenstad, the deputy assistant director for health and human services in the office of Mayor David N. Dinkins in New York, was married yesterday in Cleveland to Bruce Lawrence Kluger, a senior associate editor at Playboy magazine in New York.
The Rev.
David O'Malley, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the ceremony at the Amasa Stone Chapel on the campus of Case Western Reserve University.
Ms.
Hokenstad, 29, is keeping her name.
She is a daughter of Dorothy and Dr.
Merl Hokenstad of Shaker Heights, Ohio.
The bride graduated from Kalamazoo College and received a master's degree in social administration from Case Western Reserve.


Hitler's Handmaiden
To the Editor:
Perhaps an interview I had with Leni Riefenstahl shortly after the war may shed some light on her views.


Mahalo Air Joins Hawaiian Carriers
This month Mahalo Air became the third carrier to fly among the Hawaiian islands of Oahu, Kauai and Maui, joining Aloha and Hawaiian Airlines.
Mahalo's schedule includes seven daily round trips from Oahu to Lihue, Kauai, and four daily round trips from Oahu to Kahului, Maui.
Mahalo, which means "thank you" in Hawaiian, plans to start flying to Kona on the Big Island, but no date has been set.
Mahalo's $10 fares set off a fare war among the interisland carriers.
Next month, Mahalo said, it will raise its fares to $42 one way.


What's Good For the French . . .
To the Editor:
To this viewer, who found "Farewell My Concubine" absolutely fascinating, the most startling revelation of Patrick E. Tyler's article "Who Makes the Rules in Chinese Movies?"  [ Oct. 17 ]  is that what we see in the United States is also a censored version.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 10 about bagel shops around New York misstated the address of Atlantic Bagels in Brooklyn.
It is at 177 Atlantic Avenue, at Clinton Street.


Dull Campaign Turns Favorite Into an Underdog
There was a time, back in May, when Mary Sue Terry had what seemed an insurmountable 30-point lead over George F. Allen in the Virginia governor's race.
But going into the final weekend of campaigning before Tuesday's election, the insurmountable had been surmounted and the polls showed Ms.
Terry, a moderate Democrat, trailing Mr.
Allen, a conservative Republican, by 7 to 19 points.


One Dive Into a Pool Marks a Major Passage in Many Lives
The tears were nothing like the ones that flowed through that emotionally searing weekend and returned from time to time in the year and nine months to follow.
These were more like a wedding's tears, detectable by their absence of anger or fear.
They are reserved for moments such as the one late Friday morning when Haley Scott completed her long, improbable climb up to a starting block while the swimmers from Notre Dame and its opponents stood and cheered.
The public-address announcer at the Rolfs Aquatic Center asked the crowd to refrain from taking flash pictures at the start of heat 2 of the women's 50-yard freestyle.
The preservation of these images would not require flashes, or film, or cameras.


Neighborhood Report: Central Park; Park Program Puts Homeless to Work
Bearing the tools of his trade -- a metal reacher and plastic bags -- Bill Durham set out at 7:30 A.M. the other day on his usual route, along the western rim of Central Park from 85th to 100th Streets.
He knew what he would find: newspapers, Popsicle sticks and drinking straws all over; cigarette butts around the bus stops, and lots of crack vials.
By 9:30 he had picked up and bagged every scrap in his sector.
After half an hour for breakfast at the Yorkville Common Pantry, a nonprofit agency, he was back in the park, ready to rake leaves.


Early Release of the Budget Draws Fire
FOR years, County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke has resisted entreaties from some Democrats on the Board of Legislators to release the new county budget before the November election rather than after.
They argued that it was right for the people to know what they faced before casting their ballots rather than being surprised later.
Mr.
O'Rourke disagreed, saying that a pre-election release would politicize the budget.


The Silver Fox
ALEX The Life of Alexander Liberman.
By Dodie Kazanjian and Calvin Tomkins.
Illustrated. 385 pp.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf.


Neighborhood Reports: Flushing; After Layoffs, Bakery Workers Nurture a Plan To Rise Again
Some have taken jobs as waiters, parking attendants and movers; others have simply moved out of town.
But many of the 400 workers who lost their jobs when Stroehmann closed its Taystee Bread bakery in Flushing are still struggling to open a bakery of their own.
Their plan was born when the plant closed in July 1992, and in recent months, the workers have raised about $80,000, bringing their total to nearly $200,000, hired a project manager, and secured pledges from hundreds of people to buy their product once the business gets off the ground.
And they are busily hunting for sites.


Attack on U.S. Lugers Has Racial Overtones
Duncan Kennedy, a two-time Olympic luger from Lake Placid, N.Y., was beaten by skinheads Friday night while trying to protect a black teammate, Robert Pipkins, from what appeared to be a racial attack in eastern Germany.
Kennedy, 25 years old, was kicked and punched in the head, face and body, and may have suffered a broken nose, he said last night by telephone from Igls, Austria, where the United States team drove after leaving Germany.


The View From: Waterford; A Stalled Repair Plan Takes Its Toll at Harkness Park
THE golden autumn sun shone on the broad lawns, Italianate mansion and historic gardens of Harkness Memorial State Park in Waterford.
Just beyond the grounds, Long Island Sound sparkled.
But Diana McMasters took little note of sun and sparkle.
She eyed the mansion's cracked masonry and rotting sills.
She pushed aside dense overgrowth in one garden and pointed out a boarded-over pond in another.
"This is something that the state is supposed to take care of," said Mrs.
McMasters, a teacher from Waterford who heads a group of park supporters.
"This is a treasure that belongs to the people of Connecticut."


THE 1993 CAMPAIGN: New Jersey; X Marks the Spot the Candidates Will Watch on Election Day
There is a political map of New Jersey that some politicians carry around in their minds.
It shows the state's political landscape as an enormous, misshapen X.
In this map, the line that starts at top right and drops to the bottom left is the New Jersey Turnpike, connecting the state's big cities -- Newark, Elizabeth, Trenton, Camden -- as it runs through the Democratic Party's old urban power base.


Health Plan: Out of the Gate
The Clinton health care plan, at a hefty 1,342 pages and 5 1/2 pounds, thumped into congressional in-baskets on Wednesday.
This version differed from the one leaked last month, with revisions designed to increase the odds of the bill's passage.
Among them: abortion coverage with a "conscience clause" that would exuse people with objections from having to perform the procedure; subsidies for small businesses with with as many as 75 workers, up from 50; the right to choose a doctor, even one outside the patient's plan.


Nuclear Era Is Departing By Same Door It Entered
Nuclear disarmament begins at a conference table in Moscow, Geneva or Washington.
But it is carried out in places like a circular concrete cell buried in the dusty soil of the Texas Panhandle, where spheres of high explosives are pried from their cores of plutonium, rendering a bomb of almost unimaginable power into a collection of merely hazardous ingredients.
Dismantling nuclear warheads may be infinitely better than detonating them, but the job is tricky.
In addition to being radioactive, plutonium is highly toxic and can burn on contact with air, and most of the explosives are old and prone to detonate with heat or shock.


New York Standard Time; Here Today, Gone Unaccountably
This is the weekend for turning clocks back one hour, a reversal that gets farmers and cows back in sync but is no big deal in New York, where time enjoys a weird life of its own regardless.
While some things here go on forever - the Mets season, to take a ridiculously easy case - a more disturbing trick of New York Time is that it can make things vanish or materialize between midnight and 8 A.M.
Many chicken take-out places have become tanning salons in just this way.


SURFACING


Amid Strife, Haiti Parliament Struggles With Itself
Senator Julio Larosiliere the most senior member of the Haitian legislature, says the return of democratic rule in the country rests in the hands of its exiled President's allies in Parliament.
Like many others in the parliamentary bloc that for two years has resisted attempts to restore the elected President, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, Mr.
Larosiliere said Father Aristide's legislative supporters lacked the courage of their convictions.


Traces of Goodness


AN EARLY SPRING
There are always those who love to accuse Seventh Avenue's talents of playing catch-up.
That's because New York is the last of the major fashion capitals to introduce new styles for the next season.
And invariably, many of the same trends that already surfaced in Paris and Milan show up here.
But the truth in that New York's designers have been plugging away for months.
This week the spring '94 shows begin.
And here's a preview of some of what will be seen.
BY CARRIE DONOVAN


THE 1993 CAMPAIGN: The Ad Campaign; Dinkin's Ghostly Image of Giuliani
ON THE SCREEN
The 30-second commercial opens with a faded and grainy black-and-white photograph of Rudolph W. Giuliani.
Electronic music in a menacingly minor key plays in the background.
As a narrator attacks Giuliani proposals, photographs of headlines or blocks of text from newspaper articles flash across the screen: a New York Post headline, "Rudy's RX: Sell Off City Hosps" and two quotations from an editorial in The New York Times, "90 days and out," and "A civic Reaganism." When the narrator says Mr.
Giuliani's plan to cut the city work force would reduce services to the elderly, the camera pans across the faces of three gray-haired people.
THE SCRIPT


North American Veggies
For vegetarian travelers who find that road food means burgers and barbecue, "Vegetarian Journal's Guide to Natural Food Restaurants in the United States and Canada" lists some 1,700 restaurants serving everything from falafel to tofu Cantonese.
Many are vegetarian, others serve meat and meatless dishes.
Cost: $13, including postage.
The Vegetarian Resource Group at Box 1463, Baltimore, Md. 21203; (410) 366-8343.


Longer Store Hours? Germans Are Aghast
With more than three million Germans out of work and the economy dragging along in the worst recession in 40 years, a proposal to allow stores to stay open longer has renewed a debate that has been going on for at least 20 years.
Instead of welcoming the plan, the labor union that represents 420,000 of the country's 2.8 million retail trade employees vowed to fight it because its workers would not accept longer working hours.
The proposal, made by the Christian Democratic Party of Chancellor Helmut Kohl, would change regulations that require nearly all stores to close promptly at 6:30 P.M. most weekdays, 2 P.M. most Saturdays and all day on Sundays.


The Streets Become a Classroom; A School Weaves Ideas From Outward Bound Into Lessons
In a vacant classroom in Chelsea, after the rumble of schoolchildren had faded, five teachers collapsed into chairs and pondered aloud after another grueling day the big question that they all faced: how do you invent a place called school?
Six weeks into the academic year, the experimental School for the Physical City is open for 131 students in borrowed space, a fledging effort to transform the way that children are taught by using the expeditionary learning principles of Outward Bound.
At least once a week the Brooklyn Bridge, Central Park, Ellis Island -- the city itself -- becomes the classroom.
Subjects like mathematics, science and history are brought to life and woven into academic lessons.


A Stroll Up the Ramp With Roy Lichtenstein
Painters are legendarily fuzzy when talking about their work.
Not Roy Lichtenstein.
So Diane Waldman, curator of the Lichtenstein retrospective at the Guggenheim Museum and a longtime Lichtenstein friend and admirer, persuaded him to help her conduct the Acoustiguide tape-recorded tour of the exhibition.


Son of Madison County
SLOW WALTZ IN CEDAR BEND By Robert James Waller. 197 pp. New York: Warner Books.


Neighborhood Report: Bay Ridge; Massacre, Part 2: Replanting
They called it the Bay Ridge Chain-Saw Massacre: the destruction of 400 cherrywood, apple and pear trees six weeks ago in a beautification plan gone haywire.
Now, the Transit Authority is about to begin planting 35 new trees in what residents call a first step toward recovery.
The project, which was presented to Community Board 10 and about 15 residents on Tuesday, calls for the plantings, which will cost $15,000, to begin early next month, before the first frost, said Mary Sempepos, the board's district manager.


When Collectors and Friends Help Mount a Major Exhibition
FLORENCE had the Medicis.
Paris had Gertrude Stein, and Baltimore had the Cone Sisters as collectors and patrons of the arts.
Now a group of collectors in Nassau County has gone beyond the usual role of patrons.
In a rare collaboration between amateurs and professionals, some North Shore residents have taken a hands-on approach to the arts.
The collectors, working with the director of the Nassau County Museum of Art, Constance Schwartz, have mounted a museum exhibition including "top-notch names and top-notch art," Ms.
Schwartz said.


A Surprise Winner Of a Brilliancy Prize
THE pretourney favorites, Elena Donaldson of Mercer Island, Wash., and Irina Levitina of Teaneck, N.J., shared first prize in the 34th United States Women's Championship in August at the McLean County Arts Center in Bloomington, Ill.
The two former Soviet team members scored 7-2 in the round-robin invitational competition and each was awarded a $1,500 prize.
But the winner of the $100 brilliancy prize, 17-year-old Anna Khan, was a surprise, since seven players were ranked ahead of her at the start.
Khan, who emigrated from Latvia to Brooklyn two years ago, also won $450 for her third-place tie.


Lyme Disease And Lesson of AIDS
Re: "Controversy Flares Over Lyme Disease," Oct. 3:
The first case of what is now known as AIDS was reported in 1981.
Since that time, the AIDS surveillance case definition has been changed several times, and expanded to include more recently recognized entities.
Again, in late 1992 it was revised to delineate stages affecting management.
The end result of this process is a broader case definition, making treatment accessible to many more.


Choosing Sides In the Way We Shop
IN Westchester, where crowds of savvy consumers have increasingly been drawn to a growing lineup of sleek regional discount stores along the highways, some shoppers still hew to the old ways, saying they prefer the quiet, albeit dowdier, aisles of their local Woolworth store.
"Coming here is a lot like coming home," said Adele Piacquadio, a 72-year-old resident of the Bronx who was buying a lampshade at the Woolworth store in Eastchester recently.
"Maybe it's force of habit, but I grew up with Woolworth, and I like growing old with it."


Voters Guide; At Issue on the Ballot: How the City Works
NEW YORK would still be the nation's largest city and no one elected on Tuesday would automatically lose his job until 2002, but two ballot proposals could change the profile of New York City and the face of its government.
Both proposals would fundamentally challenge the status quo and reflect voter frustration with what many people perceive as ossified incumbents and with unresponsive bureaucrats.
But whether the proposals would improve or merely change the way the city works is debatable.


LONG ISLAND JOURNAL
Film Stars and Memories
YOU knew you were near the Hamptons Film Festival on noticing the license plate of the chauffeur-driven Mercedes-Benz.
It was RKO 1.
Where was RKO 1 heading?
To the Steven Spielberg and Martin Scorcese symposium on film preservation?
To Darryl Hannah and her directorial debut?
No.
RKO 1 turned into Doug's Vegetable Patch.
It may have been spinach and not Spielberg that brought one communications executive to the Hamptons last weekend.


Californians Relieved as Winds and Fire Subside
Hot winds that fed deadly wildfires around Southern California died overnight as unexpectedly as they had appeared, and a hunt intensified today for the arsonists who the authorities believe set at last 6 of 13 major blazes.
After four days of fire that consumed 152,000 acres and 720 structures, firefighters raced to contain the remaining blazes before the predicted return of the Santa Ana winds on Monday or Tuesday.
Arson investigators took advantage of the lull to sift through the ashes for clues and issued calls to the public to report any suspicious activities.


35 Years With Woodrow Wilson: The Journey of a Long-Distance Editor
ON March 4, 1913, Woodrow Wilson was sworn in as President of the United States.
Eighty years later to the month, Princeton University Press published the final narrative installment of "The Papers of Woodrow Wilson," a 69-volume documentary record of Wilson's life and work.
None of these elegant-looking books (each one of which costs $65) has ever appeared on a best-seller list; none is likely to turn up on the shelves of your neighborhood bookstore any time soon.
Yet some 95,000 individual volumes have been sold since 1966, when the first one appeared.
Virtually every American library owns a set, as do hundreds of other libraries around the world (there are at least two sets in Moscow.) Initially subsidized by the Woodrow Wilson Foundation, "The Papers of Woodrow Wilson" long ago began to turn a handsome profit for Princeton.
In fact, the publication of the Wilson papers is probably the biggest success story to date in the little-known branch of historical research known as documentary editing.
The publication of large-scale documentary editions like "The Papers of Woodrow Wilson," which make essential primary manuscript sources readily accessible to historians everywhere, is one of the most important jobs done by America's university presses, and one of the most unglamorous.
Documentary editing projects, like dissertations, have a way of dragging on forever; many actually outlive their original editors.


Neighborhood Report; A New Bike Path: Recreation With a River View
The Hudson River waterfront beckons the people of TriBeCa, SoHo and Greenwich Village.
But in those areas, getting there to appreciate the view poses an obstacle course that requires dodging vehicles, weaving though parking lots and tiptoeing across crumbling piers.
All that is changing under a $1.6 million project to clear a 27-foot-wide waterfront path for strollers, joggers, bikers and bench potatoes.
The path, to be completed by April 17, will run nearly two miles along the river, parallel to West Street, from Gansevoort Street south to Chambers Street.


Also Inside
MAKING IT WORK 3  Each night, Vera Kitt and six fellow travelers board an outcast train.
Their mission: to clean the subway tracks.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Amid loud music and cheap beer, a bar owner prowls his empire, where everyone knows his name.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 15  North Carolina in Gramercy Park; the Far East in Flushing Meadows.
MOVIE CLOCK 16  What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 18  Ethnic Pleasures, Elmhurst to Astoria: when you crave a good parrillada, a tasty taramosalata, or a vibrant hummus.
SOAPBOX 21  Four ordinary New Yorkers discuss the mayoral candidates, the issues and life in the city.
Plus, "Eye of the Beholder."


THE NATION: Small Cities Lead an Economic Charge; The South Renews Its Sense of Self
"IN the feeling of the South," W. J. Cash wrote a half century ago in his quirky classic "The Mind of the South," "Progress stood quite accurately for a sort of new charge at Gettysburg."
After decades of tectonic shifts in the balance of regional power in this country, the South's view of growth still seems to echo the notion that economic progress would give the Civil War's losers the last word.
Now it is worth asking whether a modern version of Pickett's charge at Gettysburg, which doomed the Confederacy, is succeeding at last.


Hold the Wine And Pass the Beer
BEER is big: there are more varieties of beer than ever on store shelves; new breweries are opening; restaurants are beginning to have beer lists, and many restaurants are designing special menus to accompany an assortment of beers.
The beer dinner is replacing the wine dinner.
And it can also happen at home.
At a restaurant beer dinner, an assortment of four or five beers are chosen, like wines, to accompany certain dishes.
Sometimes the dishes themselves are made with beer.


Trying to Salvage an Education for 'Hopeless Cause' Students
THE seventh graders in a classroom at Alberta B. Gray Schultz Middle School in Hempstead were eating lunch while working on other activities.
Several students were doing their homework with a teacher.
Another teacher was tutoring a small group of students for a test that afternoon.
In the classroom next door about a dozen 12-year-olds were learning from a third teacher about nouns and adjectives.
The youngsters in the classrooms are among the 48 seventh graders in Comet, a new program for students who educators consider most at risk to fail in school.


Oct. 24-30; Neck and Neck Till Tuesday
In the usual flurry of handshakes and handwringing, the New York City mayoral race slouched toward Election Day Tuesday, with Mayor David N. Dinkins beseeching his constituents not to let the bumps of four years in office deprive him of four more, and Rudolph W. Giuliani asking to be the first Republican to run City Hall in a generation.
New York politics is a rough sport, but this rematch of two 1989 rivals has seemed especially sour, with rancorous exchanges over racism, fascism and even the parentage of one candidate's running mate and another's supporter.
If he loses, Mr.
Dinkins will become the first black mayor of a major American city defeated in his first re-election bid.
A Giuliani defeat would leave the former Federal prosecutor's once-bright prospects much dimmed.


Judicial Choices: The Best of a Crowd
They are called judicial "elections." But the resemblance to real democracy stops there.
Of the 30 races for Supreme and Civil Court seats at stake Tuesday in New York City, only a handful are seriously contested.
Most of the meaningful choices were made months ago by political party leaders who control the complex convention and petition processes that put candidates on the ballot and strike deals for cross-party endorsements.
This system produces some distinguished judges.
But it also elevates mediocre candidates, including some of this week's likely winners.
Here are our choices in a few close contests.


Where Death Is a Dirt-Nap
SIX OUT SEVEN By Jess Mowry. 501 pp. New York: Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.


Spain's Other Continent
Archangels in the Andes in the 18th century wore knee breeches, silk stockings, doublets, brocaded coats, plumed hats, and acres of lace and ribbons; in some cases they sported snappy military rifles.
Of course, on certain religious feast days one can still find Peruvian Indians in the mountains in just such angel costumes (without the rifles), but their predecessors have been preserved in magnificent paintings, reproduced -- along with an astonishing array of art produced in oil, metals, wood and textiles for 300 years -- in CAMBIOS: The Spirit of Transformation in Spanish Colonial Art (Santa Barbara Museum of Art/University of New Mexico; cloth, $50; paper, $25).
Two curators of a show organized by the Santa Barbara Museum of Art, Gabrielle Palmer and Donna Pierce, give overviews of art in the Viceroyalty of Peru (all of South America except Brazil) and the Viceroyalty of New Spain (Central America, Mexico and parts of the United States).
But it is the descriptions of individual works that, taken together, fill one with wonder at the lavishness, vitality and great endurance of the artistic genius that flowed through the old Spanish empire, making the gold and gems Europe fought over seem tawdry in comparison.
Mexican painters like Juan Correa and Miguel Cabrera certainly knew contemporary European standards, but their work blazes with light, passion and wisdom that express their own visions of the great civilization rising around them.
And the anonymous casters and carvers of silver Peruvian incense burners in the forms of turkeys, peacocks and armadillos knew all that Cellini knew, and more.
This book is not a heavy history, but a sweet breeze of inspiration that fills one with humility and delight, and perhaps some somber reflection on the blind arrogance of people who refer to these lands now as "third world." D. J. R. BRUCKNER


'Spheres of Influence' Show Reunites Teachers and Students
IN the history of American Modernism, there are many roads leading back to the Manhattan Academy run by Robert Henri.
Stuart Davis, who studied there from 1910 to 1913 and who briefly reflected its influence before forging his own distinct style, praised the school for taking art "off the academic pedestal" and for developing "the student's confidence in his own perceptions." The painter also recalled it as a place for making friends, subject to a rite that involved the initiate buying "a large quantity of beer."
On the other hand, John Sloan regarded his mentor as "a dominant personality deservedly commanding respect and somewhat impatient of ideas that 'crossed' his own and 'never,' he said, 'felt really close to him.' " Yet, the Ashcan School painter retained much of Henri's influence; similarly, George Bellows, who said that his life "began" at the school, continued to pursue the robust form of Realism practiced and nurtured by Henri.
Then there was Man Ray, who studied with the master in Philadelphia and admired him for being "against what most people were for and for what most people were against," and in his own way followed suit.


Terror Pulls Its Chair Up to the Peace Table
YASIR ARAFAT, chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization, was quoted in the Palestinian press last week as saying that someone had tried to kill Faisal al-Husseini, the leading political figure among East Jerusalem's Arabs.
Details of where, when and how were scarce, and people around Mr.
Husseini were not very interested in discussing the matter.
But there was no reason to disbelieve Mr.
Arafat, for Mr.
Husseini is a plausible assassination target.
In the last few weeks, three allies of the P.L.O. chairman, all from his mainstream Fatah faction, have been killed by mysterious gunmen in the Gaza Strip, leaving surviving confederates to look nervously over their shoulders and to wonder if they are on someone's list of endangered species.
"Bats of darkness," Mr.
Arafat called the killers, and he talked of "a big conspiracy," dropping vague hints that Israelis were behind it.


THE 1993 CAMPAIGN: The Mayor's Race; NEW YORK CONTEST GOES DOWN TO WIRE IN HECTIC WEEKEND
In rainswept rallies and live radio interviews, the New York City mayoral candidates swung into the homestretch yesterday, with Mayor David N. Dinkins using the powers of incumbency to showcase city programs, and Rudolph W. Giuliani releasing a new television advertisement rebutting the Mayor's latest attacks by demanding, "How about something positive for a change?"
As if in answer, Mr.
Dinkins pulled a brace of 11th-hour rabbits out of his hat.
First, he announced that the city would extend health benefits to the domestic partners of its unmarried employees, including homosexuals -- an issue of great concern to gay voters whose support he wants and something he had pledged in the past.


NEWS SUMMARY
International 3-17  DREAMS VS.
Security Council condemned the Haitian military.  12  Russia links sanctions on Libya to an interest-free loan.  11  The archdiocese of Medellin is confronting drug-related violence.  14  The separatist party of Quebec plans to focus on the economy.  15  National 18-36  NUTS AND BOLTS OF DISARMAMENT  In a circular concrete cell buried in the Texas panhandle, the dangerous work of nuclear disarmament is being carried out.
Here, a first look at a long-secret world.  1  TRACING TAINTED JUICE  The clandestine production and sale of fruit juice containing sugar and preservatives is a widespread and highly profitable practice, a review of court cases shows.  1  THE TOWN THE FLOOD KILLED  After the Mississippi swallowed Valmeyer, Ill., and left it dust-caked and barren, the townspeople said they got the message.
They are moving a mile and a half inland, to higher ground.  1  FAGIN WOULD BE IMPRESSED  "Cas" and "C-Dog" were modern day high-tech Fagins, training young boys to invade banks with automatic weapons and flee.
Tomorrow they get their comeuppance.  18  SPARED BY THE DEADLY WINDS  Hot winds that fed deadly wildfires around Southern California died overnight, and a hunt intensified for arsonists.  18  WINNING SUPPORT FOR UNICEF  For 20 years the American public's support for Unicef has declined.
Across the city, polls say, about 1 in 10 of registered voters are still agonizing over which candidate to support.  1  NEW ARENA FOR NEW CLOTHES  The New York fashion industry begins its week of runway shows today in a brand new showcase, big white tents in Bryant Park.
The centralized approach, standard in Paris and Milan, has been a longtime objective of Seventh Avenue.  1  NEW CITY WORKER BENEFITS  Mayor Dinkins, who has aggressively sought the support of gay and lesbian voters, announced that the city would provide health benefits to the domestic partners of homosexual city workers.
The partners of unmarried heterosexuals will also be entitled to the benefits.  40  A LOOK AT UNDERCOVER LIFE  Conversations from conspiracy tapes offer a rare glimpse into the relationship of an undercover operative and the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Attention to details like parking tickets and car expenses alternates with torment over whether the World Trade Center bombing could have been prevented.  37  Obituaries 48  Peter C. Quennell, English author, historian and editor.


POSTINGS: With a Show of Photos from New Book; Landmarks Group Plans Forum On Preservation Pros and Cons
On April 19, 1965, Mayor Robert F. Wagner signed into law a bill creating the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission.
Pressure to form such a panel had been growing because many of the city's magnificent old buildings -- in particular the noble Roman-style Pennsylvania Station of Charles F. McKim -- had fallen victim to the wreckers' ball, making way for the modern era's often inelegant constructions of glass and steel.
In October of that year, the commission designated its first landmark, the former Astor Library on Lafayette Street.


Egypt Military Court Orders 8 Muslim Militants to Hang
An Egyptian military court today sentenced eight Muslim militants -- two of them fugitives -- to hang for reviving the outlawed group that assassinated President Anwar el-Sadat and for plotting to overthrow the Government.
The sentences raised the number of militants condemned to hang to 38 since President Hosni Mubarak began transferring cases of Islamic militants to military courts late last year.


This Week's Numbers
Last
Consensus
Period
Estimates
(I.D.E.A. INC.)
Monday
Construction spending, Sept., pct. change
-1.1
0.8
Purchasing managers' index, October
49.7
51
Tuesday
Leading indicators, Sept., percent change
1.0
0.4
New-home sales, thousands, ann. rate
616
650
Wednesday
Auto sales, late Oct., millions, annual rate
7.8
7.0
Thursday
Weekly jobless claims, thousands
347
345
Factory-goods orders, Sept., pct. change
0.9
0.8
Nonfarm productivity, 3d qtr., pct. change
-1.3
1.5
Friday
Unemployment, October, percent
6.7
6.7
Theis Week's Developments Tuesday French-German summit meeting Wednesday Federal Reserve releases beige book


Neighborhood Reports: Sheepshead Bay; Residents Cry Foul Over Air
The gentlest breeze wafting inland off the Atlantic is like a deadbolt that renders hundreds of residents in Sheepshead Bay prisoners in their own homes -- stunk in, so to speak, by odors emanating from the 100 million gallons of raw sewage processed each day at a nearby treatment plant.
"There's no delicate way to describe it: the plant constantly reeks of toilet odors," said Bernie Leitner, 63, who lives with his wife, Sondra, in the Kings Bay Cooperative Apartments.
The building where the Leitners live is directly across Avenue Y from what is officially called the Coney Island Water Pollution Control Facility, though the plant is actually in Sheepshead Bay.


SUNDAY, October 31, 1983; RED NOVEMBER
Once it was the Evil Empire.
Now it's the Magic Kingdom.
As if Russia's problems weren't depressing enough, the country's desperate cash hunger has caused it to turn its vast and impressive military enterprise into a kind of theme park -- with very expensive rides.
A new company, MIGS Etc., of Sarasota, Fla., will arrange for tourists to fly, for a price, almost any variety of Russian aircraft, from L-39 training jets to top-of-the-line MIG-29 jet fighters.
Customers need not be pilots, let alone fighter pilots; experienced Russian jet jockeys accompany them on all flights.
Prices start at $6,000 and go up to $45,000 for a program that involves a simulated dogfight.


SUNDAY, October 31, 1983; I SPY, WITH MY LITTLE EYE
The newest technical mutation for the age of paranoia is a hidden video recorder that parents can rent to sneak a view of what the baby sitter does while they are away.
It's called Babywatch; it's designed to look like a pedestal for a lamp or a vase; and it rents for $199 for three days.
For that fee, parents get five hours of tape to peruse for signs of sex, Satanism and contraband candy.
Total Recall, of Spring Valley, N.Y., which is in the business of putting together surveillance systems for businesses, produced the new gadget.
There are eight of them in existence so far, and the company is working on distribution.


Sports of The Times; Giants-Jets: Logos, Fans And a Plane
JOE the Jet fan had come home too late once too often.
His roommate, Elizabeth, was steaming.
"I've had enough!" she roared. "I'm throwing you out of this house right this minute."


Hitler's Handmaiden
To the Editor:
Leni Riefenstahl advanced the cause of Nazism through her epic films.
Here is but one example:
Her propaganda film "Triumph of the Will" was premiered in Heilbronn, Germany, with great pomp and circumstance.
There were loud and boisterous "Sieg Heils" from the audience.


HIGH SCHOOL FOOTBALL REPORT
P.S.A.L.
CITY CHAMPS: All-city runner Frankie Sinclair scored 5 touchdowns and rushed for 198 yards on 24 carries to propel LINCOLN (7-0) to its third straight Brooklyn II title as the Railsplitters pounded MADISON (5-2), 50-14.
The victory marked Lincoln's 18th consecutive regular-season victory, dating to October 1991.
Sinclair increased his touchdown total to 22, with runs of 12, 8, 7, 5 and 56 yards. . . .
Extending its winning string to a B Division-record 17 games, FORT HAMILTON (7-0) clinched its second consecutive divisional title by defeating JOHN JAY (5-1-1), 22-6.
The Tigers, the P.S.A.L.
B defending champions, broke McKee's record of 16 games set in 1989. . . .
Thomas Sieh ran for 228 yards, two touchdowns and one 2-point conversion as NEW DORP (5-2) topped CURTIS(4-4), 24-7, to capture the Staten Island title. . . .
Lance Schulters (15 carries for 143 yards, 2 touchdowns) and Eric Smith (15 carries for 111 yards, 1 touchdown) combined to help CANARSIE (7-0) clinch the Brooklyn I title as the Chiefs rocked MADISON (5-3), 36-8.
Chester Harris returned a fumble 78 yards to account for Midwood's only score.


On the City Politic: Voters' Round Table
Four New Yorkers came together for three hours last Sunday with Felicia R. Lee and Larry Olmstead of The New York Times to discuss the candidates and the issues in Tuesday's mayoral election and their feelings about life in New York.
The participants were Melissa Woronoff, 20, a college student who divides her time between the Bronx and Manhattan; Ken Shung, 39, a free-lance photographer who lives in Manhattan; Jerolyn J. Minter, a retired college professor who lives in St.
Albans, Queens, and Roger D. Fields, a "40ish" Harlem resident and the senior vice president of the United Block Front Street Association, a program in which ex-offenders build housing.
What follows are excerpts from their discussion.
What things are most important to you when you look at the quality of life in the city?
ROGER FIELDS: No. 1 is crime, which, as an African-American, is very, very on my mind.
And No. 2 is affordable housing.
When one talks about upgrading and upper mobility in any community, it must be a safe community.
And once you build housing, that housing, which may be comfortable and affordable, has to be in a safe neighborhood.
JEROLYN MINTER: I agree with much of what you're saying, but I think when you put things in order of priority, it's not crime first.
Crime is an offshoot of something that I think is more deeply rooted.
Attention to education and educational standards, economics, housing -- all are built upon the first fundamental, and that's learning how to understand someone who is different from you that you have to live next door to or in the community right adjacent to yours.
FIELDS: Well, I don't tend to agree with you.
When one talks about empowering different ethnic groups, those communities must first have safe streets and must have affordable housing before one can no longer feel stressed.
And one gets angry because one sees that one group is getting more than another group, which also causes division.
No. 2, if we talk about education standards, when you develop affordable housing and affordable home ownership, then those communities become mixed and those educational standards become more active, because the community is not monolithic nor mono-economic.
Melissa, what's your idea of the key areas?
MELISSA WORONOFF: Well, I would agree with Jerolyn.
I would also add not only race but also class and religion.
And I think that's what's great about New York City, but it makes things hard at times.
I mean, to get those things to work out, that's really the starting point and then other things will follow.
KEN SHUNG: My concerns with the city have to do with crime.
I think the real issue for me is, like, who's raising our kids?
When there are two functional parents in the house, then you can maybe have the next generation of people that would want to not resort to crime.
I just feel that you've got to start at home.
If parents don't spend time with their children, then there's no love.
When there's no love, the children don't grow up with any kind of sense of responsibility and moral obligation.
MINTER: I have a concern when I read statistics that come past my desk, that eight out of 10 African-American children are going to be brought up in single-parent families.
What is going to happen to that poor mother who's going out working, trying to support that child.
And she has to put that child in a daycare center if she doesn't get home until 5, and that daycare center or that school program is not going to be able to give them the kind of structure that they need.
When they look and see Mama struggling to pay the rent and buy food, and on the corner is this drug dealer who has diamonds and is driving cars, what's going to happen?
What happens is that person becomes the role model.
WORONOFF: I think it's interesting that there certainly are a lot more single-parent families today.
But I think what needs to happen is that both our city and the country need to acknowledge that families are changing and need to accommodate for that, rather than try to change it.
What can the mayor of this city, whoever is elected, do about any of these issues?
What are they really responsible for?
MINTER: They're responsible for selecting the people who are going to take care of the various city agencies and monitoring them.
I would make sure these people are knowledgeable, decisive, have some humanist to them and are in contact with the needs of the people.
FIELDS: I would fire every single commissioner in the City of New York; that's the first thing I would do.
The second thing, I would go to people who have grown up in this city, understand its problems, are not political.
I would want my commissioners to be responsible to me, not to the Democratic or Republican or whatever leader placed them there.
MINTER: I have come to realize that in our society we aren't willing to give people time enough to bring about change.
You can't come in and change things in four years that have been messed up for the last 12.
FIELDS: Wait a minute, Jerolyn, are you trying to tell me things were messed up in the last 12 years before David Dinkins became Mayor?
This Mayor, he has more nepotism than any other mayor in the history of this city.
He appoints Joyce Brown deputy mayor -- who happens to be married to Carl McCall, the person the Mayor appointed to the Board of Ed.
He appoints Victor Gottbaum to the Board of Ed, and his wife to being Parks Commissioner.
I can go on and on and on.
I think that this Mayor has shown no leadership.
I think this Mayor has gone to traditional clubhouse politics and has not reached out to the community.
I think the city was much better four years ago than it is right now.
Who else wants to jump into that?
WORONOFF: I think the country was better off four years ago than it is now.
I mean, the economy was better.
When the economy goes down, you know, crime does go up.
We have more homeless people.
Fewer people have jobs; more people are being laid off.
I wouldn't place that blame on Mayor Dinkins.
Ken, are you better off than you were four years ago?
SHUNG: Oh, what a question.
I guess -- I don't know, I haven't been that alert in the last four years.
Do I feel more fear when I walk down the street?
I do.
The accusation has been that the Mayor panders too much to blacks.
And that Mr.
Giuliani has pandered too much to whites.
Then the President came in and said that there are too many people in this city who are unwilling to vote for people who are different from themselves, be it because of race or religion.
SHUNG: Anyone who suffers from any kind of discrimination might find truth in that kind of statement.
I think people go into the voting booths after all is said and done, and get very tribal and start to, like, push the lever they feel they can identify with.
FIELDS: I think that everywhere you go there are going to be people who are racist.
But I think people are concerned about issues.
And President Clinton, I thought, made an inappropriate statement which caused the campaign to become even more racially oriented than it is.
What should the Mayor do to build bridges to racial harmony?
MINTER: I believe that Mayor Dinkins has been systematically trying to build those bridges here in New York, initiating programs all the way toward bringing this into fruition.
FIELDS: In reference to Mayor Dinkins's leadership in building bridges, I did not approve of the way he handled Crown Heights.
I did not approve the way he handled the Korean boycott.
I did not approve of the way he dealt with the Washington Heights situation with the drug dealer, in which my tax dollars were used to bury him.
I think when you build bridges, you build them in an objective and corrective manner.
I think, unfortunately, in this campaign, no one is building any bridges.
MINTER: In terms of Giuliani, I don't think that he would be building bridges.
He has set a tone with his activities that, to me, is negative and divisive.
I will vote for David Dinkins, because I believe in his dream.
FIELDS: Well, let me tell you something.
I'm not going to vote for David Dinkins.
I'm going to vote, this ex-offender, this African-American, is going to vote for Rudolph Giuliani.
I think his record in reference to civil rights when he was United States Attorney shows his concern.
I don't see Rudy Giuliani as a police monster.
Tell me about welfare.
MINTER: To eliminate the high numbers of people on welfare, you have to improve the economic situation.
You have to provide training for people so that they can fit into the economic arena for jobs.
For mothers who have to work, you have to provide the services that will care for the child while the mother is in training on a new job.
You have pockets of this happening.
It's not happening across the board in large numbers because you're looking at money.
Where do you get the funding for this?
FIELDS: You've been doing it for 30 years, and it hasn't worked, the social scientist's philosophy.
This is this old liberal philosophy that has kept our community behind.
We need to inform people very candidly.
If you have children out of wedlock continuously, you are going to be punished.
We must stop people from having six children from six different fathers.
No. 2, we cannot reward people because of the fact that they do not wish to work.
I agree with you, we must provide jobs.
But those jobs must be provided with the partnership between private industry and the government.
The government cannot continue to absorb and create these make-believe jobs and cost taxpayers more money.
Now the welfare system rewards you.
What is it that the mayor can and should do?
FIELDS: He should have an aggressive, aggressive program of finding fathers who are not paying.
We need to have these people who are on temporary income maintenance, these Aid to Dependent Children, and these Workfare people actually participate in training and working and placed in private enterprises.
We need an aggressive program like that.
And Mayor Dinkins doesn't have that program.
MINTER: He has started some of these programs.
FIELDS: He hasn't started -- the only thing he has started is sitting there and playing tennis at Gracie Mansion.
WORONOFF: I would say that as far as welfare is concerned, we need to have programs that fit the people's needs, rather than programs that lead people into who we want them to be.
If there are single mothers with children, then we need some sort of daycare for these children while the mothers learn the skills that they need to go out and work.
We need support for our community members out there.
We're talking about ethics and values.
What can any city administration do to affect values -- let's say, the homeless problem?
SHUNG: Well, those policies should not polarize people and put them on the margins of society.
I think people tend to think: "Well, not in my neighborhood. Or not in my backyard. Or I'll just retreat and it won't happen." What happens is, they'll be sitting in a public school, or even a private school.
And the child that grew up on welfare, that value system will be in the same classroom as your child who had maybe a nice upbringing, and those values will cross.
This is a problem that America has to confront, that our value systems, whether you're rich or poor, and those class distinctions, are eventually going to cross paths.
MINTER: You know, another concern is health care.
I think that a lot of women, particularly pro-choice women, may not be inclined to vote for Giuliani, because he has gone back and forth on the issue of abortion.
I think that taking a stance on abortion is really taking a stance on women and how highly you value them.
FIELDS: Well, people are going to vote for David Dinkins, who at one time was not pro-sexual preference, and that's become pro-sexual preference.
WORONOFF: I'd also say that Giuliani's issues on homelessness and his 90-day policy is something that people are going to be looking at.
FIELDS: I think what he was talking about was that bureaucracies tend to drag their feet.
And what he was saying was, "Within that 90 days, I want that person placed." I think he was using the concept that the Rev.
Calvin Butts and the Abyssinian church do in Harlem, that you come to the shelter for a short period of time.
And the first day you're there, you begin to look for employment and permanent housing.
Is the city doing enough?
SHUNG: To deal with homeless?
The city is not doing enough.
I think I don't even look for Mayor Dinkins to solve the world's problems.
I look for him to start moving in the right direction, to build the bridge instead of break it down. . . .
MINTER: I'd like to tell you, I have not voted for Mayor Dinkins because he was black.
I voted for him because I thought he was the best person to do the job.
I'm proud of him because he happens to be an African-American.
I feel that he sets a good role model for African-American children, who can look and say: "I can aspire, too. And doors will not necessarily always be closed to me." But I think he is a man, a human being, trying to do what I would like to see done in this city.
FIELDS: Well, I will tell you, it took a lot for me not to vote for him this time.
Because of race?
FIELDS: Because of race.
It was one of the most difficult decisions I've ever made in my life. . . .
You know, it's interesting, because you have such diverse people here.
Here I am, supporting a relatively conservative candidate.
And here are some of the traditional people who you would think would support a more conservative candidate, supporting a liberal candidate.
And what I'm hearing over and over is that we're all saying the same thing.
Who would be the best mayor to take care of the quality of life and show compassion?
We're all saying, who's going to show more compassion?
All of us sitting here who are employed or have some income are saying we're concerned about those people who can't take care of themselves.


A Flop With Many Firsts
To the Editor:
I much appreciated Frank Rich's article about the reissue of original cast recordings, "Broadway Flops Go to CD Heaven"  [ Oct. 10 ] , but am I the only one who longs to hear once again the score from "A Family Affair"?


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Farewell to Macy's Sign: 'World's Largest Store'
The sign on Macy's in Herald Square, proclaiming it "The World's Largest Store," has come down.
An electronic replacement is to go up on Nov. 26 and start operating after Jan. 1.
What kind of messages will the new version broadcast?
Laura Melillo, a spokeswoman for the store, would say only that the sign "says that we are a retailer, and says something about shopping."


Brian Friel Distills Words Into Otherness
The Irish playwright Brian Friel has given himself a near-impossible challenge in "Wonderful Tennessee," a meditative play that will strike its admirers as shimmeringly poetic and its detractors as dramatically inert.
Actually, the work, which had its premiere last summer at the Abbey Theater in Dublin and recently moved to the Plymouth Theater on Broadway, is both -- beautiful and lethargic in equal parts.
There are no galvanizing confrontations but the script's apparent aimlessness is arrested periodically by intimations of the divine.


Neighborhood Report; BACK ON TRACK


Whitman Pins Hopes On Women
CHRISTINE TODD WHITMAN, outfoxed at nearly every turn during the summer by the wily incumbent, hopes to unseat Gov.
Jim Florio on Tuesday with a late appeal to female voters.
In the final week of campaigning, Mrs.
Whitman's commercials prominently featured women, and the candidate began mentioning more often in debates and speeches that she is the mother of two teen-agers.


Hope Polinsky, David Taragin
Hope Polinsky, an account coordinator for Tribune Broadcasting in Manhattan, was married on Thursday to Dr.
David Lee Taragin, a resident in neurology at the Albert Einstein Medical Center in the Bronx.
Rabbi Gedaliah Anemer officiated at the Sands Country Club in Atlantic Beach, L.I.
The bride, the daughter of Jack and Phyllis Polinsky of Kew Gardens, Queens, graduated from Queens College and received an M.B.A. from St.
John's University in Queens.
Her father is the chief operating officer of JSP Fabrics, a New York textile firm.


N.B.A. Preview: In the East, There's No Jordan
In the Eastern Conference this time around, there are French doors swung wide open with a mat that says, "Welcome, Knicks."
Welcome to the Michael Jordan-less East, where two words -- I quit -- erased all memories of a stand-pat Knick summer and made heavy favorites of the team that stands behind Pat.


EXITING DRUG CHIEF WARNS OF CARTELS
Robert C. Bonner, who has headed the country's main drug-fighting agency for three years, says the United States is ill-prepared to do battle with the world's powerful, highly mobile and tightly managed cocaine trafficking organizations.
"I've had a devil of a time trying to respond to the traffickers," Mr.
Bonner said in an interview shortly before stepping down as head of the Drug Enforcement Administration on Friday to join a Los Angeles law firm.


Neighborhood Report: Flushing; Downtown Expansion Plan: Westward Ho!
Saying that downtown Flushing is bursting with pent-up demand for commercial and residential space, city planners last week recommended measures to encourage development in the central retail hub and channel future construction westward.
"This area has experienced a tremendous influx of new population, economic activity and investment," said Richard L. Schaffer, director of the City Planning Department.
"It's a very vibrant business district that is literally bursting at its seams."


Wall Street; Fighting It Out Over Arbitration
IN 1987, the Supreme Court upheld provisions in brokerage house contracts with investors stipulating that claims against brokers must be resolved by arbitration, and not in the courtroom.
Since that decision in Shearson/American Express v.
McMahon, the number of arbitration cases filed with major exchanges has roughly doubled.
Such cases are lucrative for securities lawyers who represent plaintiffs, especially when there is a contingency arrangement.


Manners Matter In Business
To the Editor:
A civility note to James Bernard, a senior editor of The Source, a hip-hop magazine, who is quoted as saying, "People feel that being polite doesn't get you anywhere -- it's weak." Sir, many of the most talented, most successful, most competitive among us have the best manners.
And they are the strongest.


BENEFITS
Honoring Broadway  TUESDAY -- The Montefiore Medical Center's fifth annual fund-raising evening at the Waldorf-Astoria will pay tribute to 100 years of Broadway.
Table designs contributed by companies will follow theatrical themes, among them British Airways on Shakespeare, Pierre Deux on "The Secret Garden" and Williams-Sonoma on "Company." Bill Green, the former Congressman, and Ira L. Rubin, a cardiologist, will be honored.
A 7 P.M. reception and silent auction of items, including a trip to London to tour the Globe Theater, will be followed by dinner and dancing to the music of Harbor Lights.
Tickets, $550, from (718) 920-6656.
Humanitarian Relief Fund  TUESDAY -- Madeleine K. Albright, the United States representative at the United Nations, will speak at a benefit of the International Rescue Committee at the Plaza.
The event will honor George Soros, founder of the Soros Humanitarian Fund, which helps relief organizations in the former Yugoslavia, and Dwayne A. Andreas, the chairman and chief executive of the Archer Daniels Midland Company.
A 6:30 P.M. cocktail reception will be followed by dinner and the awards ceremony.
Tickets, $500, from (212) 679-0010.


Dean Hachamovitch and Joan Morse
Joan Ellen Morse, a product manager, and Dean Jacob Hachamovitch, a program manager, both at the Microsoft Corporation in Redmond, Wash., were married in Boston last evening.
Rabbi Bernard Mehlman performed the ceremony at the Ritz-Carlton.
Mrs.
Hachamovitch graduated from Brown University and received a master's degree in management from Northwestern University.
She is the daughter of Claire and Richard Morse of Brookline, Mass.
The bride's father is a private investor there.


A Streak in the Heavens Has Become a Straggler
Shuffling through season brochures, peering over the shoulders of customers at record stores and listening to music-business shop talk, one hears a little less about the early-music movement.
Not 10 years ago it was a streak in the musical heavens.
Today it has settled back into the cottage industry where it began, but now with larger, more imposing cottages and superb craftsmen inside them.
About a dozen brilliant ensembles in Europe keep on keeping us up to date on the past; a handful do the same in this country.
Period-instrument orchestras arose and died in New York a few years ago, and maybe not from philistinism or government indifference but simply because they didn't play very well.
New York audiences -- with the recorded sound of splendid English, German and Dutch groups in their ears -- responded accordingly.
Fairness might have dictated more patience, but paying audiences are not likely to subsidize on-the-job career development.


ARE WOMEN'S HEARTS DIFFERENT?
Robin Marantz Henig's article "Are Women's Hearts Different?" (Oct. 3) hit my phobic heart where it hurts.
I had a pacemaker "installed" after a cursory examination and within a week complained of discomfort.
A cardiologist said to me: "You are phobic and it is your attitude that is the problem -- not the pacemaker." He wasn't present when a test showed a defective loose wire, rubbing against my heart.
It took a (four-hour) procedure to have a new wire inserted.
ARLENE LANE Forest Hills, Queens


Stigmatized Treatment
To the Editor:
It is unfortunate that a stigma still attaches to substance abuse treatment because many valued employees will be denied the care they need.
I recently treated a patient regarded as a "valued" employee by his employer.
He had been 11 years on the job, with no prior incidents, had tested positive for cocaine use on a random screening and was mandated to 10 weeks of outpatient treatment as a condition for being reinstated.
The tragedy of this situation is that the employee not only lost his wages during his suspension, but his health insurance benefits as well.


Peter A. Smul and Debra J. Rudich
Debra Jill Rudich, a daughter of Joel and Phyllis Rudich of Columbus, Ohio, was married last evening to Peter Allen Smul, a son of Sandy and Vicki Smul of New York.
Rabbi Herschel Schacter officiated at the Stouffer Westchester Hotel in White Plains.
Mrs.
Smul, 29, is a manager of market analysis at Home Box Office, the cable television network, in New York.
She graduated from Dartmouth College, and she and her husband received M.B.A.'s from Harvard University.
Her father is the president and chief executive of Coaxial Communications, a cable television company in Columbus.


Tech Notes; Keeping Tabs on Postal Workers
THE Postal Service may not be able to tell you where your letter is, but it will soon know what time each collection box is emptied.
"We'll be able to determine any early or missed collections," said Lou Eberhardt, a Postal Service spokesman.
"This will really help us smooth our collection schedule out."
As part of a nationwide system that will be completed by the spring, a stainless steel "button" will be placed in most boxes that are emptied twice a day or more.
Employees collecting the mail will carry an electronic wand.
Installation began in New York City earlier this month.


Term Limits Drive the Talented Out of Politics
To the Editor:
As chairman of the Committee on Elections and Reapportionment of the California State Senate since 1987, I have been directly involved in the state and national term-limit debate since its most recent incarnation as a popular political cure-all.
In California, term limits for state officeholders were enacted in 1990; term limits for members of Congress were similarly enacted in 1992.


LAST CALL
Having spent the past year in the Czech Republic, I can tell you that unplanned and unexpected pregnancies are more accepted there than they are here.
I know many parents in their 40's, with children in their 20's, who have accepted still more infants into their lives.
Why is it that we have such an aversion to the unplanned in our country?
MARIGA TEMPLE-WEST Devon, Pa.


Corrections
The Wall Street column last Sunday, about signs of instability at Spectrum Information Technologies, misspelled the name of a public relations firm in Jericho, N.Y., that once worked for Spectrum, and misstated the extent of its recent telephone cutoff.
The firm is De Nigris/Blankman Inc.; its telephone malfunctioned for a time, but remains in service.


Mighty Brazil Rides A Free-Market Wave
WHEN Paul Duval travels to the United States and Europe, all he hears are jokes about Brazil's 2,000 percent annual inflation and Brazil's "minister-of-the-month," the revolving door in the top levels of government.
That's fine for this American shopping center developer.
Why invite competition when you are making money like never before?
"Business is absolutely booming," said Mr.
Duval, a managing partner in Shopinvest, based in Rio de Janeiro.
"We are building three shopping centers, in Rio, Sao Paulo and Brasilia, for a total of $180 million."


Hitler's Handmaiden
To the Editor:
John Simon's sophistication and demanding sense of taste are well known.
All the more dismaying, then, is his fawning review of Leni Riefenstahl's self-serving memoir.
The main problem is summed up in Mr.
Simon's question: "Can the self-deceptions of an obsessed esthete wipe out the fact of her greatness as an artist?" But Mr.
Simon has it backward.
Rather, ask this: Can Miss Riefenstahl's greatness as an artist wipe out the fact that (as Mr. Simon notes a sentence earlier) she put her art to the use of evil?
ALAN M. SCHWARTZ  New York


County To Buy Mt. Vernon Stadium
UNDER a plan developed by Mayor Ronald A. Blackwood of Mount Vernon and County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke, this city's aging Memorial Field Stadium will be renovated and made available for both countywide and local sporting and entertainment events by the spring of 1996.
The county has agreed to purchase the rundown stadium -- built in 1930 -- along with the adjoining field and to spend $6 million to refurbish the six-acre site, Mr.
O'Rourke said.
When completed, it will be the largest and most modern sports stadium in the county.


Paul M. Froelich, Meg M. Kruizenga
Meg Mulder Kruizenga, the daughter of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard J. Kruizenga of Irving, Tex., was married yesterday to Paul Montgomery Froelich, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Don Froelich of Dickinson, N.D.
The Rev.
Dr.
Melvin Hill, a Baptist minister, and Lee Willard Autrey, a Christian Science practitioner, officiated at the John's Island Beach Club in Vero Beach, Fla.
Mrs.
Froelich graduated from Bryn Mawr College and received a master's degree in history from the University of Michigan.
She is a producer of television documentaries for David Grubin Productions in New York.
Her father, a retired vice president of the Exxon Corporation in Dallas, is a senior fellow at the Institute for the Study of Earth and Man at Southern Methodist University in Dallas.


CHILDREN'S BOOKS
THE GIVER By Lois Lowry. 180 pp.
Boston:  Houghton Mifflin Company. $13.95. (Ages 12 to 14)


ARNOLD GLIMCHER AND HIS ART WORLD ALL-STARS
Arne Glimcher's West Coast adventures were a lively read.
I'd like to add that, in addition to selling one-of-a-kind works, Pace Editions, the gallery's prints division, pioneered the multiples market by making limited series of signed lithographs available to a new generation of potential collectors at an affordable price.
AMY SLOANE-PINEL Paris


Habitats/The Right Stuff; A Bargain at Full Price
THE first terrace is more of a Juliet balcony, "only room for six people to have champagne before dinner," Nina Kaminer explained, laughing over her shoulder as she conducted a tour of the empty apartment.
Its parquet floors covered in white dropcloths, the exquisite little prewar duplex in Murray Hill, bought just over a month ago, is getting the full treatment from her contractors.
The floor plans for the renovation were taped to the front door and she pointed out the 4-foot-wide star that will be inlaid in the foyer floor.
"Isn't it terrific?," she asked, stopping only briefly as she headed up the circular staircase to the top floor to show off the second terrace: a 6-foot-wide one that wraps around the 18- by 14-foot master bedroom.


The Sound of Cossack Thunder
The Cossacks are coming, straight out of some 19th-century nightmare.
Those fearsome horsemen once again stalk the Russian steppes, whips stashed in their boots and swords tucked in their belts, defending God and country and longing for the restoration of the Romanov dynasty.
When last seen, they were being obliterated in the bloody Soviet collectivization drives of the 1930's; a million of them died.
Before the Revolution, they had become infamous as the nail in the czarist boot, putting down peasant and worker uprisings and leading pogroms against the Jews and other minorities.


The Man From Auschwitz
PICTURES AT AN EXHIBITION By D. M. Thomas. 278 pp.
New York:  Charles Scribner's Sons. $22.


Bermuda
At one time, Bermuda's busiest tourist season was winter.
Visitors, particularly the affluent, would come for a month or longer.
Many of today's visitors still prefer the period from November to March, when the army of T-shirts thins and cashmeres move in, when beach life scales down and the temperature favors golf and tennis.
Hotels and restaurants are not as crowded, rates are lower and cooler does not translate to cold.
At the beginning of the year, in an attempt to convince prospective guests that January toMarch is not cold, a number of hotels offered a "temperature  guarantee," which will be repeated in 1994.
During these months, participating hotels (including Lantana Colony, Elbow Beach, the Reefs and the Princess Hotels) will give a 20 percent discount on room rates on any day the temperature does not reach 68 degrees.


A Game That Offers Coslet a Much-Needed Showcase
As Jets Coach Bruce Coslet looks across the field this afternoon, he will see Dan Reeves, the Giants' coach.
And although he will have a number of different things to think about today, no doubt Coslet's mind will flash to how well the new coach is doing in his first season in New York.
The Giants are off to a 5-1 start and lead the National Football Conference East division.
There are no negative stories flooding out of East Rutherford, N.J.
His team is a model of efficiency and consistency.
Reeves is easing into a smooth transition on all fronts.


Neighborhood Report: Washington Heights; Editor's Apologies Quell Fury Over Article
An article about Hispanic culture, children and sex abuse that appeared in the first issue of a new neighborhood newspaper in Washington Heights hit a raw nerve with so many readers that the editor dedicated much of the second issue to apologizing for the furor.
The article, by Antonio Mendez, titled "Hispanic Culture Translated: More Than Just Language," appeared in Manhattan Heights Forum, a monthly newspaper started last month by Joyce M. Perry, a writer and teacher who lives in Washington Heights.
Ms.
Perry said she started the paper to give the community a sounding board for serious issues, including one that is close to her own heart: the plight of children in the city.


UNIVERSITY PRESSES -- IN SHORT: FICTION
SHORT STORIES
THE MAGIC OF BLOOD  By Dagoberto Gilb. University of New Mexico, $19.95.


Clinton's Foreign Policy: Top Adviser Speaks Up
W.
Anthony Lake, President Clinton's national security adviser, sat in his spacious corner office in the West Wing of the White House the other day, breaking his self-imposed vow of silence.
His mission: to defend his boss against critics who say they cannot understand the Clinton foreign policy.
He tried a little joke.


Kay Wahrsager, Michael L. Adler
September wedding plans for Kay Fierman Wahrsager and Michael L. Adler have been announced by the mother of the prospective bride, Karel F. Wahrsager of New York.
Mr.
Adler is the son of Shelley and Arthur C. Adler of Irvington, N.Y.
Miss Wahrsager graduated cum laude from the College of William and Mary.
Her father, the late Sigmund Wahrsager, was a senior partner in the investment banking firm of Bear, Stearns &amp; Company in New York.
Her maternal grandfather, the late Harold L. Fierman, was a founding partner of the New York law firm of Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hays &amp; Handler.


Health Plan: Out of the Gate
The Clinton health care plan, at a hefty 1,342 pages and 5 1/2 pounds, thumped into congressional in-baskets on Wednesday.
This version differed from the one leaked last month, with revisions designed to increase the odds of the bill's passage.
Among them: abortion coverage with a "conscience clause" that would exuse people with objections from having to perform the procedure; subsidies for small businesses with with as many as 75 workers, up from 50; the right to choose a doctor, even one outside the patient's plan.


Steps to Keep Toilet Tanks and Machinery Watertight
TOILET-TANK leaks are fairly easy to find and correct.
If moisture accumulates on the outside of the tank, note the tank's height, lift the cover and check the height of the water inside.
If the heights are the same, the problem is condensation caused by water in the tank that cools the porcelain below room temperature.
The cure is to install plastic foam sheets against the inside of the tank with special adhesive.
Kits containing all the insulating materials needed, plus instructions, cost about $20.


Marianne Nebel, Peter Goetz Jr.
Marianne Nebel, the daughter of Michael and Mary Nebel of Potomac, Md., was married yesterday to Peter Benedict Goetz Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Goetz of Martinsville, N.J.
The Rev.
James Hayes, a Roman Catholic priest, officiated at the Church of St.
Andrew in New York.
Ms.
Nebel Goetz and Mr.
Goetz work for Parsons Brinckerhoff Quade &amp; Douglas Inc., an engineering concern in New York, she as an assistant vice president, he as a proposal coordinator.
She graduated from New York University.
Her father is the president of National Consulting Services, a computer consulting company in Potomac.
Her mother is an executive assistant at PhillipsPublishing Inc., which publishes newsletters in Potomac.


SUNDAY, October 31, 1983; RELATIVITY
Albert Einstein is universally associated with genius and personal nobility.
He won the Nobel prize and worked for world peace.
But according to "The Private Lives of Albert Einstein," just published in Britain, the gentle physicist was an adulterous, egomaniacal misogynist who may have even beaten his first wife.
There is no question he once described her as a woman of "uncommon ugliness." Einstein himself was no Fabio, but his sagging jowls and unruly hair never seemed like Halloween material before.
The newly revealed Bad Einstein, on the other hand, seems tailor made for trick or treating.
Boo!


Voters Guide; At Issue on the Ballot: How the City Works
NEW YORK would still be the nation's largest city and no one elected on Tuesday would automatically lose his job until 2002, but two ballot proposals could change the profile of New York City and the face of its government.
Both proposals would fundamentally challenge the status quo and reflect voter frustration with what many people perceive as ossified incumbents and with unresponsive bureaucrats.
But whether the proposals would improve or merely change the way the city works is debatable.


P. T. Barnum Statue Needs Restoration, Care
Since I learned from the article on the P. T. Barnum statue (Sept. 26) that I have been "taken to task" by several members of the Bridgeport community, I trust you will have no objections to publishing a few corrections and addenda to the article in question.
(1) Thomas Ball's statue of Barnum, after being awarded a medal at the International Exhibition in Munich in 1888, was shipped to a warehouse in Hoboken, N.J., where it was stored until the showman's death in 1891.
It was only after that event that it was moved to Bridgeport, where it remained at the circus's winter quarters while its base and pedestal were being prepared.


Corrections
An article on Oct. 10 about bagel shops around New York misstated the address of Atlantic Bagels in Brooklyn.
It is at 177 Atlantic Avenue, at Clinton Street.


350 Feet Above Flood Ruins, A River Town Plots Rebirth
The Mississippi had its way with this old railroad town, settling in for as long as it pleased and leaving the place dust-caked and barren, an American Pompeii.
Now the people of Valmeyer say they got the river's message.
They voted to move a mile and half east to the bluffs where they used to shoot deer and rabbits, up by the hickory and maple forest they used to drive past to get to their valley, on the hill where they planted a wooden star at Christmas that could be seen clear across the river in Missouri.


Magnet School's Magnet: Preschool
Shanicqua Gant, 3, of Bridgeport and Laura Kantorowski, 4, of Fairfield sat at a small table eating their snacks and giggling.
"I'm finished; when are we going outside?" asked Laura.


My Day in Taxi Court: A Little Justice for All
I AM a habitual filer of complaints with the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission.
I believe this is my civic duty, the manifestation of a quixotic notion that a minimal standard of polite behavior can be imposed upon New Yorkers.
My story is an ordinary one, the kind you hear at parties and over lunch in the company cafeteria, the kind that is always outdone by someone within earshot who has suffered a greater, more dramatic indignity.


Who Took the Talk Out of the Talk Shows?
Trivializing ourselves to death?
That prospect has to haunt anyone who has followed this year's most contrived television event: the "war" of the late-night talk shows.
In a blizzard of press releases and publicity coups, the professional fates of Dave, Jay, Conan, Arsenio and poor Chevy somehow have become barometers of the very future of television.
With the smoke now clearing, it seems that CBS's flaky David Letterman is a rating point or so -- about a million households, give or take -- ahead of NBC's earnest Jay Leno.
Fox's clueless Chevy Chase has been mercifully canceled.
NBC's jittery Conan O'Brien is still desperately learning on the job.
The determinedly smiling Arsenio Hall seems, with good reason, more paranoid than ever.


Sally M. Sigler, Rodney E. Luery
Mr. and Mrs.
Arnold E. Sigler of Ridgewood, N.J., have announced the engagement of their daughter Sally Margaret Sigler to Rodney Erik Luery, a son of Rodney G. Luery of North Brunswick, N.J., and Ruth Magill of Jamesburg, N.J.
A September wedding is planned.
Ms.
Sigler, 24, is an executive secretary with the American Express Travel Related Services Company in New York.
She graduated from the Katherine Gibbs School.
Her father is a vice president at J. P. Morgan Investment Management Inc. in New York.
Her mother, Marcy Sigler, is an owner of C. C. Van Emburgh Inc., a funeral home in Ridgewood.


Beverly Griffin, Stephen Wong
Beverly Marie Griffin, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Eugene D. Griffin of St.
Louis, was married there yesterday to Stephen Tien Wong, a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Stephen P. Y. Wong of Jackson, N.J.
The Rev.
Patrick J. O'Laughlin officiated at the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Basilica of St.
Louis, King of France.


Consider, Please, the Upside of Fat
To the Editor:
"After Years of Bloated Overhead, It's Time to Get Lean and Mean" (Oct. 10) represents a gratuitous potshot at fatness.
Kmart's pecuniary woes notwithstanding, the metaphor is exactly backwards.
Fat is the biological equivalent of money in the bank.
If Kmart is spending too much, the pattern more resembles anorexia, in which the sufferer spends more energy than she ingests.
I would like to see a fat economy, have a fat bank account, have a job paying a fat wage, etc., instead of being unemployed in a lean economy with my resources on a "long and difficult diet." ROBIN KING  Flushing, N.Y., Oct. 10


Oct. 24-30; A Cold Calculus Of Mass Murder
Since Jean Claude Pressac published his strange book, "The Auschwitz Crematoria: The Machinery of Mass Slaughter," last month, French scholars have debated whether it is a landmark in research on the Nazis' methods of mass murder or a twisted product of a period in which denial of the Holocaust has become more widespread.
Based on previously inaccessible archives in Moscow, the book traces in matter-of-fact detail the methods by which the Nazis obtained the ovens, ventilation systems, poison and other equipment that enabled them to dispose of as many as 2,200 bodies a day at Auschwitz.


Hitler's Handmaiden
To the Editor:
Leni Riefenstahl is mistaken in her belief that neo-Nazis are not using "Triumph of the Will." In fact, it is a neo-Nazi icon.
For $59, you can buy it from the revisionist Institute for Historical Review; for $25, from Tom Metzger's White Aryan Resistance -- to name only two of several sources.
It circulates widely underground.
A copy was found in the apartment of a skinhead in Portland, Ore., who killed an Ethiopian man, Mulugeta Seraw.
A former skinhead who saw it told me he could "see how it sucked people up."


New Season, Old Cast, Room for One More
Nobody in the "Murphy Brown" cast died this year or walked out after a contract dispute.
Still, when the season premiere rolled around, there was a brand-new face on the team.
In television seasons past, series usually acquired new characters as replacements, especially when the youngest child in the cast was aging dangerously out of cuteness range.
But series have other needs, and sometimes they can be met only by new blood, as at least four shows have recently decided.
ANITA GATES "Murphy Brown"
He's boyishly handsome.
He wears denim jackets and camouflage pants and sometimes a touch of Don Johnson stubble.
He's Scott Bakula, portraying a veteran foreign correspondent named Peter Hunt, and just weeks ago a Serbian guard was holding a gun to his head while the world watched via satellite.
Now he's part of the "F.Y.I." television team, where Murphy (Candice Bergen) and her colleagues admit to feeling a little threatened.


The Ax Murders
Oh it breaks my heart to see those stars
Smashing a perfectly good guitar
I don't know who they think they are
Smashing a perfectly good guitar.
-- "Perfectly Good Guitar" by John Hiatt  WHO indeed.
Legend credits Pete Townshend with starting it, back in 1966, when the Who was still a mod pub band called the High Numbers.
Mr.
Townshend smashed, and the fans screamed and demanded he do it again.
And again and again.
Now a whole new generation of bands and fans who've barely heard of the Who is reviving rock's most primal ritual.
And naturally, they think they invented it.


Baggage Check: Weighing Risks
IF you check your baggage on an airline, you are taking a chance.
It may be sent someplace else and arrive long after you do.
It may get squashed or dropped and your shampoo may rupture and ruin your clothes.
If you fail to put identification inside the bag, the tags may be torn off by a conveyor belt and you may never see the bag again.
There are additional disheartening possibilities, criminal ones.
Your bag may be rifled while it is in the custody of the airline or its baggage-handling contractor; your camera, jewelry and field glasses may be taken.
Or the whole bag may be stolen.
A Sept. 30 broadcast of Primetime Live on pilferage of valuables from luggage, with covert videotapes of bags being opened by baggage handlers, has focused attention on this issue.


On Sunday; A Small World, Coexisting On 3 Cushions
INTRICATE as the slow carom and click and gleam of the three balls about the baize tabletop, a pattern emerges in the life of Sonny Cho, who leans competitively in the billiard parlor just beyond the subway el's filigree of sidewalk shadows.
His mother, Mary, first taught him to hold a cue stick over 20 years ago, before the family left Korea.
"She stood me on a milk crate in my father's billiard parlor, and that's how I got my first taste, in the third grade," said Mr.
Cho, who is busy preparing for the big invitational championship next weekend at the Master Billiard parlor in Sunnyside, Queens, where he thinks he has a shot at the $3,000 first prize.


Q and A
Satisfying Arrears On a Condominium Q. I own a condo in New York City.
Because of the recession, I am behind in my mortgage and maintenance and have filed for bankruptcy.
The trustee in my case has abandoned the real estate because there is no equity.


Fires Don't Worry Trainers
The fires raging in Southern California canceled Thursday's card at Santa Anita Park, but three New York-area trainers who will have horses running at the Breeders' Cup there next Saturday said yesterday that they were not concerned.
"It wasn't a problem for us," said Bill Mott, who has already shipped his charges to the picturesque track in Arcadia, Calif., just north of Los Angeles.
"If there was, we're unaware of it." Mott has entered the defending champion, Fraise, in the Turf, and Lech and Paradise Creek in the Mile.


Neighborhood Reports: Flushing; After Layoffs, Bakery Workers Nurture a Plan To Rise Again
Some have taken jobs as waiters, parking attendants and movers; others have simply moved out of town.
But many of the 400 workers who lost their jobs when Stroehmann closed its Taystee Bread bakery in Flushing are still struggling to open a bakery of their own.
Their plan was born when the plant closed in July 1992, and in recent months, the workers have raised about $80,000, bringing their total to nearly $200,000, hired a project manager, and secured pledges from hundreds of people to buy their product once the business gets off the ground.
And they are busily hunting for sites.


Neighborhood Reports; New Road Hours
News for walkers, runners, bikers and skaters: Central Park drives will now be closed to motor vehicles part of each weekday for 10 months of the year instead of 7.
The drives are closed to vehicles weekends all year round.
They are also closed weekdays, 10 A.M. to 3 P.M. and 7 P.M. to 10 P.M., from April to mid-November.
But this "summer schedule" will now begin in January.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD
GRAMERCY PARK  Good Old Folk From North Carolina
As part of its 95th anniversary celebration, the National Arts Club will hold the exhibition "North Carolina in New York," which will feature the works of some of North Carolina's best-known painters, sculptors and folk artists (pictured above, "Wrestlers" by Jim Moon).
Most of the artists attended the Penland School of Crafts in Appalachia, which is dedicated to traditional handicrafts.
Much of the exhibit will focus on studio glass, a process pioneered by North Carolina artists decades ago.
The opening reception (a good spot to load up on Southern food and bluegrass music) is free.


Neighborhood Report; A New Bike Path: Recreation With a River View
The Hudson River waterfront beckons the people of TriBeCa, SoHo and Greenwich Village.
But in those areas, getting there to appreciate the view poses an obstacle course that requires dodging vehicles, weaving though parking lots and tiptoeing across crumbling piers.
All that is changing under a $1.6 million project to clear a 27-foot-wide waterfront path for strollers, joggers, bikers and bench potatoes.
The path, to be completed by April 17, will run nearly two miles along the river, parallel to West Street, from Gansevoort Street south to Chambers Street.


Neighborhood Report: Bay Ridge; Massacre, Part 2: Replanting
They called it the Bay Ridge Chain-Saw Massacre: the destruction of 400 cherrywood, apple and pear trees six weeks ago in a beautification plan gone haywire.
Now, the Transit Authority is about to begin planting 35 new trees in what residents call a first step toward recovery.
The project, which was presented to Community Board 10 and about 15 residents on Tuesday, calls for the plantings, which will cost $15,000, to begin early next month, before the first frost, said Mary Sempepos, the board's district manager.


Superman Drops Comic-Strip Pose
ON occasion the only way to tell the difference between children's theater and theater meant for grown-ups is by the time of day of the show.
We know that "It's a Bird . . . It's a Plane . . . It's Superman," at Theater Three in Port Jefferson through Nov. 27, is meant for adults because curtain time is 8 P.M.
Theater Three children's shows are performed in the morning.
The musical, scored by Charles Strouse with lyrics by Lee Adams, was adapted by David Newman and Robert Benton from the comic strip.
It opened on Broadway in 1966, but the version being staged by Theater Three is the revised one presented last year at the Goodspeed Opera House in East Haddam, Conn.
Mr.
Strouse also plumbed the comics for his hit musical "Annie" and the current "Annie Warbucks."


THE 1993 CAMPAIGN: The Referendum; A Measure to Limit Terms Draws Incumbents' Fire
Peter F. Vallone, the Speaker of the City Council and a doyen of New York City's Democrats, swept through a center for the elderly on Steinway Street in Queens recently, passing out leaflets and gladhanding a host of constituents.
As Election Day neared, he was fighting the toughest challenge of his long political career, even though he has no opponent.
"I'm not here asking you to vote for me, though that wouldn't hurt," Mr.
Vallone told the center's receptive crowd.
"I have something more important to talk about."


On Pushing (Not Cranking) the Mower
MANY gardening trends have been displacing the traditional ways, but plant tenders have probably been so busy they haven't noticed.
Now that the season is slowing down to a saner pace, there is time for reflection.
The suburbs are becoming quieter.
There is less of that deafening noise from the power mowers and more of that gentle hum from the old-fashioned push 'em yourself reel mowers.
The older models are coming back!


TODAY'S SECTIONS
Special Today: The Magazine, Reintroduced  Section 6
The Magazine presents a fresh face and a new structure today, with expanded sections for principal articles and Style features, more color illustration and photo features and added columns.
Today's centerpiece: The image game in Washington.
A Debut for Color In Travel Section 5
The special issue on Winter in the Sun, with a food column and new weekly features.
Arts and Leisure Section 2
In "Frank Sinatra Duets," an icon makes a triumphant recording comeback and closes a generation gap with a chorus of famous voices.
Book Review Section 7
Margaret Atwood's new novel "The Robber Bride"; and a special section on university presses.
Business Section 3
The departure last week of George M.C.
Fisher as head of Motorola Inc. stunned the company.
But he leaves Motorola firmly planted at the intersection of electronics and telecommunications.
The City Section 13*
Editorials and Op-Ed Section 4
Real Estate Section 10+
With space easier to find, health clubs are flexing their muscles.
Regional Weeklies Section 13


Jodie E. Gould, Robert B. Katel
Jodie E. Gould, a writer and articles editor for Woman's World magazine in Englewood Cliffs, N.J., was married on Friday to Robert B. Katel, a freelance writer in New York.
James Ketcham, the Town Justice of East Hampton, L.I., officiated at the town hall there.
The bride, who is keeping her name, is a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Joseph Gould of Yorktown Heights, N.Y.
She graduated from Ithaca College and received a master's degree in journalism from Columbia University.


Carmen Torruella, Jarvis Slade Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Radames A. Torruella of San Juan, P.R., have announced the engagement of their daughter, Carmen Beatriz Torruella, to Jarvis James Slade Jr., the son of Alice Patterson Slade and Mr.
Slade, both of New York.
A December wedding is planned.
Ms.
Torruella is a securities analyst at Merrill Lynch &amp; Company in New York.
She graduated from Harvard University, from which she also received an M.B.A.
Her father is a senior partner and the head of the labor department at McConnell Valdes, a law firm in San Juan.


West Virginia Extends Syracuse Drought
For the second consecutive week, Syracuse, a preseason pick to challenge Miami for the Big East title, played the role of punching bag for a legitimate conference contender.
Last week the Orangemen were punished by Miami, 49-0.


THE 1993 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Trail; Hillary Clinton Praises Florio's Opposition to Assault Weapons
Hillary Rodham Clinton flew to New Jersey for the second time in 10 days today to stand by Gov.
Jim Florio, endorse his ban on assault weapons, and then extol him as the candidate for women.
Mrs.
Clinton's 20-minute speech in a damp and drafty hangar at the Essex County Airport was the highlight of a busy Saturday of campaigning in which Mr.
Florio attended rallies in Atlantic City, Vineland and Turnersville in southern New Jersey, flew here by helicopter, and then went to Camden to attend a children's Halloween party and meet with black and Hispanic officials.


Oct. 24-30: Croatian Slaughter; A Massacre Ghoulish Even According to Bosnian Standards
Along the road to the massacre in the Muslim village of Stupni Do, Croatian nationalist soldiers manning checkpoints seemed almost friendly, as though there were nothing outsiders might find in the hamlet that could be harmful to the cause of a separate Croatian state in Bosnia.
Casualness in the face of slaughter is one of the lesser shocks of the Bosnian conflict.
As they waved reporters through, the young Croats with fair hair and blue eyes, the collars of their camouflage fatigues rakishly turned up, looked for all the world as though they were ushering visitors to a battlefield where Croatian soldiers had performed storied deeds.


Pro-Nazi Rulers' Legacy Still Lingers for Croatia
At a souvenir stand in Zagreb's central market, glaring down over key rings, cigarette lighters and T-shirts, hang portraits of a firm-jawed man in military uniform.
He is Ante Pavelic, who headed the pro-Nazi Government that ruled Croatia from 1941 to 1945.
When a photographer tried to take pictures of the souvenir stand one morning recently, he was quickly surrounded by thugs from the criminal syndicate that controls the market.
Amid invective and threats, they forced the photographer to open his camera and turn over his film.


Elizabeth Burger, Richard Mahoney Jr.
Elizabeth Mary Burger, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Andrew M. Burger of Yonkers, was married yesterday to Richard Aloysius Mahoney Jr., the son of Mr. and Mrs.
Mahoney of Edina, Minn.
The Rev.
Brian McSweeney performed the ceremony at Annunciation Roman Catholic Church in Crestwood, N.Y.
Mrs.
Mahoney, 29, is a case manager at the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkin, Wharton &amp; Garrison.
She graduated from Pace University.


In Times Square, Turning Profits From 'Gin Mills'
AT 9 A.M. in Rudy's Bar, Ernest Schroeder sits on a stool counting money.
There are many $100 bills, rolls and rolls of quarters, and everything in between.
The cash, around $12,000, represents the weekend take from his four Times Square bars.
At a time when saloons everywhere are struggling, Mr.
Schroeder says that his establishments -- Rudy's, the Full Moon Saloon, the Holland Bar and the Savoy -- are doing well.
The bars are loud, the beer cheap, the food almost free -- and the clientele of a class that would not be terribly affected if the stock market crashed.


Stock Tips
Meat stock is the nexus of modern cooking.
In the 14th century, when the French began shrugging off the medieval palate, with its flavors of mustard, cinnamon, vinegar and sugar, in favor of sauces built from the rich essence of meat, Guillaume Tirel (a.k.a. Taillevent) began writing down the formula for broths as well as sauces that could moisten a variety of dishes.
Careme and later Escoffier built on Taillevent's efforts to codify the saucier's repertoire -- which, in fact, has changed very little in almost 700 years.
Some eras are partial to the rich, brown espagnole sauce, while others favor veloute, the white stock enriched with cream or butter.
Whatever the reigning fashion, the foundation remains the same.
Rich, clear, intensely flavored stock is the springboard for unguentary cooking.


On the City Politic: Voters' Round Table
Four New Yorkers came together for three hours last Sunday with Felicia R. Lee and Larry Olmstead of The New York Times to discuss the candidates and the issues in Tuesday's mayoral election and their feelings about life in New York.
The participants were Melissa Woronoff, 20, a college student who divides her time between the Bronx and Manhattan; Ken Shung, 39, a free-lance photographer who lives in Manhattan; Jerolyn J. Minter, a retired college professor who lives in St.
Albans, Queens, and Roger D. Fields, a "40ish" Harlem resident and the senior vice president of the United Block Front Street Association, a program in which ex-offenders build housing.
What follows are excerpts from their discussion.
What things are most important to you when you look at the quality of life in the city?
ROGER FIELDS: No. 1 is crime, which, as an African-American, is very, very on my mind.
And No. 2 is affordable housing.
When one talks about upgrading and upper mobility in any community, it must be a safe community.
And once you build housing, that housing, which may be comfortable and affordable, has to be in a safe neighborhood.
JEROLYN MINTER: I agree with much of what you're saying, but I think when you put things in order of priority, it's not crime first.
Crime is an offshoot of something that I think is more deeply rooted.
Attention to education and educational standards, economics, housing -- all are built upon the first fundamental, and that's learning how to understand someone who is different from you that you have to live next door to or in the community right adjacent to yours.
FIELDS: Well, I don't tend to agree with you.
When one talks about empowering different ethnic groups, those communities must first have safe streets and must have affordable housing before one can no longer feel stressed.
And one gets angry because one sees that one group is getting more than another group, which also causes division.
No. 2, if we talk about education standards, when you develop affordable housing and affordable home ownership, then those communities become mixed and those educational standards become more active, because the community is not monolithic nor mono-economic.
Melissa, what's your idea of the key areas?
MELISSA WORONOFF: Well, I would agree with Jerolyn.
I would also add not only race but also class and religion.
And I think that's what's great about New York City, but it makes things hard at times.
I mean, to get those things to work out, that's really the starting point and then other things will follow.
KEN SHUNG: My concerns with the city have to do with crime.
I think the real issue for me is, like, who's raising our kids?
When there are two functional parents in the house, then you can maybe have the next generation of people that would want to not resort to crime.
I just feel that you've got to start at home.
If parents don't spend time with their children, then there's no love.
When there's no love, the children don't grow up with any kind of sense of responsibility and moral obligation.
MINTER: I have a concern when I read statistics that come past my desk, that eight out of 10 African-American children are going to be brought up in single-parent families.
What is going to happen to that poor mother who's going out working, trying to support that child.
And she has to put that child in a daycare center if she doesn't get home until 5, and that daycare center or that school program is not going to be able to give them the kind of structure that they need.
When they look and see Mama struggling to pay the rent and buy food, and on the corner is this drug dealer who has diamonds and is driving cars, what's going to happen?
What happens is that person becomes the role model.
WORONOFF: I think it's interesting that there certainly are a lot more single-parent families today.
But I think what needs to happen is that both our city and the country need to acknowledge that families are changing and need to accommodate for that, rather than try to change it.
What can the mayor of this city, whoever is elected, do about any of these issues?
What are they really responsible for?
MINTER: They're responsible for selecting the people who are going to take care of the various city agencies and monitoring them.
I would make sure these people are knowledgeable, decisive, have some humanist to them and are in contact with the needs of the people.
FIELDS: I would fire every single commissioner in the City of New York; that's the first thing I would do.
The second thing, I would go to people who have grown up in this city, understand its problems, are not political.
I would want my commissioners to be responsible to me, not to the Democratic or Republican or whatever leader placed them there.
MINTER: I have come to realize that in our society we aren't willing to give people time enough to bring about change.
You can't come in and change things in four years that have been messed up for the last 12.
FIELDS: Wait a minute, Jerolyn, are you trying to tell me things were messed up in the last 12 years before David Dinkins became Mayor?
This Mayor, he has more nepotism than any other mayor in the history of this city.
He appoints Joyce Brown deputy mayor -- who happens to be married to Carl McCall, the person the Mayor appointed to the Board of Ed.
He appoints Victor Gottbaum to the Board of Ed, and his wife to being Parks Commissioner.
I can go on and on and on.
I think that this Mayor has shown no leadership.
I think this Mayor has gone to traditional clubhouse politics and has not reached out to the community.
I think the city was much better four years ago than it is right now.
Who else wants to jump into that?
WORONOFF: I think the country was better off four years ago than it is now.
I mean, the economy was better.
When the economy goes down, you know, crime does go up.
We have more homeless people.
Fewer people have jobs; more people are being laid off.
I wouldn't place that blame on Mayor Dinkins.
Ken, are you better off than you were four years ago?
SHUNG: Oh, what a question.
I guess -- I don't know, I haven't been that alert in the last four years.
Do I feel more fear when I walk down the street?
I do.
The accusation has been that the Mayor panders too much to blacks.
And that Mr.
Giuliani has pandered too much to whites.
Then the President came in and said that there are too many people in this city who are unwilling to vote for people who are different from themselves, be it because of race or religion.
SHUNG: Anyone who suffers from any kind of discrimination might find truth in that kind of statement.
I think people go into the voting booths after all is said and done, and get very tribal and start to, like, push the lever they feel they can identify with.
FIELDS: I think that everywhere you go there are going to be people who are racist.
But I think people are concerned about issues.
And President Clinton, I thought, made an inappropriate statement which caused the campaign to become even more racially oriented than it is.
What should the Mayor do to build bridges to racial harmony?
MINTER: I believe that Mayor Dinkins has been systematically trying to build those bridges here in New York, initiating programs all the way toward bringing this into fruition.
FIELDS: In reference to Mayor Dinkins's leadership in building bridges, I did not approve of the way he handled Crown Heights.
I did not approve the way he handled the Korean boycott.
I did not approve of the way he dealt with the Washington Heights situation with the drug dealer, in which my tax dollars were used to bury him.
I think when you build bridges, you build them in an objective and corrective manner.
I think, unfortunately, in this campaign, no one is building any bridges.
MINTER: In terms of Giuliani, I don't think that he would be building bridges.
He has set a tone with his activities that, to me, is negative and divisive.
I will vote for David Dinkins, because I believe in his dream.
FIELDS: Well, let me tell you something.
I'm not going to vote for David Dinkins.
I'm going to vote, this ex-offender, this African-American, is going to vote for Rudolph Giuliani.
I think his record in reference to civil rights when he was United States Attorney shows his concern.
I don't see Rudy Giuliani as a police monster.
Tell me about welfare.
MINTER: To eliminate the high numbers of people on welfare, you have to improve the economic situation.
You have to provide training for people so that they can fit into the economic arena for jobs.
For mothers who have to work, you have to provide the services that will care for the child while the mother is in training on a new job.
You have pockets of this happening.
It's not happening across the board in large numbers because you're looking at money.
Where do you get the funding for this?
FIELDS: You've been doing it for 30 years, and it hasn't worked, the social scientist's philosophy.
This is this old liberal philosophy that has kept our community behind.
We need to inform people very candidly.
If you have children out of wedlock continuously, you are going to be punished.
We must stop people from having six children from six different fathers.
No. 2, we cannot reward people because of the fact that they do not wish to work.
I agree with you, we must provide jobs.
But those jobs must be provided with the partnership between private industry and the government.
The government cannot continue to absorb and create these make-believe jobs and cost taxpayers more money.
Now the welfare system rewards you.
What is it that the mayor can and should do?
FIELDS: He should have an aggressive, aggressive program of finding fathers who are not paying.
We need to have these people who are on temporary income maintenance, these Aid to Dependent Children, and these Workfare people actually participate in training and working and placed in private enterprises.
We need an aggressive program like that.
And Mayor Dinkins doesn't have that program.
MINTER: He has started some of these programs.
FIELDS: He hasn't started -- the only thing he has started is sitting there and playing tennis at Gracie Mansion.
WORONOFF: I would say that as far as welfare is concerned, we need to have programs that fit the people's needs, rather than programs that lead people into who we want them to be.
If there are single mothers with children, then we need some sort of daycare for these children while the mothers learn the skills that they need to go out and work.
We need support for our community members out there.
We're talking about ethics and values.
What can any city administration do to affect values -- let's say, the homeless problem?
SHUNG: Well, those policies should not polarize people and put them on the margins of society.
I think people tend to think: "Well, not in my neighborhood. Or not in my backyard. Or I'll just retreat and it won't happen." What happens is, they'll be sitting in a public school, or even a private school.
And the child that grew up on welfare, that value system will be in the same classroom as your child who had maybe a nice upbringing, and those values will cross.
This is a problem that America has to confront, that our value systems, whether you're rich or poor, and those class distinctions, are eventually going to cross paths.
MINTER: You know, another concern is health care.
I think that a lot of women, particularly pro-choice women, may not be inclined to vote for Giuliani, because he has gone back and forth on the issue of abortion.
I think that taking a stance on abortion is really taking a stance on women and how highly you value them.
FIELDS: Well, people are going to vote for David Dinkins, who at one time was not pro-sexual preference, and that's become pro-sexual preference.
WORONOFF: I'd also say that Giuliani's issues on homelessness and his 90-day policy is something that people are going to be looking at.
FIELDS: I think what he was talking about was that bureaucracies tend to drag their feet.
And what he was saying was, "Within that 90 days, I want that person placed." I think he was using the concept that the Rev.
Calvin Butts and the Abyssinian church do in Harlem, that you come to the shelter for a short period of time.
And the first day you're there, you begin to look for employment and permanent housing.
Is the city doing enough?
SHUNG: To deal with homeless?
The city is not doing enough.
I think I don't even look for Mayor Dinkins to solve the world's problems.
I look for him to start moving in the right direction, to build the bridge instead of break it down. . . .
MINTER: I'd like to tell you, I have not voted for Mayor Dinkins because he was black.
I voted for him because I thought he was the best person to do the job.
I'm proud of him because he happens to be an African-American.
I feel that he sets a good role model for African-American children, who can look and say: "I can aspire, too. And doors will not necessarily always be closed to me." But I think he is a man, a human being, trying to do what I would like to see done in this city.
FIELDS: Well, I will tell you, it took a lot for me not to vote for him this time.
Because of race?
FIELDS: Because of race.
It was one of the most difficult decisions I've ever made in my life. . . .
You know, it's interesting, because you have such diverse people here.
Here I am, supporting a relatively conservative candidate.
And here are some of the traditional people who you would think would support a more conservative candidate, supporting a liberal candidate.
And what I'm hearing over and over is that we're all saying the same thing.
Who would be the best mayor to take care of the quality of life and show compassion?
We're all saying, who's going to show more compassion?
All of us sitting here who are employed or have some income are saying we're concerned about those people who can't take care of themselves.


TROUBLED WATER
The great water scare was brought to us by the Natural Resources Defense Council, the same group that perpetrated the scare that Alar in apple products created cancer risks.
Same tactics: old, fully documented data sensationalized to look like an expose, coordinated release of material by a professional P.R. firm to print, radio and television, as well as a book by a freelance writer reviewed just in time.
The incredible thing is that the news media went for the bait again.
A.
DAVID ROSSIN Los Altos Hills, Calif.


Iona Quarterback Throws For 6 Scores Against Siena
Iona 54, Siena 21
Quarterback Tom Proudian threw for six touchdowns as Iona routed host Siena, 54-21, yesterday at Loudonville, N.Y.
Iona (7-1 over all, 4-0 in the conference) extended its winning streak to six games and remained undefeated in the Metro Atlantic Conference.


DEATH BENEFITS
I have enjoyed the company of journalists at lonely places, and argued the essential truth of their profession at isolated outposts and in the backs of trucks.
That truth is, they are not, as Malcolm W.  Browne would have us believe (Endpaper/Life and Times: "Death Benefits," Oct. 3), in a state of grace; rather, they are in limbo, condemned to watch from afar the passions and pain of humanity.
It is this that forces them back to their hotel rooms, showers and bars, leaving those who may never return to continue their Sisyphean tasks.


Phoenix Dining: Rising Expectations
SUDDENLY Phoenix is bursting with good restaurants.
Even as recently as five years ago, for anyone interested in great food this humming desert oasis provoked little more than a yawn.
A favorite of retired America, it was also the capital of white-bread America.
There was Vincent Guerithault's and then . . . not much more.
Today, the chef's stylish Vincent's on Camelback, at 3930 East Camelback Road, is still at the summit of Phoenix restaurantdom, but the summit is no longer such a lonely place.
Since they opened in 1990, Christopher's and Christopher's Bistro, just down Camelback at No. 2398, have quickly developed into two of this country's best dining rooms, with constantly evolving menus that reflect the quirky creativity of the chef Christopher Gross.
The stunning wine list bespeaks the increasing expertise of his sommelier wife, Paola Gross.


Open Doors in Carriacou
ARTHUR BAIN, the silver-haired local pilot, circles his six-seater while cows lumber and cars gun it off the 1,500-foot runway, which is also the main road.
An insouciant great blue heron observes the landing from the bordering mangrove swamp.
A sign next to the road-runway warns, "Stop, Look, Listen for Approaching Aircraft, Then Proceed With Caution." The customs official offers apologies on behalf of the cows: "Usually they know the schedule of the flights." Welcome to Carriacou.
I will learn in the days ahead that cooperation is the spirit of this 13-square-mile island, the largest in the Grenadine chain, 23 miles northeast of Grenada.
People, goats, cattle, cars, chickens, exotic tropical birds and occasional small aircraft share the space amicably.
Beaches and doors are open, boundaries flexible.
Mountains give way to green pasture, green pasture to white beach and beach to blue sea.
Goats, tethered to swings and slides, share a playground with children.
A cow tied to a clothesline rubs its back against drying sheets.


Iraq Raid Stirs Doubts on Clinton Policy
To the Editor
An article by Seymour M. Hersh in The New Yorker suggests that the Clinton Administration had inconclusive evidence for its charge that Saddam Hussein was responsible for an attempt to assassinate former President Bush in Kuwait (news article, Oct. 25) -- and thus for the bombing of Baghdad.
This raises important questions, which require Congressional investigation.


UNIVERSITY PRESSES -- IN SHORT: FICTION
SHORT STORIES STORYHOOD AS WE KNOW IT And Other Tales.
By Jack Matthews.
Johns Hopkins University; cloth, $32.50; paper, $12.95.


Fight Fiercely, Ruben Navarrette Jr.
A DARKER SHADE OF CRIMSON Odyssey of a Harvard Chicano.
By Ruben Navarrette Jr.  270 pp.
New York: Bantam Books. $21.95.


ARNOLD GLIMCHER AND HIS ART WORLD ALL-STARS
I can't imagine that the artists on your cover are pleased with their group appearance.
They look a little too pampered, groomed and well fed, and in the shadow of Glimcher.
Most artists I know tend to bridle at the term "stable," which connotes something tamed, bought and owned.
JANET GASSON PAPAZIAN Great Neck, L.I.


Hold the Wine And Pass the Beer
BEER is big: there are more varieties of beer than ever on store shelves; new breweries are opening; restaurants are beginning to have beer lists, and many restaurants are designing special menus to accompany an assortment of beers.
The beer dinner is replacing the wine dinner.
And it can also happen at home.
At a restaurant beer dinner, an assortment of four or five beers are chosen, like wines, to accompany certain dishes.
Sometimes the dishes themselves are made with beer.


Neighborhood Report; BACK ON TRACK


Down but Undefeated In 'Norman Conquests'
SARAH and Annie are desperately seeking love and attention, and Norman is right there to provide it.
So what if Norman is married to Ruth, who is Annie's sister?
It isn't that Norman is indifferent to Ruth.
The line he uses for his conquests ("I want to make you happy") is, indiscriminately, spoken, even to his wife.
But her typical response is "Yes, I love you, too, Norman, but please leave me alone."


Making It Work; On the Garbage Team
IT was an ungodly 2:48 on a Wednesday morning when a yellow-and-black-striped heap of a subway train puffed and jerked into the station at 59th Street and Lexington Avenue.
On the platform, a woman who seemed to have had a long evening, judging by her scowl and the wig that sat askew atop her head, began to yell.
"Move this thing faster," she ordered, clearly grasping the fact that her train would not arrive until this thing was gone.
"Get this out of here!"


NEW YORKERS &amp; CO.
Farewell to Macy's Sign: 'World's Largest Store'
The sign on Macy's in Herald Square, proclaiming it "The World's Largest Store," has come down.
An electronic replacement is to go up on Nov. 26 and start operating after Jan. 1.
What kind of messages will the new version broadcast?
Laura Melillo, a spokeswoman for the store, would say only that the sign "says that we are a retailer, and says something about shopping."


Democratic Decorations At Bard College
Though the Post-Modern movement took Robert Venturi's ideas in ridiculous directions, many of those ideas have become even more valuable with time.
Architects agonizing over how to design buildings for today's culturally fragmented public, for example, could do worse than reacquaint themselves with Venturi's concept of the "difficult whole." Unity is not meant to be easy, Venturi proposes, nor is diversity synonymous with distintegration.
Difference is as great a civic virtue as justice, faith or grandeur.
And seldom has it been celebrated as delectably as at Stevenson Library, Venturi's new addition to a pair of library buildings at Bard College.
The strength of the design is due partly to Venturi's smart solution to a complex problem, but it also owes much to the context he found there.
A small school with a progressive reputation, Bard sits high on a bluff above the Hudson River in Annandale, commanding views that have scarcely changed since the days of the Hudson River painters.
Its original library, a perfectly proportioned Ionic temple built in 1893, is the ideal architectural accent for this American arcadia.
Of ivory brick surrounded by weathered stone columns, this Greek Revival gem stands for the idea of America as a natural paradise where democracy could take root.


The Executive Life; Spending the Bounty From Studio Takeovers
MORE than once, Frank Price has been in the right place at the right time to make millions of dollars -- and now he's positioning himself for another success.
As chairman of Columbia Pictures when it was taken over by the Coca-Cola Company and a producer at Columbia/Tri-Star when the two were acquired by Sony, Mr.
Price is using some of the fortune he made in those deals to invest in a new distributor, Savoy Pictures.
The company, where he is also a director, is headed by Victor Kaufman, who created Tri-Star and was vice chairman at Columbia during the Coca-Cola years.
Putting his money into enterprises like this now is what attracts him.
"That's the idea -- to make a successful company," he said.


Yes, Virginia


Channel Tunnel List Is Opened to Americans
Americans who want to be among the first to ride through the Channel Tunnel on trains connecting England, France and Belgium can now sign up with Britrail Travel International.
The tunnel is scheduled to open May 6, carrying trainloads of officials in 3 hours between London and Paris and 3 hours 15 minutes between London and Brussels.
After opening day, two services, Eurostar and Eurotunnel, will operate trains for the general public.
Eurostar service is for people riding inside passenger trains; Eurotunnel service, also called Le Shuttle, is for freight and automobiles, which, with drivers and passengers riding inside their vehicles, will be carried on rail cars.


Squaring The Circle
To the Editor:
Something struck me while reading Caryn James's essay "You Are What You Wear"  [ Oct. 10 ] .
For years, it's been a movie cliche that the white man always gets the Asian woman, dead or alive ("The World of Suzie Wong," "Rambo II," "The Year of the Dragon," etc.) Lately, it seems that the white men are having the Asian men also ("The Wedding Banquet," "M. Butterfly").
Perhaps it takes "The Ballad of Little Jo" to square the circle by having: a white woman, dressed up as a white man, possessing an Asian man, in a braid.


Councilman Is Hurt Confronting Cyclist
City Councilman Andrew S. Eristoff, a Republican from the East Side of Manhattan, was punched in the face by a bicyclist yesterday after asking the man to ride on the street, rather than the sidewalk.
Mr.
Eristoff, who is in the middle of a tough race for re-election to the seat he won in a special election last February, was attacked shortly after 2 P.M. near the Sloan's Supermarket on First Avenue near 20th Street, the police and his aides said.
He suffered a deep cut on his left cheek, they said.


Voters Guide; After All the Talk, It's Decision Time
AFTER thousands of handshakes, tons of chicken dinners and millions of dollars in nasty and overblown television commercials, the big day is now just two days away, and for better or worse it's time to decide.
You can be forgiven for thinking the main thing that has divided the incumbent Mayor, David N. Dinkins, and and his Republican-Liberal challenger, Rudolph W. Giuliani, is whether George J. Marlin, the Conservative Party candidate, should have been included in their debates.
But as the chart at right shows, there are some real distinctions between the men who would be Mayor.
At the same time that you are being asked to decide who should spend the next four years in City Hall, you will get to weigh in on whether eight years in office is enough for anyone.
If it is approved, ballot proposal No. 4 would force candidates who win on Tuesday and are re-elected in four years to be out by 2001.
Meantime, voters on Staten Island will take the next step in deciding whether what Gotham joined together man should put asunder.
Finally, you may just have a hot race for the City Council in your neighborhood.
So go see.
You have nothing to lose but your vote.
TODD S. PURDUM


Oklahoma Death Row Inmate Is Returned to New York
After months of legal wrangling and a feud between governors, Thomas Grasso, the twice-convicted killer who preferred a death sentence in Oklahoma to prison in New York, was brought back to New York yesterday to serve out a 20-year-to-life term for the 1991 murder of an elderly Staten Island man.
Accompanied by Oklahoma law-enforcement officials, the 30-year-old inmate left a prison in McAlester, Okla., on Friday and arrived at 8:30 P.M. at Sing Sing prison in Ossining, N.Y., where he had been held before he was transferred to Oklahoma.
New York prison officials said that shortly after 10 P.M. he was placed in a vehicle to be taken to another New York prison, which, for security reasons, was not being announced until his arrival.


CURRENCY
Last
Prior
Year
Week
Week
Ago
Japanese Yen108.55
108.05
123.44
per Dollar
German Mark1.6870
1.6171
1.5423
per Dollar
Canadian Dollar1.3204
1.3048
1.2388
per U.S. Dollar
British Pound1.4815
1.4725
1.5565
U.S. Dollar per British Pound
Gold$368.50
$360.00
$343.20
Republic National Bank
Currency: Friday NY Close


Profile: James Lebenthal; Municipal Bonds? Boring? Not in This Showman's Hands
IT is a disgusting image.
The front of the truck trailer lurches upward, causing garbage to ooze from the rear.
Most of the load is indistinguishable: the mess is gooey, gunky, endless.
But here is a box that once contained Betty Crocker au gratin potatoes.
There, a Spam can.
On the container's fuzzy gray floor are the remnants of a small boy's sneaker.
And the smell is really, really revolting.
"This is a fascinating thing," exclaims the thin man attired in a gray nailhead suit from Barneys, a $90 necktie and silk socks.


Difficult Odds


The Obvious Shot: Getting Beyond It
SOMETIMES, the hardest thing to do when you're photographing is to get beyond the obvious.
This summer we were in New Hampshire, driving beside a wide, shallow river, and we decided to pull over and rest.
I got out and began walking up and down the bank, taking pictures.
The light was a wonderful silver, reflecting jagged highlights off the river's surface.
A pale line of mountains stretched across the horizon; bright orange and yellow wildflowers dotted the near bank.
The scene was a little trite, but I was simply trying to record the experience as best I could.


Neighborhood Reports: Sheepshead Bay; In a Garden by the Water, a Tower of Memories
At the western point of Sheepshead Bay, where land and water meet, a light will glow atop a tower.
It may be taken for a lighthouse, or a fiery chimney.
It will be an eternal flame, in memory of the millions who perished in the Holocaust.


Neighborhood Report: Flushing; Downtown Expansion Plan: Westward Ho!
Saying that downtown Flushing is bursting with pent-up demand for commercial and residential space, city planners last week recommended measures to encourage development in the central retail hub and channel future construction westward.
"This area has experienced a tremendous influx of new population, economic activity and investment," said Richard L. Schaffer, director of the City Planning Department.
"It's a very vibrant business district that is literally bursting at its seams."


Bohemian Rhapsody
KAFKA WAS THE RAGE A Greenwich Village Memoir.
By Anatole Broyard. 149 pp.
New York: Carol Southern Books/ Crown Publishers. $18.


New &amp; Noteworthy Paperbacks
THE DIVINERS By Margaret Laurence.
University of Chicago, $12.95.
This Canadian author's fifth novel, originally published in 1974, is the story of a middle-aged writer who sees her young daughter, whom she's raised alone, preparing to separate from her.
Our reviewer, Marge Piercy, called the book "ambitious and compelling."


Peter Quennell, a Man of Letters And Man About Town, Dies at 88
Peter Quennell, a dashing English man of letters who also wrote about the celebrities he socialized with, died on Wednesday in London.
He was 88.
A published author for 71 years, Sir Peter was a prolific critic, biographer, historian, reviewer, essayist, poet and editor of books and journals.
He was equally known as a wit, gossip, world traveler and hedonist.
He was knighted last year.


Africa Gets A Vote for 2004 Games
Interest by Africa in the 2004 Summer Games may postpone China's continuing bid to be host to the Olympics, the president of the International Olympic Committee said yesterday.
China was widely considered to be a front-runner for the 2004 Games after losing a 45-43 vote last month to Sydney, Australia, for the rights to the 2000 Games.
At the very least, the Chinese were expected to make a strong push for the 2004 Games, which will be awarded in three years.


Administration Leaves Top Civil Rights Jobs Vacant
A year after Bill Clinton was elected on a platform that included re-invigorating civil rights policy, his Administration has yet to fill many of the critical policy positions.
Civil rights organizations are generally pleased by the direction taken by the Administration in major Supreme Court cases involving voting and civil rights.
But the groups are frustrated by the slow pace of appointments.
Important vacancies at the Justice and Labor Departments and the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission have left on hold a variety of issues affecting women, minorities, the disabled and voting rights.


Waiver Language
To the Editor: My wife and I had a nearly identical experience to that of Dan and Sylvia Larsen in the Practical Traveler ("Waivers: More Than a Warning," Aug. 22) when we signed up for a rafting trip last June in Denali National Park, Alaska.


10% of Fruit Juice Sold in U.S. Is Not All Juice, Regulators Say
The clandestine production and sale of adulterated fruit juice is a widespread and highly profitable practice, a review of court cases filed across the country shows -- a practice that is costing American consumers an estimated $1.2 billion a year and exposing them to undisclosed and unapproved chemicals.
Regulators at the Food and Drug Administration, which oversees the food industry, had hoped that tainted juice would become less common after the Federal prosecution in 1987 of Beech-Nut Nutrition Corporation.
Beech-Nut paid a $2 million fine for illegally selling "apple juice" that was nothing more than sweetened water and chemicals.
But the recent cases all involved activities that continued long after that landmark case.
Enforcement Still Haphazard
And while Federal officials say they are committed to pursuing adulteration cases, court exhibits and interviews with investigators and juice industry executives show that enforcement efforts are still haphazard, plagued by inadequate resources and an institutional tradition that has put a low priority on cases that, at least until recently, were not considered a threat to public safety.


De La Hoya, Floored, Stills Wins in Round 1
Oscar De La Hoya moved his scripted career in the ring forward tonight.
And in the process, he showed he was not just another pretty face.
America's sole gold medalist of the 1992 Barcelona Olympics was knocked down in the first round for the first time in his amateur or pro career by the experienced Narciso Valenzuela.
But the first round never went to its three-minute conclusion.
De La Hoya came back from the left hook and pounded Valenzuela to the canvas twice with flurries.
The second time, the Mexican didn't get up as the referee counted to 10.
It took all of 2 minutes 25 seconds.


If You're Looking for a Pumpkin, This Is the Time and Place
PUMPKIN pie.
Pumpkin fritters.
Pumpkin squash.
Pumpkin soup.
Pumpkin ravioli.
Pumpkin ice cream.
The list of what to do with pumpkin is seemingly endless, especially when the pumpkin season reaches its crescendo.


A Truly Golden Oldie
To the Editor:
The most serious omission from Frank Rich's article is the Jerome Moross and John Latouche collaboration "The Golden Apple," a work that was quite successful Off Broadway before moving to the Great White Way.
This work (which really is an opera) helped spawn the career of Kaye Ballard, and one song, "Lazy Afternoon," has received the attention not only of many composer/arrangers and musicologists but also of Barbra Streisand in the 1970's.
Alas, the original cast album (highlights, once issued on RCA and reissued on Elektra) shows no sign of being reissued by either company.
KEVIN L. SCOTT  Bronx


Finding Out What Happens To All That Recycled Material
THE county's newest museum combines sociology, economics and science in a smartly designed showcase, for recyclable garbage.
The site is the new Education and Conference Center of the Material Recovery Facility here, where county residents can learn what happens to the trash they put out at the curb.
The Material Recovery Facility -- nicknamed Murf -- celebrated its first birthday recently with an official ceremony to open the new center.
County Executive Andrew P. O'Rourke and other officials cut the ribbon alongside a robot made of soda cans, a mannequin dressed in newspapers and a dummy promoting recycling.
A potpourri of bottles, cans and containers dangled from the ceiling over their heads.


LAST CALL
I recently found myself pregnant at an older age and can understand Elizabeth Berg's ambivalence about starting again with a new baby.
She doesn't mention, though, how essential it is to have the choice of continuing or terminating a pregnancy.
My hopes, too, were shattered by an early miscarriage.
While I can defer to a decision made by Mother Nature, I will not accept the harassment and irrationality of the clinic pickets.
VIRGINIA MILLER New York, N.Y.


Data Bank/October 31, 1993
Data Bank/October 31, 1993
New Orders for Durable Goods
Sept.
Aug.
July
Monthly percent change
0.7
2.6
-2.8
Personal Income
Monthly percent change
0.2
1.3
-0.3
Existing-Home Sales
Monthly percet change
2.6
-1.3
4.9
Consumer Confidence
Oct.
Sept.
Aug.
1985 = 100
59.4
63.8
59.0
Gross Domestic Product
III Q'93
II Q'93
I Q'93
1987 dollars, in percent
2.8
1.9
0.8
Weekly Jobless Claims
Oct. 22
Oct. 15
Oct. 8
In thousands
347
351
344
Coal Production
Thousands of net tons, weekly total
82,163
78,558
72,780
Crude Oil, W. Texas Intermediate
Oct. 29
Oct. 22
Oct. 15
Friday spot price, per barrel
$16.92
$18.07
$18.27


A Long Road on Affordable Housing
A RECENT proposal to build two five-unit apartment buildings for homeless families on a residential stretch of the Post Road here drew protests from some members of neighborhood associations a few weeks ago and highlighted the tensions surrounding the issue of affordable housing in the county.
These units were proposed by the nonprofit housing organization known as Shore -- the acronym stands for Sheltering Homeless Is Our Responsibility -- and were targeted for homeless families or others who qualified.


Russia Ties New Libyan Sanctions to a Loan
Russia is threatening to veto new Security Council sanctions against Libya for refusing to surrender two suspects in the bombing of a Pan American World Airlines airliner over Scotland five years ago unless the United States, Britain and France give it an interest-free loan to cover a $4 billion debt Tripoli owes it.
The United States and its allies are resisting the Russian demand, which one American diplomat described as "a nonstarter."


New Branch of the Tate Honors Cornish Town
With its stone cottages and narrow cobbled streets, the seaside town of St.
Ives, about 300 miles southwest of London, has long been an inspiration to British artists.
Now a new branch of the Tate Gallery celebrates the Cornish town and the painters, sculptors and potters who turned this former fishing village into an artists' colony.
The three-story gallery, which opened this summer, was designed by the British architects Eldred Evans and David Shalev.Among the five main rooms are two devoted to a group of artists who lived and worked in St.
Ives from 1925 to 1975, including the painters Ben Nicholson, Terry Frost, Christopher Wood, Alfred Wallis and Bryan Wynter, the sculptor Naum Gabo and the potter Bernard Leach.


A Menu Newcomer: Manchurian Dishes
A RESTAURANT that stamps itself Asian, Eastern or Oriental is making a statement.
It is saying that its cuisine is a mixture.
Usually that means two-thirds Chinese dishes, one-third Japanese and a sprinkling of something exotic, often Thai.
Eastern Pavilion in East Setauket has a new twist, Manchurian.
The menu describes the food as "a combination of Japanese, Korean, Russian and Chinese cooking . . . from the region of the frigid Siberian North and the land of hearty pioneers."


Hooked On Cider
A COUPLE of weeks ago I went up to the Berkshires and sank my teeth into a Golden Russet.
It was crunchy and aromatic, with a tangy-sweet flavor that lingered like pineapple.
"It's my favorite eating apple," Thomas Christopher yelled over the clanking of his Farmer's Favorite Mark, a 19th-century cider press with an early-20th-century motor.
"It's the only American variety I've found that has the right combination of sweetness, acidity, tannins and aromatics to make a good cider all by itself."


Terrorize A Child, Pull a Crowd
At the end of "The Good Son," two of the world's most valuable child actors are dangled off the edge of a cliff -- for real.
This stunt may be the latest cultural symptom of how quickly children are growing up.
Macaulay Culkin, as a murderous little boy, and Elijah Wood, as the good-seed cousin who spots his crimes, were suspended high above the ocean, just like macho adults who insist on doing their own tricks.
How can you hang a kid off the side of a cliff?


Neighborhood Reports; New Road Hours
News for walkers, runners, bikers and skaters: Central Park drives will now be closed to motor vehicles part of each weekday for 10 months of the year instead of 7.
The drives are closed to vehicles weekends all year round.
They are also closed weekdays, 10 A.M. to 3 P.M. and 7 P.M. to 10 P.M., from April to mid-November.
But this "summer schedule" will now begin in January.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD: Red Hook; Dancing Along the Way
Red Hook Arts, a multimedia youth group, has teamed up with Dancing in the Streets, which specializes in site-specific performances, to create a production that stretches along several blocks of Red Hook.
The audience will meet at Pier 41 and walk through Red Hook as a Narratr relates the neighborhood's history, with stops at warehouses, the Trolley Museum and other spots for brief dance and music performances, some by local schoolchildren and the elderly.
The price will end with a play staged at the Beard Street pier.


THE 1993 CAMPAIGN: Financing; Why Contributors Give To Opposing Candidates
The candidates for mayor portray the battle for City Hall as a titanic struggle between competing ideologies.
But when it comes to campaign contributions many influential people have decided to play it safe and give to each side, campaign records show.
Some contributors call it hedging their bets.
Some say it is political indecision.
Some profess a genuine admiration for both candidates, and some say they simply changed their minds in midcampaign.
But the upshot is that scores of contributors have insured that they will be in the winner's corner, no matter who wins on Tuesday.


THE 1993 CAMPAIGN: Campaign Watch; Dinkins Draws a Crowd; Giuliani Plays Solitaire
In the final campaign week as seen on television, Mayor David N. Dinkins wrapped himself in the cloak of his incumbency, buoyed by an all-star cast of Hollywood and Washington celebrities.
Rudolph W. Giuliani, in contrast, played the Lone Ranger, poised to avenge four years of municipal evil with no big guns by his side, no fancy munitions at all beyond faith, family and a handful of turncoat Democrats.
As Mayor Dinkins leaned into the televised embrace of Barbra Streisand, the Rev.
Jesse Jackson and Tipper Gore, his Republican-Liberal challenger appeared proudly on the evening news beside his latest supporter, Andrew S. Fisher of the Brooklyn Economic Development Corporation.
As Mr.
Dinkins clasped hands with President Clinton ("a friend of mine from Hope, Arkansas"), Mr.
Giuliani stood alone at a podium before four questioners on WCBS-TV in a hand of political solitaire that was supposed to have been a debate.


Train to the Plane: Will It Ever Fly?
When the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey first proposed a light rail system that would finally link New York City's airports to Manhattan by sleek, quiet electric trains, people cheered.
But now that the plans are nearing completion -- with a proposal to put the Manhattan terminal in one of the worst traffic spots in the city -- rumblings of opposition are surfacing.
Just about everyone recognizes the need for better access to Kennedy International and La Guardia Airports, where congested highways are the principal transportation connection to the rest of the city.


Oct. 24-30: Haitian Standoff; Aristide Calls for A Total Embargo
Caught in a stalemate with Haiti's military leaders, the Rev.
Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the deposed President, asked the United Nations last week to impose a total trade embargo to force his opponents to resign.
Father Aristide was supposed to return to Port-au-Prince yesterday , under the terms of a United Nations-brokered agreement that was signed in July by the Haitian President and the country's military ruler, Lieut.
Gen.
Raoul Cedras.
Father Aristide says he is ready to return but only after General Cedras has given up power.


Melissa Moore, Richard Abate
Melissa Moore, a doctoral candidate in politics, and Richard R. Abate, a doctoral candidate in American studies, both at New York University, were married yesterday.
The Rev.
Dr.
Alfred A. Moss performed the Episcopal ceremony at the University Club in New York.
Ms.
Moore, 24, is keeping her name.
She graduated from Smith College.
She is a daughter of Harold and Mary Ann Moore of Maplewood, N.J.
Her father is a partner in the New York law firm of Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom.
Her mother is the municipal welfare director of Chatham Borough and the towns of Maplewood, South Orange and Millburn, all in New Jersey.


Neighborhood Reports: Upper East Side; A Cheaper Express Bus Brings Protests
As the city sees it, the new, less expensive Harlem-to-Wall Street express bus along Fifth Avenue is an enhancement of existing express services, and people should be happy.
But Yorkville residents are complaining: they fear the new private service will threaten two public East Side lines to Wall Street.
Their concern is that the Transit Authority will close the York Avenue route to lower Manhattan for lack of passengers, forcing residents to walk to Fifth Avenue for the other bus.


Rangers Burn Whalers as Patrick Fiddles
James Patrick sat in the press box in his suit and his tie, leafed through the press notes, watched the Rangers' goals as they were replayed on television and didn't play hockey.
Again.
That situation is not likely to change anytime soon.


Twyla Tharp: Back to Basics
"Demeter and Persephone," Twyla Tharp's premiere in the Martha Graham Dance Company's recent, rich season, offered a shrewd look at mother-daughter relationships.
It was not a masterpiece, but it was, finally, a mutual success for both the choreographer and the troupe.
The company's range was extended by a work that was novel, in the best sense, and Ms.
Tharp revealingly redefined herself as a modern-dance choreographer.
For more than a decade, she has insisted on seeing herself as a classical choreographer -- working with ballet companies, hiring ballet dancers for her own group and making increased, if often inverted, use of the classical ballet vocabulary.
Yet she has never accepted the codified classical idiom as a given.
At heart, she remains rooted in a modern-dance mentality.
That is, she's more interested in exploring new movement than in accepting a single vocabulary as a creative premise.


Kansas St. Tops Oklahoma
Kansas St. 21, Oklahoma 7
Fans tore down the goal posts yesterday after Kansas State beat Oklahoma for the first time in 23 tries, but there wasn't much celebration in the Wildcats' locker room.


Ms. Sonkin, Mr. Stoneburn
Michelle Sonkin, a daughter of Ralph and Bea Eisemann of Englewood Cliffs, N.J., was married last evening to Stephen Stoneburn, the son of the late Sidney and Tilda Stoneburn.
Rabbi A. Bruce Goldman officiated at the Four Seasons restaurant in New York.


Benjamin to Miss Preseason Finale
While Derrick Coleman and Rick Mahorn both practiced with the Nets today for the second straight day, Benoit Benjamin missed the drill and will not play Sunday afternoon against the Minnesota Timberwolves at Duke University in Durham, N.C.


The WASP Descendancy
I never thought I'd be having tea with someone who had tea with Edith Wharton.
But to spend an afternoon with Susan Mary Alsop in her Georgetown drawing room is to realize that our country is not so old, after all, that its history can be spanned in a single afternoon.
Many people come to Washington to make history, but few know it as personally as Mrs.
Alsop does.
In 1934, when she was 16, Susan Mary Jay was taken by her Great-Aunt Harriet to tea with Wharton at her country house outside Paris.
The young girl hoped the famous expatriate would talk about Marcel Proust and Aldous Huxley.
But the writer, a plump, elderly woman in a shapeless suit wound about with scarves, was less like the enchanting Ellen Olenska than the tiresome Lawrence Lefferts.


Value Caribbean Style
BARGAINS are fair game in the Caribbean, and some can be found without trying.
One example: A hotel shopper looking for a room in Puerto Rico called the small Casa San Jose, a stylish bed and breakfast in San Juan, and asked for the "best rate." The choices for Sept. 12 and 13 were few: A $150 windowless room on the first floor or a $200 suite with a view on the third.
The bargain hunter paused to consider: windowless claustrophobia versus a view -- or two long flights of stairs versus convenience.
The voice at the hotel broke in: "You can have the $200 suite for $180."
All discounts don't come that easily, especially during the winter high season when expensive hotels are often full.
But negotiating is certainly in order.
Published rates should not be taken at face value.
Some hotelkeepers say without caviling that they will negotiate.
On the other hand, the published bargain rate can also slide upward -- a special package may be "subject to availability." Most packages are not available during holidays; the best bargains in winter are in January, when rates dip at many hotels.
In any case, discount packages need close scrutiny.


No Headline
"If I don't vote, I can't gripe about anything." -- BEATRICE GILENSON of Queens, who says she is disgusted with both mayoral candidates.  [ 1:5. ]


POSTINGS: Solving a Style Conundrum; Museum's Addition Is Designed To Reflect a View of the Future
In designing an addition to the Museum of the City of New York, James Stewart Polshek &amp; Partners found itself in a contextual sandwich.
To the west, on Fifth Avenue, was the original museum, a neo-Georgian structure with red bricks and pediments.
To the east, running from 103d to 104th Streets, was the Patrick Henry Preparatory School, a gabled and yellow-brick building modeled on a French Renaissance town hall.
Rather than mimic the older buildings, Mr.
Polshek's office produced a spare and straightforward modern composition.
"We didn't attempt to be cute," he said.
"We have not replicated quoins or punched windows. But we used the same brick and the same marble trim in ways that speak to the next century rather than the past century." The point, Mr.
Polshek said, was to express the expanding mission of the museum, where exhibitions are to focus on the future of the city, as well as its past.


Term Limits Drive the Talented Out of Politics; Aid to Orderly Change
To the Editor:
Let me disagree with "Term Limits Limit Voters' Rights" (editorial, Oct. 21), which suggests that term limits "violate democracy." The instinct of the voters to limit terms is sound.
The purpose is not to "Force the rascals out," as you phrase it, but to open up the electoral process.
Under the present system corruption and special interests are institutionalized by the unlimited number of terms incumbents may serve.


Corrections
Because of an editing error, a review on Oct. 3 about "The Lives of Beryl Markham," by Errol Trzebinski, misidentified the first woman to fly a plane solo across the Atlantic.
She was Amelia Earhart; Markham was the first woman to do it from east to west.


Neighborhood Report: Tribecca; When a Hotel Is Half Historic
A proposal to build a 34-floor hotel tower and attach it to a warehouse in a historic district is being hailed by some as an ideal marriage of opposites.
Others denounce the plan as a monstrous urban misfit.
Hearings at the Landmarks Preservation Commission last week and at Community Board 1 the week before drew clashing testimony on the proposed Hudson Hotel and Conference Center, to be built on an empty lot at the northeast corner of West and Laight Streets.


Yangtze Cruise
To the Editor: Nicholas D. Kristof's sour report of his cruise, "The Yangtze's Gorges" (Oct. 10) certainly did not match the impressions that my wife and I had on a five-day cruise in July on the same boat, the Yangtze Paradise.
What Mr.
Kristof viewed as a ho-hum sight of "high mountains on either side of the narrow channel" we experienced as soaring escarpments that brought a sting of tears to the eyes at such monumental and overpowering natural beauty.
Too bad about the rain he reported, but the Chinese can hardly be blamed for that.
When we traveled during the hottest period of the year, the sun was out, and when we left the air-conditioned cabin to lounge on our private balcony, we did not see "ugly and industrial" river banks "with one hulking factory next to another." What we saw was a river busy with junks chugging upstream and drifting downstream and fishermen up to their waists at the river's edge scooping nets into the waters, raising them to the surface, finned trophies sparkling in the sun.


Inquiry Delays Solarz's Appointment as Envoy to India
President Clinton has put off nominating former Representative Stephen J. Solarz as Ambassador to India after a background check found problems that the Administration is unwilling to specify.
New York Newsday reported today that the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Immigration and Naturalization Service had been drawn into a deepening investigation of the former Brooklyn Congressman, and subpoenas have been issued.
But the newspaper said it could not confirm the nature of the allegations or possible infraction or misconduct that was holding up the nomination.


Boo!
Tonight millions of people who usually measure out their lives in coffee spoons, commuting, the evening news and Sunday afternoon football will break loose.
They will act silly.
They will wear funny clothes.
They will probably embarrass their children, who may think it's O.K. for them to leave the house dressed like Barney but pure nuttiness on their parents' part.
They will be wrong.
There are times, and Halloween is one of them, when pretending to be somebody else is the height of sanity.


Bottle Collecting: Pieces of the Past Worth Digging Deep For
SOMEWHERE under dense overgrowth in this industrial Raritan Bay town, Glenn Vogel and Glenn Harbour are digging through the ash, clay, sand and rusting metal of history.
For more than six hours, the slow, rhythmic work is punctuated by odd bits of nursery rhymes and nonsense songs that float up from a 15-foot hole in the abandoned dump.
Mr.
Vogel and Mr.
Harbour estimate they are digging down as far as 1895.
Scattered around the opening are the remains of leather boots, wooden buckets, porcelain bowls and eight-inch-long oyster shells -- all of which they have dug up and none of which interest them.


Corrections
A picture in The Times Magazine last Sunday, with an article about 50 influential people in fashion, was printed in error.
The photograph, supplied with an erroneous label by a publisher, showed a model who appears on the cover of "John T. Molloy's New Dress for Success," not Mr.
Molloy himself.


Neighborhood Report: Washington Heights; Homicide Rate Falls by 27 Percent
The number of slayings in the 34th Precinct, long among the most murderous in the city, has dropped sharply so far this year, according to police statistics.
But the experts disagree on just how to interpret the new figures.
Slayings in the precinct, which covers Washington Heights and Inwood, were down by 27 percent through the end of September from last year at the same time, to 51 from 70.
The 1992 total, 98, also represented a drop from the precinct's all-time high, 119 in 1991.
The number had risen steadily from 1987 to 1991.


Jane Humpstone, L. C. Ward 3d
Jane Hamilton Humpstone, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John H. Humpstone Jr. of Locust Valley, L.I., was married yesterday to L. Courtney Ward 3d, the son of Lee C. Ward Jr. and Barbara Ward, both of New York.
The Rev.
Erik Kolbell, a United Church of Christ minister, performed the nondenominational ceremony at the National Arts Club in New York.
Ms.
Humpstone, 30, is keeping her name.
She is the manager of program strategies for Apco Associates, a public affairs concern in Washington.
She graduated magna cum laude from Colgate University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
Her father retired as the president of Legal Systems Inc., a subsidiary of Bowne &amp; Company, the financial printing company in New York.


Marrakesh Expressive
An old ruin can seduce the imagination anywhere, but especially in Marrakesh.
It was there that Simon Xavier Hermes came under the spell of a 500-year-old palace, the former domain of a sultan's brother.
Half in shambles, its columns supported by spare timbers, its halls clogged with collapsed plaster, the house "felt wonderfully real," says Hermes, a scholar of comparative religion and a scion of the French leather clan.
"There it was, stewing in its own juices."
The house was not habitable by modern standards.
A classic of the urban villa type, with impossibly long, narrow rooms arranged around an outdoor courtyard, it lacked comfort and amenities and would need substantial renovation.
Neighborhood buildings would have to be annexed for bathrooms.
Rooms were accessible to each other only through the courtyard outside.
A mazelike entrance of narrow zigzagging corridors -- great for defense in the 16th century -- was hardly what you'd call welcoming.


Alfie, Oh Alfie, What Can We Do With Ye?
To the Editor:
In "For Best Results, Forget the Bonus" (Viewpoints, Oct. 17), Alfie Kohn suggests that rewards are dangerous.
Extrinsic rewards such as money, praise and recognition will, according to him, undermine intrinsic interest in rewarded activity.
If this is so, it is strange that his own attacks on rewards persist, since they have surely earned him money, praise and recognition.


THE 1993 CAMPAIGN: Long Island; G.O.P.'s Grip In Nassau Shows Signs Of Strain
The 41-year-old truck driver, a registered Republican, owes his son's job to the Republican machine that has run Nassau County nearly all his life.
But for the first time, the approaching election for county executive is triggering none of the familiar reflexes.
Thomas S. Gulotta, the incumbent, whom most residents here seem to have met at one ribbon-cutting or another, has failed to win him over.
"He started out with a surplus, and all of a sudden we're in a deficit," said the man, chin resting on his garden rake.
"Taxes keep going up. It's just like the Federal Government." He spoke on condition of anonymity, fearing his son would soon be unemployed if the father's plans to vote for Mr.
Gulotta's rival, Benjamin L. Zwirn, became known.


Phone Speaks English
American visitors to Switzerland who can't speak any of that country's four languages -- French, German, Italian and Romansch -- can still get information on topics ranging from baby-sitting to ski conditions by calling Anglo-Phone.
The 24-hour service's English-speaking operators, at 157-50-14, can also draw on lists, updated daily, of lawyers, doctors, veterinarians and other professionals.
Each call is $1 a minute.


Poignant "Pathetique"


THE 1993 CAMPAIGN: Policy Change; Workers' Partners Added To Health Plan by Dinkins
Mayor David N. Dinkins, who has aggressively sought the support of gay and lesbian voters, yesterday announced that New York City would provide health benefits to the domestic partners of homosexual city workers.
The city would join 12 other municipal governments that already do so.
The partners of unmarried heterosexuals would also be entitled to the benefits.


My Day in Taxi Court: A Little Justice for All
I AM a habitual filer of complaints with the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission.
I believe this is my civic duty, the manifestation of a quixotic notion that a minimal standard of polite behavior can be imposed upon New Yorkers.
My story is an ordinary one, the kind you hear at parties and over lunch in the company cafeteria, the kind that is always outdone by someone within earshot who has suffered a greater, more dramatic indignity.


Neighborhood Reports; Lights! Pedestrians! Safety!
It may come as a surprise to residents of the Upper West Side, but they don't stay out late enough, at least according to two groups bent on increasing neighborhood safety.
The Police Liaison Group and West Side Crime Prevention say that residents fearful of nighttime dangers limit their forays, leaving the streets to drug dealers, prostitutes and homeless people.
So, in a project called West Side Lights, the two groups have joined Community Board 7, the police and Consolidated Edison to press landlords and store owners from 88th Street to 92d Street, between Broadway and the Hudson River, to supplement the vague glow of streetlights with high-powered, wall-attached lamps.


THE WORLD: The Conservatives' Devastating Defeat; Canada Joins the World in Dumping Incumbent Leaders
IN a sense, the Canadian elections last week constituted a revolution.
With the Conservatives nearly obliterated, regional parties have been infused with sudden national power, and are threatening to dissolve the country into jealous fiefs.
Only the Liberals, swept to victory by Ontario, the most populous and richest province, remain a force to hold things together.
The changes, which give the Liberals led by Jean Chretien a comfortable majority of 178 out of 295 House of Commons seats but have created hostile factions of western Reformers and Quebec separatists, took place for reasons that are both born of Canadian politics and are also international.
Nine years ago the Conservatives, led by Brian Mulroney, came to power with the largest number of seats in the history of Canada.
But his Government, and that of his successor Kim Campbell, could not control high joblessness, high budget deficits and debt.
So a grassroots fury developed against Mr.
Mulroney, and it was followed by a campaign of gaffes by Ms.
Campbell.


LAST CALL
I am approaching 44 and have gone through the same reckoning that so many of us have (Hers: "Last Call," by Elizabeth Berg, Oct. 3).
The tracts about passages to new stages -- to a freedom to relinquish the burden of fertility and maternity -- are interesting but not felt.


Make His Night, Too


Neighborhood Report; Hanging Baskets
Central Park employees last week began hanging the first of 140 new wastebaskets on lampposts.
The 20-gallon black steel baskets, raised four feet off the ground to discourage rodents, are part of a $27,000 project to improve trash collection.
Next month, the park's 55-gallon drums will be replaced with plastic covered carts that hold 100 gallons.
In the spring, blue carts for recycling bottles and cans are to be installed.
The new containers are for south of 72d Street; the program will be extended next year.
M.H.


Neighborhood Repots: Upper East Side; After Fire, Church Seeks Aid
The Church of the Heavenly Rest on Fifth Avenue at 90th Street is starting a million-dollar fund-raising campaign this week to help restore the church, which was badly damaged by a three-alarm fire on Aug. 7.
Fire destroyed half the chancel area of the Gothic stone building, with damages estimated at more than $3 million.
Perhaps the biggest loss was an enormous, elegant Austin organ, considered one of the finest in the city.
The Episcopal church had long been noted for the quality of its musical offerings.


Public &amp; Private; Competitive Cancer
On Mortality Monday, when I have the sonogram, the mammogram and the shakes, there comes a four-minute interval during which I believe I have breast cancer.
"We just want to take a few more pictures on the left side," is what the technician says, and she takes them and bustles off, leaving me to contemplate lumpectomy, mastectomy and chemotherapy until the doctor returns to report that there was some problem with the film and all the little spots are gone, vamoosed, vanished, have a nice year, everything's fine.


The Guys, the Ghouls, the Girls
It's expensive being a friend of Robert Woolley, the socially stringent auctioneer at Sotheby's.
Tonight, amid hay bales and pumpkins at the auction house, Mr.
Woolley will give his fourth annual Halloween party, a benefit for the Gay Men's Health Crisis, and he has devised a novel price scale for tickets.
Old friends are expected to donate $500; new friends, $250, and acquaintances, $125.


THE 1993 CAMPAIGN: The Undecided; Mayoral Race Still Perplexes Many Voters
Emily Toney, an insurance underwriter, says she is torn between voting for Rudolph W. Giuliani like her mother, who says she thinks he can "take the bull by the horns," and voting for David N. Dinkins because he has rebuilt housing in her depressed Brooklyn neighborhood, Bedford-Stuyvesant.
In nearby Park Slope, Edward Murphy, a lifelong Democrat, says he fears that deep down he has the urge to vote for Mr.
Giuliani, a Republican, because the candidate is white.
"That's the only reason I've waited so long to decide," he said, tugging on his Yankees cap.


Neighborhood Report: Central Park; Park Program Puts Homeless to Work
Bearing the tools of his trade -- a metal reacher and plastic bags -- Bill Durham set out at 7:30 A.M. the other day on his usual route, along the western rim of Central Park from 85th to 100th Streets.
He knew what he would find: newspapers, Popsicle sticks and drinking straws all over; cigarette butts around the bus stops, and lots of crack vials.
By 9:30 he had picked up and bagged every scrap in his sector.
After half an hour for breakfast at the Yorkville Common Pantry, a nonprofit agency, he was back in the park, ready to rake leaves.


50 Years of Fashion


ARNOLD GLIMCHER AND HIS ART WORLD ALL-STARS
The 11 artists pictured on your cover look like an aging football team and the art gallery owner, Arnold Glimcher, a B-team coach.
And perhaps this is the point, with the headline "Arnold Glimcher and His Art World All-Stars." Is art now a sport where gallery owners lure the best-selling artists from other galleries for a higher price?
And is this the 90's?
Women were better off in the 1930's, when photographs of artists gathering together included at least one woman, perhaps Georgia O'Keeffe.
MARGIE LEE Portland, Ore.


Elizabeth Mullen, R. Scott Cassie
Elizabeth Jane Mullen, a daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
John J. Mullen of New Rochelle, N.Y., was married yesterday to R. Scott Cassie, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
Richard F. Cassie of New Vernon, N.J.
The Rev.
Patrick Brown performed the Roman Catholic ceremony at the Church of St.
Thomas More in New York.


TROUBLED WATER
Sara Terry's article "Drinking Water Comes to a Boil" (Sept. 26) deftly captures the critical nature of the threats to our cities' water supplies.
Many of the dangers stem from the fact that surface-water supplies (reservoirs, lakes and streams) are especially vulnerable and costly to treat.
There is an underutilized alternative for many small and large cities -- ground water.


From Volvo, Speed and Space
THERE'S the green sea.
Lovely.
The beach.
A twisting road.
And the commercial drones on, the announcer properly bored or maybe sad as he laments the state of our workaday world:
"Will we ever look forward to Mondays? What about mowing the lawn? Or going to the dentist? Will cleaning out the basement ever be a joy? Will doing the laundry ever be the highlight of our week? How 'bout driving a station wagon? Will that ever be fun?"


A la CarteBay Scallops, a Rare Breed Indeed, Are Making a Return Visit
BAY SCALLOPS are small, sweet and special.
They are tender treats that grow in bays, harbors and ponds from Massachusetts to Long Island.
Although bay scallops are most abundant from November through March, it seems as though fewer are available each year.
As a result some restaurants mislabel calicos, which come from Southern waters, as bays.
Connoiseurs do not relish the less desirable and flavorful calicos.


Neighborhood Reports: Sheepshead Bay; In a Garden by the Water, a Tower of Memories
At the western point of Sheepshead Bay, where land and water meet, a light will glow atop a tower.
It may be taken for a lighthouse, or a fiery chimney.
It will be an eternal flame, in memory of the millions who perished in the Holocaust.


It All Ends Tuesday


WESTCHESTER GUIDE
JAPANESE LANTERNS
It was the slope of her wide-brimmed hat in an old photo that inspired the title "Rita Hayworth" for one of Jeff Shapiro's stone lanterns.
But the more obvious influence on his work is Japanese, reflecting 10 years of study in 4 Japanese cities.
An exhibition of Mr.
Shapiro's indoor-outdoor lanterns will be on display at the Gallery in the Courtyard in Katonah through Nov. 22.
Using pieces of uncut natural stone for which he scours the Catskill stream beds, he creates a central ceramic core that blends with the stone and contains the lighting source -- a candle or an electric bulb.
Sometimes a carefully casual growth of moss or lichen is added.


Glittering New Capital Belies Turmoil in Nigeria
Amid a wooded plain and soaring granite hills, a new city is rising here, its splendor and vast scale in stark contrast to the pervasive rot and decline of much of Africa.
This is the site of Nigeria's new capital, a reflection of the country's sense of itself as black Africa's leader, and at the same time a symbol of a nation hoping to be one of the world's great powers in the next century.


'Stuck In the Muck'
To the Editor:
I am at once pleased, offended and puzzled by Michael Kimmelman's essay "A Few Artless Minutes on '60 Minutes' "  [ Oct. 17 ] .
Mr.
Kimmelman grudgingly commends our report for questioning the opaque nature of contemporary art criticism and the objects upon which it heaps so much impenetrable praise.
But he condemns us for lumping together such disparate artists as Jeff Koons, Cy Twombly, Robert Gober and Robert Ryman.
Mr.
Kimmelman does not seem to understand that it was not "William Paley's network" that lumped them together; it was the spring sale of contemporary art held at Alfred Taubman's sale room -- Sotheby's.


Mutual Funds; Customs That Bewilder Investors
CERTAIN tricks of the mutual fund trade can leave an unwary investor feeling quite mistreated.
With some legal sleights of hand, the industry can make funds, or their track records, seem very different from what they really are.
And investors can trip themselves up, too, by not understanding fine distinctions in fund language.


Eavesdropping on Hitler's Scientists
OPERATION EPSILON The Farm Hall Transcripts.
Introduction by Sir Charles Frank.
Illustrated. 313 pp.
Berkeley:  University of California Press. $30.


City of Darkness


Wall Street; Philip Morris Shows How to Stay Down
IN the weeks before she went on maternity leave in July, Rebecca Barfield, a tobacco analyst at First Boston, entertained the same question from client after client: What will you name the baby?
Her stock answer: "It won't be Philip, it won't be Morris, and it won't be Winston."
No wonder.
Like most other analysts following tobacco companies, Ms.
Barfield had been caught off guard on April 2 -- Marlboro Friday -- when Philip Morris said 1993 operating earnings would drop as much as 40 percent.
The stock plunged $14.25 that day to $64.125, and closed Friday at $53.75.


U.S. Razes Somali Shacks for New Airport Road
Aden Mohammed Abdi was rather surprised when some American troops appeared at his two-room shack about a week ago and told him he was about to get a new home.
He was even more surprised on Thursday afternoon, when bulldozers abruptly plowed his family's wooden shack into the ground with most of his belongings inside.


PAPERBACK BEST SELLERS: October 31, 1993
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Fiction
1
44
THE JOY LUCK CLUB, by Amy Tan. (Ivy, $5.99.) The tensions and bonds shared by Chinese-American women and their mothers.
2*
5
THE AGE OF INNOCENCE, by Edith Wharton. (Collier/Macmillan, $5.95.) The 1920 novel about New York society life in the 1870's.
3
37
THE PELICAN BRIEF, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) A law student probes the murder of two Supreme Court justices.
4
2
THE KILLER ANGELS, by Michael Shaara. (Ballantine, $5.99.) A 1974 novel about the Battle of Gettysburg.
5
3
LORD OF HAWKFELL ISLAND, by Catherine Coulter. (Jove, $5.99.) Romantic passions and feminist feelings at play in 10th-century Britain.
6
7
THE TALE OF THE BODY THIEF, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) "The Vampire Chronicles," continued.
7
5
MITIGATING CIRCUMSTANCES, by Nancy Taylor Rosenberg. (Signet, $5.99.) A woman's revenge after she and a daughter are attacked.
8
1
INADMISSIBLE EVIDENCE, by Philip Friedman. (Ivy, $5.99.) A prosecutor struggles to convict a real estate tycoon of murder.
9
1
THE GENERAL'S DAUGHTER, by Nelson DeMille. (Warner, $6.50.) The investigation of the murder of an officer, a general's daughter.
10
1
AMERICAN STAR, by Jackie Collins. (Pocket, $6.50.) The vengeful wife of a Hollywood star menaces his romance with a celebrated model.
11
81
A TIME TO KILL, by John Grisham. (Island/Dell, $6.99.) Racial tensions surface during the trial of a man charged with murder.
12
1
DEVIL'S WALTZ, by Jonathan Kellerman. (Bantam, $6.50.) A psychologist-detective investigates a small child's strange illnesses.
13
8
DRAGON TEARS, by Dean Koontz. (Berkley, $6.99.) Two police detectives try to cope with a demonic serial killer in southern California.
14
6
THE SECRET HISTORY, by Donna Tartt. (Ivy, $6.99.) Close friends at a small college must deal with the consequences of a crime.
15
10
INTERVIEW WITH THE VAMPIRE, by Anne Rice. (Ballantine, $6.99.) The 1976 novel that began "The Vampire Chronicles."
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
NonFiction
1
7
THE WAY THINGS OUGHT TO BE, by Rush Limbaugh. (Pocket, $6.99.) Anecdotes and opinions offered by the talk show host.
2
4
THE PRESIDENT'S HEALTH SECURITY PLAN. (Times Books/Random House, $8.) The Clinton Administration's health care proposals.
3
521
THE ROAD LESS TRAVELED, by M. Scott Peck. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $10.95.) Inspiration.
4
5
IT DOESN'T TAKE A HERO, by H. Norman Schwarzkopf with Peter Petre. (Bantam, $6.99.) The autobiography of the general.
5
37
I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRD SINGS, by Maya Angelou. (Bantam, $4.99.) The poet's depiction of her childhood and adolescence.
6
107
A YEAR IN PROVENCE, by Peter Mayle. (Vintage, $10.) A sojourn in the south of France.
7
11
UH-OH, by Robert Fulghum. (Ivy, $5.99.) Reflections on life's commonplaces.
8*
1
SUBMARINE, by Tom Clancy. (Berkley, $14.95.) A guided tour through a nuclear warship and the world of which it is a part.
9*
27
THE SILENT PASSAGE, by Gail Sheehy. (Pocket, $5.50.) The psychological and social significance of menopause for today's women.
10*
1
YOUNG MEN &amp; FIRE, by Norman Maclean. (University of Chicago, $10.95.) An account of a disastrous fire in a Montana forest in 1949.
11
7
SAVE YOUR JOB, SAVE OUR COUNTRY, by Ross Perot with Pat Choate. (Hyperion, $6.95.) Arguments against the ratification of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
12
1
RUSH! by Michael Arkush. (Avon, $4.99.) A biography of the talk show host Rush Limbaugh.
13*
16
EVERY LIVING THING, by James Herriot. (St. Martin's, $6.99.) Continuing the memoirs of the Yorkshire veterinarian.
14*
128
YOU JUST DON'T UNDERSTAND, by Deborah Tannen. (Ballantine, $10.) The different languages men and women speak.
15*
22
TRUMAN, by David McCullough. (Touchstone/S&amp;S, $15.) A biography of the 33d President.
16*
9
PRINCESS, by Jean P. Sasson. (Avon, $5.50.) Life as lived by a member of the royal family and other women in Saudi Arabia.
Weeks
This
On
Week
List
Advice, How-To and Miscellaneous
1
5
THE DAYS ARE JUST PACKED, by Bill Watterson. (Andrews &amp; McMeel, $12.95.) A new collection of "Calvin and Hobbes" cartoons.
2
141
THE SEVEN HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE, by Stephen R. Covey. (Fireside/S&amp;S, $12.) Principles to practice in the pursuit of success.
3
2
BOTTOMS UP! by Joyce L. Vedral. (Warner, $12.99.) Exercises for women to achieve good health and fitness.
4
157
THE T-FACTOR FAT GRAM COUNTER, by Jamie Pope-Cordle and Martin Katahn. (Norton, $2.99.) How to reduce fat in one's diet.
Rankings reflect sales figures, for the week ending Oct. 16, at 3,050 bookstores plus wholesalers serving 38,000 other retailers, statistically weighted to represent sales in all such outlets nationwide.
An asterisk indicates that a book's sales are barely distinguishable from those of the book above.


HALLOWEEN NOTES
POPULAR MASKS: Beavis and Butt-head; Bill and Hillary Clinton; characters from the film "Aladdin"; Whoopi Goldberg (but not Ted Danson).
PARTIES: Deborah Harry is to sing tonight at the Tunnel; Susanne Bartsch will hold court at the Roxy; Out magazine and Atlantic Records will give a party for INXS at the Palladium; Fode Kouyate will perform at Thread Waxing Space.


11 on Fire Escape Rescued in a Blaze
Six adults and five girls in pajamas were rescued yesterday from a third-floor fire escape at an apartment building on the Upper West Side as flames rolled from second-floor windows, Fire Department officials said.
The one-alarm blaze was reported at 4:44 A.M. at 930 Columbus Avenue, near 106th Street, in a five-story brick building.
The fire apparently started in a second-floor apartment and spread rapidly, engulfing much of the floor when firefighters arrived four minutes later.


ARNOLD GLIMCHER AND HIS ART WORLD ALL-STARS
America has too many artists producing too much middle-of-the-road landfill.
When their work stops selling, it's said, "the art market crashed," and then come the calls for more Government funding to keep the pampered impostors in clover.


Landscape Inspires Clothing for Men
ON the linings of the breast pockets inside of thousands of men's suits in stores throughout the country, the labels read "Allyn Saint George -- American Classic" or "Allyn Saint George -- American Couture."
"The first label is on proper business attire; the second group has a more upscale look," said Allyn St.
George, the designer.
He draws inspiration for his clothing collections, he said, from the grounds of his 19-acre estate here, called Saintland.


Neighborhood Reports: Upper West Side; Yes, Broadway Malls Can Blossom Too
The unhappy state of Broadway's median strips may be most obvious to the people living above them.
"When you walk by the malls, you see one piece of garbage," said Eugene Hide, the president of the Broadway Mall Association.
"When you live on the 10th floor and look down, you see a hundred pieces."
But this year, merchants, co-op boards and condominium owners on Broadway and West End Avenue contributed to clean up the malls in a pilot area from 86th to 96th Streets.


INSIDE
Fagin Would Be Impressed
Two Los Angeles gang members trained young boys to invade banks, terrorize tellers and flee in stolen cars.
Tomorrow they face sentencing for more than 100 robberies.
Page 18. 7 Die in Ulster Attack
At least seven people died in an attack on a bar in Northern Ireland.
A Protestant paramilitary group claimed responsibility.
Page 7.
Sounds of Defiance in Haiti
Haiti's capital echoed with gunfire as opponents of the ousted President celebrated their successful defiance of international diplomacy.
Page 12.
Summary


Grilled Fare in Handsome Surroundings
PLEASE notice that this review does not begin with words like "Well, pardner, out yonder at the Rattlesnake Bar &amp; Grill in South Norwalk . . ." When the menu headings are Snake bites (appetizers), Buckaroo Burgers, Sagebrush &amp; Tumbleweed (salads) and Serious Grub (entrees), it is easy to fall into Old West palaver.
The decor features a bleached cow skull and a larger-than-life snake sculpture whose glittery mosaic-skinned body winds itself along the top of the long bar in the main dining room.
Less hokey and actually quite attractive is the natural wood structure, suggesting rafters, in front of and above the bar, from which hangs a series of colorful Indian rugs, reminiscent of a Southwestern lodge.


Fathers and Sons


New York Standard Time; Here Today, Gone Unaccountably
This is the weekend for turning clocks back one hour, a reversal that gets farmers and cows back in sync but is no big deal in New York, where time enjoys a weird life of its own regardless.
While some things here go on forever - the Mets season, to take a ridiculously easy case - a more disturbing trick of New York Time is that it can make things vanish or materialize between midnight and 8 A.M.
Many chicken take-out places have become tanning salons in just this way.


Steps to Keep Toilet Tanks and Machinery Watertight
TOILET-TANK leaks are fairly easy to find and correct.
If moisture accumulates on the outside of the tank, note the tank's height, lift the cover and check the height of the water inside.
If the heights are the same, the problem is condensation caused by water in the tank that cools the porcelain below room temperature.
The cure is to install plastic foam sheets against the inside of the tank with special adhesive.
Kits containing all the insulating materials needed, plus instructions, cost about $20.


Mangled Metaphors
Perot is a good fellow," Lee Iacocca said about Ross Perot (the former H. Ross Perot) in preparing to challenge the billionaire's anti-Nafta campaign, ". . . but he's on the wrong side of the angels here."
In reporting this comment, Newsweek said the former Chrysler boss was "gearing up for his role" as Administration anti-protectionist spokesman.
Gearing up was a suitable figure of speech to describe the action of an automobile executive.


Steps to Keep Toilet Tanks and Machinery Watertight
TOILET-TANK leaks are fairly easy to find and correct.
If moisture accumulates on the outside of the tank, note the tank's height, lift the cover and check the height of the water inside.
If the heights are the same, the problem is condensation caused by water in the tank that cools the porcelain below room temperature.
The cure is to install plastic foam sheets against the inside of the tank with special adhesive.
Kits containing all the insulating materials needed, plus instructions, cost about $20.


The Irish Make Up For Earlier Lapses
For the first time in nearly two years, Notre Dame was trailing at halftime.
And the way Navy was plucking the Notre Dame defense on this drizzly afternoon at Veterans Stadium, it looked as if the upcoming Florida State-Notre Dame titan clash and Notre Dame's hopes for an unbeaten season and a national championship were fizzling not only before Irish eyes.
It was fizzling right there, plain and simple, for everyone to see.


NEWS ABOUT THE MAGAZINE
With this issue, The New York Times introduces an enlarged and redesigned Magazine.
Many familiar features remain; even so, the changes in look, structure and content are probably the most substantial since the Magazine was born 97 years ago.
The Times has changed vastly since then, especially on Sunday.
Each Sunday section has become virtually a magazine for its own special field.
The redesign that starts today aims to focus this general-interest Magazine on what it does best: Our central mission is to publish articles on subjects in the news that are meticulously reported, written with narrative power, edited with unhurried care and presented dramatically in glossy color.
That squares with the companion purpose of seeking out and publishing outstanding photojournalism, capitalizing on our high-quality gravure reproduction.


A World Away From the Series; Mitch Williams Goes Home to Soothe That 'Achin' Inside'
A pale moon, like an eavesdropper, had appeared above the modest red wood ranch house here in central Texas.
In the cool early evening, Mitch Williams, in that now familiar scraggly beard and sweatshirt, jeans and black cowboy boots, sat on the deck and looked out over the broad, flat 600 acres he owns, which, he says, when giving directions to it, is "in the sticks, four miles from paved roads."
It was here that Mitch Williams came immediately after the World Series.
It was here he came to get away.
To get away from the madness and taunts and death threats and police protection that his performance in the World Series had generated.
To get away "from blowin' that last game," as he described it, to get away from "achin' inside."


Sherry A. Bricker, Andrew L. Miller
Sherry Ann Bricker, the daughter of Norman and Fran Bricker of Bellmore, L.I., was married last evening to Andrew Laurence Miller, a son of Michael and Susan Miller of New Vernon, N.J.
Rabbi Stanley Platek performed the ceremony at the Hewlett-East Rockaway Jewish Center in Hewlett, L.I.
Mrs.
Miller, 27, is an actuary with Insurance Services Office Inc., a property-casualty insurance concern in New York.
She graduated from the State University at Binghamton, N.Y.
Her parents own Cherrywood Hallmark, a stationery store in Wantagh, L.I.


Also Inside
MAKING IT WORK 3  Each night, Vera Kitt and six fellow travelers board an outcast train.
Their mission: to clean the subway tracks.
NEW YORKERS &amp; CO. 4  Amid loud music and cheap beer, a bar owner prowls his empire, where everyone knows his name.
PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD 15  North Carolina in Gramercy Park; the Far East in Flushing Meadows.
MOVIE CLOCK 16  What's showing at the local movie houses, today through Thursday.
GOOD EATING 18  Ethnic Pleasures, Elmhurst to Astoria: when you crave a good parrillada, a tasty taramosalata, or a vibrant hummus.
SOAPBOX 21  Four ordinary New Yorkers discuss the mayoral candidates, the issues and life in the city.
Plus, "Eye of the Beholder."


Boston Journal; At Doyle's Cafe, a Sign Of the Mayoral Times
Not only is Thomas M. Menino poised to become the first Italian-American mayor here, but perhaps even more astonishingly he has already conquered Doyle's Cafe, a century-old citadel of Irish politics in this most Irish of American cities.
It is Tommy Menino's picture, and not that of his Irish-American opponent, James T. Brett, that hangs over the long mahogany bar where Gerry Burke was presiding the other day.


A Little Devil For the Devil In Us All
For $5 you can have a vinyl replica of Bugs Bunny, Sylvester the Cat, Daffy Duck, Tweety or -- my choice -- Taz, the Tasmanian Devil.
The appeal of this slobbering, snarling tornado who wants to eat or destroy everything in his path is simple: he is the id personified.
As such, his absurdly aggressive persona is particularly appealing to New Yorkers.


The Hot Stove League Cools Off
Once upon a time, baseball's winter gathering was the oasis in the barren land between the end of the World Series and the start of spring training.
But this December, there will be no oasis because the agents drank all the glistening water last winter and plundered the lush land.
"No question that played a role," Bud Selig, the acting commissioner, said in discussing the altered off-season schedule.
"It became a distraction."


Scholar, Diplomat, Artist Beyond Compare
The art of the 17th-century northern Baroque has an odd reputation in America.
Everyone is mad for the Dutch painters of the era -- the soulful Rembrandt with his golden shadows and the light-soaked domestic perfections of Vermeer -- but the Flemish Peter Paul Rubens?
His name evokes Church Triumphant martyrdoms, over upholstered female nudes, and epicene monarchs costumed as gods, images that have little appeal in the censorious, secular, anti-everything 1990's.
Yet few paintings visiting this country at present are as captivating as Rubens's "Garden of Love," the centerpiece of an exhibition titled "The Age of Rubens" at the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston (through Jan. 2).
Many of the characteristic beauties of Flemish Baroque art can be savored in this panoramic image: sensuous figures, neo-classical architecture, acres of marvelously wrought silks and exotic stuffs, putti as plump as pillows, stormy skies and lambent rays of sunlight that speak of the cruelty of time and the triumph of human love.


Boy, 11, Shot and Killed In a Queens Beauty Salon
Bullets flew through a Queens beauty salon window yesterday, killing an 11-year-old boy inside who had taken a piece of birthday cake from an upstairs neighbor's party to his mother at work in the salon, the police and neighbors said.
Two bullet holes were visible in the window of the New Look Beauty Salon at 106-59 Guy R. Brewer Boulevard in Jamaica, Queens, about a block south of York College.
No weapon was recovered at the scene, and there were no immediate arrests.


In Other Words
FRENCH LESSONS A Memoir.
By Alice Kaplan. 221 pp.
Chicago:  University of Chicago Press. $19.95.


Not Quite On the Fringe
To the Editor:
I should like to clarify a point made by Peter Watrous is his essay on this year's Meet the Composer grants  [ "Yes, It's Improvised. But Is It Really Jazz?" Oct. 10 ] .
He referred to my Oregon group, Pacific Rim Players, as "an unrecorded big band." In fact, our recording debut was in 1989 on the Italian label Blank Saint, with the saxophonist/composer Anthony Braxton; it received a five-star review in Down Beat magazine.
Other recording projects in the works are with the pianist Andrew Hill for Soul Note and with the reedsman Vinny Golia for Nine Winds.


An Emergency Unit With Children in Mind
MARQUIS JONES'S mouth drooped as he lay on an examining table in the emergency room of the children's unit of Yale-New Haven Hospital.
"Show me where it hurts," the doctor said to the 7-year-old as her hands gently probed his belly.


At Work; Want to Survive? Learn to Negotiate!
SO, Bunky, you're depressed because the economy's dragging, your company's melting away, you've got a hefty mortgage, a Volvo with a bad case of the Swedish flu and a gaggle of orthodontia-bait kids?
Meet Nicole Schapiro, who lived through World War II and somehow survived a firing squad during the Hungarian Revolution before coming to the United States and settling, eventually, in the San Francisco Bay Area.
Ms.
Schapiro, a consultant and trainer with her own firm, was in Bali in 1991 teaching women to be entrepreneurs when word reached her that she had lost her house and all her belongings in the fire that ravaged the Oakland hills.


Steps to Keep Toilet Tanks and Machinery Watertight
TOILET-TANK leaks are fairly easy to find and correct.
If moisture accumulates on the outside of the tank, note the tank's height, lift the cover and check the height of the water inside.
If the heights are the same, the problem is condensation caused by water in the tank that cools the porcelain below room temperature.
The cure is to install plastic foam sheets against the inside of the tank with special adhesive.
Kits containing all the insulating materials needed, plus instructions, cost about $20.


Bruce Babbitt's Landscape, at Risk
For months, Interior Secretary Bruce Babbitt has been trying to persuade Congress to accept a small increase in grazing fees and new regulations to halt the deterioration of 260 million acres of public rangeland.
And for months, he has been frustrated by Republicans determined to embarrass President Clinton and by a small but ornery group of Western Democrats determined to preserve a way of life that exists mainly in their minds.
An exasperated Mr.
Babbitt now says he will impose the fees and regulations by administrative fiat, which is his right under the Federal rule-making process.
But that is not the outcome he had hoped for.


New Jersey Q &amp; A: John J. O'Brien; Staying on Top of Newspaper Trends
JOHN J. O'BRIEN, the executive director of the New Jersey Press Association, has come a long way since his days of sweeping the floors in the press room at the weekly Hunterdon County Democrat in Flemington 28 years ago.
Though it seems odd now, he thought he had "reached the pinnacle" of his career when the paper quickly promoted him to Linotype operator in the composing room, setting news articles and advertisements in hot metal.


Technology; Carving Out Real-Life Uses for Virtual Reality
A SURGEON planning a delicate operation practices it over and over, making cuts and retracting organs in different ways until he is satisfied he has found the best approach.
The much carved upon patient does not mind, though, since it is a "virtual" body -- one that exists only as a mass of data in a computer.
Virtual reality, the use of electronic sensors and computer-generated images to give people the illusion of participating in fabricated events, is moving beyond the game room and into practical applications in medical schools and other real-life settings.


Mercury Is Hazardous Over the Long Term
To the Editor:
An Associated Press report Oct. 21 on contamination of soil by elemental mercury in New York's Westchester County is, unfortunately, misleading about the hazard.
It is hazardous to contaminate the soil, but not because mercury "can cause brain damage or loss of muscle control if ingested or inhaled in even very small amounts."


Joan Taback, Andrew Frankle
Joan E. Taback, a daughter of Sally Lebow of New York and the late George Taback, was married last evening to Andrew J. Frankle, the son of Mr. and Mrs.
John T. Frankle of Tenafly, N.J.
Rabbi Susan Heneson Moskowitz performed the ceremony at the Whitehall Club in New York.
Mrs.
Frankle is the director of merchandising for the Collection Division of Liz Claiborne Inc. in New York.
She graduated from Duke University.
Her father was a partner in Taback &amp; Hyams, a law firm formerly in Jamaica, Queens.
Her mother teaches social studies at the Harry B. Thompson Middle School in Syosset, L.I.
The bride is a stepdaughter of the late Edwin M. Lebow.


Bomb Informer's Tapes Give Rare Glimpse of F.B.I. Dealings
It is shortly after a bomb has blown a hole five stories deep at the World Trade Center and an F.B.I. agent is talking to Emad A. Salem, the former Egyptian army officer who is the bureau's secret source of information, its most valuable undercover operative.
But rather than talk about the conspiracy, about who was involved in it and how it was done, Mr.
Salem's concerns are more mundane, involving unpaid parking tickets, the tolls he pays as he travels between New York and New Jersey, the expenses of using his own car to carry out his informer's duties.


Karen Lapinsky, Douglas Sylvester
Karen E. Lapinsky, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs.
Martin Lapinsky of East Brunswick, N.J., was married last evening to Douglas H. Sylvester, a son of Mrs.
Louis E. Sylvester of Atlanta and the late Mr.
Sylvester.
Rabbi Ari Fridkis officiated at the Basking Ridge (N.J.) Country Club.
The Rev.
J.
Chester Gray 3d, an Episcopal priest, took part in the ceremony.
Mrs.
Sylvester, 31, is a senior consultant at C.A.S.T.
Management Consultants, in Santa Monica, Calif.
She graduated summa cum laude from the University of Pennsylvania, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She and her husband received M.B.A. degrees from Harvard University.
The bride's previous marriage ended in divorce.


Working Class
LIKE ascots, pinkie rings, jodphurs and overalls, cowboy boots look right on only certain types of men.
They are the male equivalent of stiletto heels: what makes one man kind of macho can make another fellow look really ridiculous.
Over the years, they have been worn, with mixed results, by everyone from George Bush and Bill Clinton to Robert Redford and Kevin Costner.
That Joey Buttafuoco would wear a pair of black-and-white snakeskin cowboy boots to court to plead guilty to statutory rape in his affair with Amy Fisher, the so-called Long Island Lolita, was as predictable as it was, perhaps, inappropriate.


Giuliani's Field Force
NOW what?
Someone called to see if the candidate would do a forum on the day before Election Day.


FERMAT'S THEOREM
Four possibilities are suggested by Pierre Fermat's marginal note:
1. Fermat really had a proof -- a direct, relatively unobstructed route to Q.E.D.


Term Limits Drive the Talented Out of Politics; Disappointed Too Long
To the Editor:
I take umbrage with "Term Limits Limit Voters' Rights," (editorial, Oct. 21).
You state that "limits can foster mediocrity, by discouraging men and women genuinely interested in government as a professional calling, not just a brief fling."


Lack of Civility Is Everywhere
To the Editor:
Civility, ah, if it only were so  [ "Have a #%!&amp;$@$! Day," Oct. 17 ] .
But how can it be?
Not in any major city.


Neighborhood Reports; Lights! Pedestrians! Safety!
It may come as a surprise to residents of the Upper West Side, but they don't stay out late enough, at least according to two groups bent on increasing neighborhood safety.
The Police Liaison Group and West Side Crime Prevention say that residents fearful of nighttime dangers limit their forays, leaving the streets to drug dealers, prostitutes and homeless people.
So, in a project called West Side Lights, the two groups have joined Community Board 7, the police and Consolidated Edison to press landlords and store owners from 88th Street to 92d Street, between Broadway and the Hudson River, to supplement the vague glow of streetlights with high-powered, wall-attached lamps.


Three Actors, Three Tales
Last year Matt Dillon appeared as Cliff, the hilariously untalented musician in the movie "Singles." Mr.
Dillon would seem to have been meant for the part, but in fact he came close to not playing it.
In this adaptation from "A Pound of Flesh: Perilous Tales of How to Produce Movies in Hollywood," published last week by Grove Press, the producer Art Linson describes how he negotiated with Mr.
Dillon's agent, how he helped cast Sean Penn in "Fast Times at Ridgemont High" and how Leonardo DiCaprio was discovered.
Matt Dillon -- (who will appear as a homeless person in "The Saint of Fort Washington," opening on Nov. 17.)


U.S. Rejects Document on Aristide's Health
Government officials said today that a document used to brand President Jean-Bertrand Aristide of Haiti as mentally unstable was probably a forgery.
The document had already been rejected as a possible fake by the Central Intelligence Agency, several Government officials said today.
They said it was circulated by opponents of Mr.
Aristide in Congress, not by the C.I.A., which has nonetheless described the deposed President as possibly unstable and stands by that judgment.


World Markets; Nikkei Gets a Face Lift -- and Futures
WHEN the Japanese stock market began its long free fall in 1990, regulators thought they knew what the problem was: Those new-fangled stock index futures, and the American brokers who used computers to trade them.
So the regulators sought to dampen the market in Nikkei 225 futures by making them more expensive -- jacking up the margins, or the downpayment investors must make on their purchases.


Arthur D. Greenleigh, 90, Expert On Welfare Issues and Refugees
Arthur D. Greenleigh, who led Federal and private programs to help victims of the Depression and World War II and later founded a consulting firm on welfare issues, died on Friday at home in Manhattan at the age of 90.
The cause was cardiac arrest, his family said.


ARNOLD GLIMCHER AND HIS ART WORLD ALL-STARS
What are we supposed to feel after reading Allan Schwartzman's article "Can I Interest You in a Schnabel, Mr. Ovitz?" (Oct. 3), about the shenanigans of a wheeler-dealer.
Envy -- that Arnold Glimcher helped transform deal-making into high art -- or revulsion?
Probably both, since this is how art is celebrated nowadays -- in cutting deals.
DENISE BOSTROM San Francisco


'Big Bird' Eases Chaos At Airport in Tokyo
FORM is supposed to follow function throughout Japan, so it is no surprise that the country's newest and most desperately needed air terminal, at Haneda Airport in Tokyo, is called Big Bird.
And from the air it looks exactly like that -- a bird about three football fields long, its wings spread .
Haneda is Tokyo's domestic airport (the exception, for political rather than logistical reasons, are flights to Taiwan), and until the opening of the new terminal on Sept. 27, was also its most chaotic one.
Measured in passengers moved every year, three of the world's busiest air routes -- Tokyo to Sapporo, Tokyo to Fukuoka and Tokyo to Osaka -- all pass through Haneda.
And the airport has long been so overwhelmed that almost all passengers move to their aircraft by bus, creating some of the aviation industry's most frequent tarmac traffic jams.


Kristin Barrett, R. L. Selvala Jr.
Kristin Anne Barrett, an associate in corporate finance at the Chemical Banking Corporation, was married yesterday to Richard Lee Selvala Jr., a senior analyst in the treasurer's office of the General Motors Corporation.
Both work in New York.
The Rev.
Michael Lindvall performed the ceremony at the First Presbyterian Church in Ann Arbor, Mich.
The bride and the bridegroom graduated from the University of Michigan.
Mrs.
Selvala received an M.B.A. from Columbia University.
She is a daughter of Bruce H. Barrett of Kentwood, Mich., and Eleanor Barrett of Southfield, Mich.


Prague: Lost Era
To the Editor: I returned to the United States from a weekend as a house guest in Prague on Sept. 26, the date Michael Chabon's article appeared.
Somehow the author's self-inflicted melancholy escaped me in Prague as I walked among the many buildings encased in scaffolding as the city dramatically revitalizes itself.
The writer's moroseness also evaded me on Saturday as my friends and I tried to decide whether to attend one of the three operas, or the philharmonic, or any one of the numerous concerts and recitals being performed that night in the gloriously Baroque churches the writer so dolefully dispatches.
After attending an enjoyable production of Bedrich Smetana's opera "Hubicka" ("The Kiss") at the National Theater, such melancholy continued to elude me at U Zelene Zaby (The Green Frog), an ancient wine bar where a group of 20 people at the next table celebrated the musical exploits of a young violinist in its company.


Kirstin Lynde, Curtis Alexander
Kirstin Gail Lynde, the daughter of Richard and Karin Lynde of Basking Ridge, N.J., was married yesterday to Curtis Lyle Alexander, the son of Rita Alexander of Guelph, Ontario, and the late Mr. and Mrs.
Curtis L. Alexander.
The Rev.
Stephen McConnell officiated at the Presbyterian Church of Liberty Corner, in Liberty Corner, N.J.
Mrs.
Alexander is a vice president and the director of training for Bronner Slosbert Humphrey, a direct marketing, consulting and advertising agency in Boston.
She graduated magna cum laude from Williams College, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa, and received an M.B.A. from the University of Pennsylvania.
Her father is the provost and vice president of academic affairs at Montclair State College in Upper Montclair, N.J.


Neighborhood Report: Washington Heights; Homicide Rate Falls by 27 Percent
The number of slayings in the 34th Precinct, long among the most murderous in the city, has dropped sharply so far this year, according to police statistics.
But the experts disagree on just how to interpret the new figures.
Slayings in the precinct, which covers Washington Heights and Inwood, were down by 27 percent through the end of September from last year at the same time, to 51 from 70.
The 1992 total, 98, also represented a drop from the precinct's all-time high, 119 in 1991.
The number had risen steadily from 1987 to 1991.


5 Chefs Are Preparing the Feast for 500 Arts Council Diners
TOO many cooks most certainly will not spoil the broth at the Westchester Arts Council's Arts Alive benefit on Nov. 20.
On the contrary, bonhomie in evidence among the chefs who prepared and presented their signature dishes to a panel of tasters at a kitchen dress rehearsal recently bodes well for the 500 diners who are expected at the gala.


Corrections
An article today on page 1 of The City (section 13), about ambulance service, misspells the name of a doctor at the Emergency Medical Service center in Maspeth, L.I.
He is Michael Lozano, not Losano.


Hitler's Handmaiden
To the Editor:
It is of no interest to me whether Leni Riefenstahl slept with Hitler.
There is more than one way to get into bed with such a man.
By making "Triumph of the Will," Miss Riefenstahl became Hitler's handmaiden if not his mistress.


Alfie, Oh Alfie, What Can We Do With Ye?
To the Editor:
There are two big problems with Alfie Kohn's recent work on rewards.
A warning label is in order.


Luisa J. Orto, W. F. Symmans
Luisa Jane Orto, a daughter of Jane Orto of Westfield, N.J., was married yesterday to Dr.
W.
Fraser Symmans, the son of Dr. and Mrs.
W.
Ashley Symmans of Hamilton, New Zealand.
The Rev.
William R. Forbes performed the ceremony at the Presbyterian Church at Westfield, N.J.
Ms.
Orto, who is keeping her name, graduated summa cum laude from Boston University, where she was elected to Phi Beta Kappa.
She is a doctoral candidate in art history at New York University.


Miss McAnaney, G. D. Molinsky Jr.
Mr. and Mrs.
Edward G. McAnaney 2d of New York have announced the engagement of their daughter Kathleen Glennon McAnaney to George Donald Molinsky Jr., a son of Mr. and Mrs.
Molinsky of Kettering, Ohio.
An August wedding is planned.
Miss McAnaney graduated cum laude from Harvard University.
She is a third-year law student at the University of Notre Dame, as is her fiance.
Her father, a lawyer in New York, is the president of the Peter B. and Adeline W. Ruffin Foundation, which supports secondary and higher education.


Neighborhood Report: Tribecca; When a Hotel Is Half Historic
A proposal to build a 34-floor hotel tower and attach it to a warehouse in a historic district is being hailed by some as an ideal marriage of opposites.
Others denounce the plan as a monstrous urban misfit.
Hearings at the Landmarks Preservation Commission last week and at Community Board 1 the week before drew clashing testimony on the proposed Hudson Hotel and Conference Center, to be built on an empty lot at the northeast corner of West and Laight Streets.


SUNDAY, October 31, 1983; REINVENTING THE LAWN
The Clinton Presidency is making good use of the White House lawns.
The big event was the Yasir Arafat-Yitzhak Rabin handshake.
But there have been Easter egg rolls, news conferences (with forklifts loaded with Federal regulations), and even a convention of talk radio hosts who gathered to broadcast live from the North Lawn as they interviewed officials on health care.
This is probably the only lawn in America that would welcome talk show hosts en masse.
Some Presidents like the Rose Garden, some the Oval Office, some the lawn.
In the future, the Clinton Administration might consider other lawn uses: a few grazing longhorns to show sympathy with ranchers; a circus or two, to show sympathy with Congress, and some kind of Nafta festival, with hockey players and mariachi music.
But the best use of all would be to plant a big garden.


Neighborhood Report: Morrisania; An Officer's Eyes and Ears
This summer, Jeff King, a community police officer at the 42d Precinct in the South Bronx, was finally overwhelmed by his beat: nine square blocks of apartment buildings and cavernous housing projects too sprawling for one person to handle.
But he and his supervisors found a solution in a basement office of the precinct station house: a band of eager auxiliary officers who were more than happy to assist Officer King.


PLAYING IN THE NEIGHBORHOOD: Red Hook; Dancing Along the Way
Red Hook Arts, a multimedia youth group, has teamed up with Dancing in the Streets, which specializes in site-specific performances, to create a production that stretches along several blocks of Red Hook.
The audience will meet at Pier 41 and walk through Red Hook as a Narratr relates the neighborhood's history, with stops at warehouses, the Trolley Museum and other spots for brief dance and music performances, some by local schoolchildren and the elderly.
The price will end with a play staged at the Beard Street pier.


Michele Oxman, Steven R. Boal
Michele Lee Oxman, a daughter of Dr.
Herbert Oxman and Lynn Oxman, both of Mequon, Wis., was married last evening to Steven Robert Boal, a son of Dr.
Bernard Boal and Pamela Boal of Great Neck, L.I.
Rabbi Mordecai Waxman performed the ceremony at Congregation Shalom in Fox Point, Wis.
Mrs.
Boal, 24, graduated from the University of Wisconsin.
She is a merchandising coordinator at Town and Country Homes, a real estate development company in Oak Brook, Ill.
Her mother is an administrative associate at the Madison Medical Group, and her father a cardiologist, both in Milwaukee.


Sports of The Times; Samaranch: Peace, Not Prizes
HIS face was a mask, the impassive stare of an accountant hired to certify the results of the Academy Awards.
Except that Juan Antonio Samaranch was not merely reading a slip of paper that announced whether Jack Nicholson or Paul Newman had won an Oscar.
Juan Antonio Samaranch was opening the sealed envelope of history.
Samaranch has been president of the International Olympic Committee since 1980.
He is the most important sports figure in the world, more than any slam-dunker, more than any airwave-blaster, even more important than any sneaker-maker.


No, It's Not a Dirty Song
LOUIE LOUIE The History and Mythology of the World's Most Famous Rock 'n' Roll Song; Including the Full Details of Its Torture and Persecution at the Hands of the Kingsmen, J. Edgar Hoover's F.B.I., and a Cast of Millions; and Introducing, for the First Time Anywhere, the Actual Dirty Lyrics.
By Dave Marsh.
Illustrated. 245 pp.
New York: Hyperion. $19.95.


QUEBEC BLOC SET FOR OTTAWA ROLE
Gilles Duceppe, a former labor organizer who won a seat in Parliament for the Bloc Quebecois, is now packing his bags for Ottawa along with 53 other Bloc victors -- teachers, lawyers, economists, small business operators, a baker -- to become the official opposition to Prime Minister-designate Jean Chretien's Liberals.
But Mr.
Duceppe, 46, who has now won two elections in the Laurier-Ste.-Marie working-class district here for the three-year-old party that is seeking Quebec's separation from Canada, insists that the Bloc will focus more on economics than ideology, at least over the near term.


Manager's Profile
KENT SIMONS  Fund: Neuberger &amp; Berman Selected Sectors, $575 million in assets.
Co-manager since 1988. (Sponsor: Neuberger &amp; Berman Management, New York City).
Born: May 13, 1935, Detroit.
Education: B.A., Princeton University.
Last Vacation: One week in July, visiting Bermuda with his daughter.
Fund Performance: One year, through September: +24.4% (all growth funds: +18.9%).
Five years, annualized: +16.1% (+14.4%)*
Stock Market View: Neutral (self-rating).
Stock Pick: First Fidelity Bancorp, Newark, N.J., because of its "low P/E relative to its prospects; the company just announced a buyback, so they must agree."  Current Strategy: Looking for "stocks whose current P/E ratio does not reflect their superior financial characteristics and/or outlook." (*Source: Morningstar Inc.)


Neighborhood Reports: Upper East Side; A Cheaper Express Bus Brings Protests
As the city sees it, the new, less expensive Harlem-to-Wall Street express bus along Fifth Avenue is an enhancement of existing express services, and people should be happy.
But Yorkville residents are complaining: they fear the new private service will threaten two public East Side lines to Wall Street.
Their concern is that the Transit Authority will close the York Avenue route to lower Manhattan for lack of passengers, forcing residents to walk to Fifth Avenue for the other bus.


